<doc id="277880" wikidata="Q2280045" url="?curid=277880" title="China–United States relations">
<text>The relationship between the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC) and the United States of America (USA) has been complex and at times tense since the establishment of the PRC and the retreat of the government of the Republic of China to Taiwan in 1949. Since the normalization of relations in the 1970s, the US–China relationship has been marked by persistent disputes including the political status of Taiwan, territorial disputes in the South China Sea, and more recently the treatment of Uyghurs in Xinjiang. Despite these tensions, the two nations have significant economic ties and are deeply interconnected, while also engaging in strategic competition on the global stage. As of 2025, China and the United States are the world&#x27;s second-largest and largest economies by nominal GDP, as well as the largest and second-largest economies by GDP (PPP) respectively. Collectively, they account for 44.2% of the global nominal GDP, and 34.7% of global PPP-adjusted GDP.

One of the earliest major interactions between the United States and China was the 1845 Treaty of Wangxia, which laid the foundation for trade between the two countries. While American businesses anticipated a vast market in China, trade grew gradually. In 1900, Washington joined the Empire of Japan and other powers of Europe in sending troops to suppress the xenophobic Boxer Rebellion, later promoting the Open Door Policy to advocate for equal trade opportunities and discourage territorial divisions in China. Despite hopes that American financial influence would expand, efforts during the Taft presidency to secure US investment in Chinese railways were unsuccessful. President Franklin D. Roosevelt supported China during the Second Sino-Japanese War, aligning with the Republic of China (ROC) government, which had formed a temporary alliance with the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) to fight the Japanese. Following Japan&#x27;s defeat, the Chinese Civil War resumed, and US diplomatic efforts to mediate between the Nationalists and Communists ultimately failed. The Communist forces prevailed, leading to the establishment of the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC) in 1949, while the Nationalist government retreated to Taiwan.

Relations between the US and the new Chinese government quickly soured, culminating in direct conflict during the Korean War. The US-led United Nations intervention was met with Chinese military involvement, as Beijing sent millions of Chinese fighters to prevent a US-aligned presence on its border. For decades, the United States did not formally recognize the PRC, instead maintaining diplomatic relations with the ROC based in Taiwan, and as such blocked the PRC&#x27;s entry into the United Nations. However, shifting geopolitical dynamics, including the Sino-Soviet split, the winding down of the Vietnam War, as well as of the Cultural Revolution, paved the way for US President Richard Nixon&#x27;s 1972 visit to China, ultimately marking a sea change in US–China relations. On 1 January 1979, the US formally established diplomatic relations with the PRC and recognized it as the sole legitimate government of China, while maintaining unofficial ties with Taiwan within the framework of the Taiwan Relations Act, an issue that remains a major point of contention between the two countries to the present day.

Every US president since Nixon has toured China during their term in office, with the exception of Jimmy Carter and Joe Biden. The Obama administration signed a record number of bilateral agreements with China, particularly regarding climate change, though its broader strategy of rebalancing towards Asia created diplomatic friction. The advent of the Xi administration would prefigure a sharp downturn in these relations, which was then further entrenched upon the election of President Donald Trump, who had promised an assertive stance towards China as a part of his campaign, which began to be implemented upon his taking office. Issues included China&#x27;s militarization of the South China Sea, alleged manipulation of the Chinese currency, and Chinese espionage in the United States. The Trump administration would label China a &quot;strategic competitor&quot; in 2017. In January 2018, Trump launched a trade war with China, while also restricting American companies from selling equipment to various Chinese companies linked to human rights abuses in Xinjiang, among which included Chinese technology conglomerates Huawei and ZTE. The US revoked preferential treatment towards Hong Kong after the Beijing&#x27;s enactment of a broad-reaching national security law in the city, increased visa restrictions on Chinese students and researchers, and strengthened relations with Taiwan. In response, China adopted &quot;wolf warrior diplomacy&quot;, countering US criticisms of human rights abuses. By early 2018, various geopolitical observers had begun to speak of a new Cold War between the two powers. On the last day of the Trump administration in January 2021, the US officially classified the Chinese government&#x27;s treatment of the Uyghurs in Xinjiang as a genocide.

Following the election of Joe Biden in the 2020 United States presidential election, tensions between the two countries remained high. Biden identified strategic competition with China as a top priority in his foreign policy. His administration imposed large-scale restrictions on the sale of semiconductor technology to China, boosted regional alliances against China, and expanded support for Taiwan. However, the Biden administration also emphasized that the US sought &quot;competition, not conflict&quot;, with Biden stating in late 2022 that &quot;there needs to not be a new Cold War&quot;. Despite efforts at diplomatic engagement, US-China trade and political relations have reached their lowest point in years, largely due to disagreements over technology and China&#x27;s military growth and human rights record.

==History==
===Chinese Civil War and World War II===
During the civil war, the communists petitioned the U.S. for support but were unsuccessful. Instead, the U.S. offered both military and financial support to the KMT, under the hopes that a united, democratic, coalition government would be formed in China.

In late 1935, the Communist International (Comintern) instructed the CCP to establish the broadest possible anti-fascist united front. At a meeting in December 1935, the CCP Politburo resolved to reach understanding, seek compromise, and establish relations with all nations, parties, and individuals who opposed imperial Japan. After the US entry into World War II, the communists sought military support from the US. Mao welcomed the American Military Observation Group in Yan&#x27;an and in 1944 invited the US to establish a consulate there.

The defeat of Japan in 1945 caused the U.S. to reevaluate their position in Asia. President Truman was worried that the collapse of the Japanese empire would cause a power vacuum which could be filled by the Soviet Union. However, the Soviet Union acted cautiously in the conflict, eventually withdrawing in May 1946, which left the U.S. feeling as though there was not a serious Soviet threat in the region.

On 5 August 1949, the Truman administration released a white paper on relations with China. Responding to domestic arguments about responsibility for the perceived loss of China to communism, Secretary of State Dean Acheson placed blame on Chiang Kai-shek&#x27;s Nationalist government for losing the confidence of its military and the Chinese people and stated that the United States could not have prevented the outcome of the Chinese Civil War. This position failed to satisfy domestic critics. It also harmed the prospect of diplomacy with the communists and outraged Mao Zedong, who wrote a series of articles criticizing the white paper. Mao criticized the Truman administration for providing huge amounts of support to Nationalist forces which the administration deemed demoralized and unpopular, stating that the only rational basis must have therefore been the Truman administration&#x27;s imperialist ambitions and desire to hurt the Chinese people by needlessly prolonging the civil war.

Amidst successive PRC victories, the U.S. ambassador to China John Leighton Stewart left China in August 1949. Mao Zedong penned an article directly addressing the ambassador, entitled &quot;Farewell, Leighton Stewart!&quot;, writing that his departure represented &quot;the complete defeat of the U.S. policy of aggression&quot; and was &quot;worth celebrating&quot;.

The People&#x27;s Republic of China was formed after the communist People&#x27;s Liberation Army (PLA) won the Chinese Civil War against the Kuomintang nationalists (KMT) and officially established on 1 October 1949. The defeated KMT fled to Taiwan, which they occupied under martial law until 1987, while the PLA secured control of mainland China. Following the civil war, America only recognized the KMT-controlled Republic of China in Taiwan as a legitimate government, not the communist People&#x27;s Republic of China.

===Korean War===

On 25 June 1950, the China-aligned state of North Korea invaded America-aligned South Korea. In response, the United States and its allies pushed the United Nations Security Council to pass Resolution 82, which authorized military action against North Korea. Although the Soviet Union had veto power, at the time it was boycotting Security Council proceedings over the UN&#x27;s recognition of the ROC instead of the PRC as the representative of China.

Initially, the U.S. government saw Chinese intervention as unlikely. The People&#x27;s Republic was barely a year old, and it needed time to rollout new policies to begin its communist transformation. Furthermore, it appeared that, if China was going to engage in warfare, it would be in KMT-controlled Taiwan, not Korea.

However, the PRC was not just focused on internal matters. They had been invaded via the China-North Korea border by Japan twice before. It was possible that, if the U.S. secured control of the Korean peninsula, they could do the same. The US was also opposed to the PRC&#x27;s interests in Taiwan. Within two days of the North invading the South, the US deployed forces to the Taiwan strait.

After their defeat in the Chinese Civil War, parts of the Nationalist army had retreated south and crossed the border into Burma. The United States supported these Nationalist forces because the United States hoped they would harass the People&#x27;s Republic of China from the southwest, thereby diverting Chinese resources from the Korean War.

It seemed to the new Chinese leadership that stopping American encroachment into Asia was an important issue. In a speech to the Politburo in August, Mao stated, &quot;if the American imperialists are victorious, they will become dizzy with success, and then be in a position to threaten us.&quot; PRC Premier Zhou Enlai echoed this sentiment in a speech in September: &quot;the Chinese people can never tolerate foreign invasion, nor allow the imperialist to invade our neighbour at will without response&quot;. Chinese leadership under Mao Zedong could not tolerate an American-occupied state directly on its border: Chinese premier and foreign minister Zhou Enlai warned that China would intervene in the war on national security grounds; this warning was dismissed by President Truman.

On 30 September 1950, the UN offensive (for all intents and purposes under the direction of the United States) crossed the 38th parallel into North Korea. Kim Il-Sung held an emergency meeting with Chinese officials, appealing for their urgent entry into the conflict. The UN authorized the reunification of Korea, meaning that the entire peninsula could fall into US control. In October 1950, China attempted to make contact with the United States by way of its embassy in India. The United States did not respond. On 19 October 1950, Chinese forces crossed into North Korea.

In response to the PRC&#x27;s entry into the conflict, the US froze all Chinese assets in America. The United States also prohibited transfers funds from the United States to recipients within the PRC, which also cut off funding for American-influenced institutions in the PRC, such as Christian Colleges. In December 1950, the PRC seized all American assets and properties, totaling $196.8 million. The PRC also began efforts to remove American cultural influence from China, including by nationalizing cultural institutions affiliated with the United States. The United States banned American citizens from traveling to the PRC.

In late October 1950, China began its intervention with the Battle of Onjong. During the Battle of the Ch&#x27;ongch&#x27;on River, the People&#x27;s Volunteer Army overran or outflanked the UN forces, leading to the defeat of the US Eighth Army. A ceasefire presented by the UN to the PRC shortly after Ch&#x27;ongch&#x27;on River, on 11 December it was rejected by the Chinese, who were now convinced of their ability to defeat the UN forces, and wanted to demonstrate China&#x27;s military power by driving them out of Korea altogether. The Chinese achieved further victory at the Third Battle of Seoul and the Battle of Hoengsong, but UN forces recovered, pushing the front back to lands around the 38th parallel by July. A stalemate followed. Even though the US Air Force would spend the entire war with total air supremacy, dropping over 635,000 tons of bombs and other ordinance on North Korea and killing millions of Koreans, the strategic impasse ultimately lasted until the Korean Armistice Agreement that ended the fighting was signed on 27 July 1953. Since then, a divided Korea has continued to feature in US-China relations, with large American forces still stationed in the South.

In 1952, in the midst of the Korean War, the American army surveyed Chinese prisoners of war (POWs) asking them why they believed the PRC was involved in the conflict. Of 238 respondents, 60% agreed it was for the defense of China against the US, while only 17% said it was to defend North Korea.

===Vietnam War===
The People&#x27;s Republic of China provided resources and training to North Vietnam, and in the summer of 1962, Mao agreed to supply Hanoi with 90,000 rifles and guns free of charge. After the launch of America&#x27;s Operation Rolling Thunder in 1965, China sent anti-aircraft units and engineering battalions to North Vietnam to repair the damage caused by American bombing, rebuild roads and railroads, and perform other engineering work, freeing additional hundreds of thousands North Vietnamese Army units for combat against American forces supporting South Vietnam.

The Chinese presence in North Vietnam was well known to US officials. The Johnson administration sought to conceal China&#x27;s involvement from the United States public, on the rationale that domestic backlash might compel the administration to expand the war to China or withdraw precipitously. American planners accounted for China&#x27;s involvement, with President Lyndon B. Johnson and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara opted not to invade North Vietnam, favoring a strategy of supporting South Vietnam in defending itself instead. The possibility of direct Chinese intervention in the Korean War was also ambiguous throughout the course of the war and remained in question as well. While Mao Zedong reportedly told journalist Edgar Snow in 1965 that China had no intention of fighting to save the Hanoi regime and would not engage the US military unless it crossed into Chinese territory, American officials nevertheless continued to remain alert for any potential changes in plan from China. Furthermore, Mao also made additional statements where he declared belief that the People&#x27;s Liberation Army would win a confrontation with United States forces should the two enter military conflict with one another, citing the Korean War as one such reason he held this belief. Regardless of whatever intentions the China may have had, United States troops ultimately exited Vietnam as domestic opposition to American deployment in Vietnam increased, ending United States involvement in the Vietnam War.

===Freezing of relations (1949–1971)===

Between 1949 and 1971, US–China relations were uniformly hostile, with frequent propaganda attacks in both directions. At the 1954 Geneva Conference, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles forbade any contact with the Chinese delegation, refusing to shake hands with Zhou Enlai, the lead Chinese negotiator. Relations deteriorated further under President John F. Kennedy (1961–1963). Before the Cuban Missile Crisis, policymakers in Washington were uncertain whether or not China would break with the Soviet Union on the basis of ideology, national ambitions, and readiness for a role in guiding communist activities in many countries. New insight came with the Sino-Indian border war in November 1962 and Beijing&#x27;s response to the Cuban Missile Crisis. Kennedy administration officials concluded that China was more militant and more dangerous than the Soviet Union, making better relations with Moscow desirable, with both nations trying to contain Chinese ambitions. Diplomatic recognition of China remained out of the question, as a crucial veto power on the UN Security Council was held by America&#x27;s ally on Taiwan. The United States continued to work to prevent the PRC from taking China&#x27;s seat in the United Nations and encouraged its allies not to deal with the PRC. The United States placed an embargo on trading with the PRC, and encouraged allies to follow it.

The PRC developed nuclear weapons in 1964 and, as later declassified documents revealed, President Johnson considered preemptive attacks to halt its nuclear program. He ultimately decided the measure carried too much risk, and it was abandoned. Instead, Johnson looked for ways to improve relations. The American public seemed more open to the idea of expanding contacts with China, such as the relaxation of the trade embargo. But the War in Vietnam was raging, with China aiding North Vietnam. Mao&#x27;s Great Leap Forward had failed in its goal to properly industrialize China and sparked a famine, and his Cultural Revolution exercised hostility to the US. In the end, Johnson made no move to change the standoff.

Despite official non-recognition, the United States and the People&#x27;s Republic of China held 136 meetings at the ambassadorial level beginning in 1954 and continuing until 1970, first in Geneva and in 1958–1970 in Warsaw.

The Cultural Revolution brought about near-complete isolation of China from the outside world and vocal denunciations of both US imperialism and Soviet revisionism.

Beginning in 1967, the Foreign Claims Settlement Commission established the China Claims Program, in which American citizens could denominate the sum total of their lost assets and property following the Communist seizure of foreign property in 1950. American companies were reluctant to invest in China despite (future top leader) Deng Xiaoping&#x27;s reassurances of a stable business environment.

===Rapprochement (1968–1972)===

The end of the 1960s brought a period of transformation. For China, when American President Johnson decided to wind down the Vietnam War in 1968, it gave China the impression that the US had no interest in expanding throughout the Asia-Pacific anymore. Meanwhile, relations with the USSR rapidly worsened. This gave Richard Nixon—running for president in 1968—the idea of using that rivalry to improve Washington&#x27;s relations with Moscow and Beijing, while each rival would cut back support for Hanoi.

This became an especially important concern for the People&#x27;s Republic of China after the Sino-Soviet border conflict of 1969. The PRC was diplomatically isolated and the leadership came to believe that improved relations with the United States would be a useful counterbalance to the Soviet threat. Zhou Enlai, the Premier of China, was at the forefront of this effort with the committed backing of Mao Zedong, Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party. In 1969, the United States initiated measures to relax trade restrictions and other impediments to bilateral contact, to which China responded. However, this rapprochement process was stalled by the Vietnam War, where China was supporting the enemies of the United States. Communication between Chinese and American leaders, however, was conducted through Romania, Pakistan and Poland as intermediaries.

In the United States, academics such as John K. Fairbank and A. Doak Barnett pointed to the need to deal realistically with the Beijing government, while organizations such as the National Committee on United States–China Relations sponsored debates to promote public awareness. Many saw the specter of Communist China behind communist movements in Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos, but a growing number concluded that if the PRC would align with the US it would mean a major redistribution of global power against the Soviets. Mainland China&#x27;s market of nearly one billion consumers appealed to American businesses. Senator J. William Fulbright, Chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, held a series of hearings on the matter.

Richard M. Nixon mentioned in his inaugural address that the two countries were entering an era of negotiation after an era of confrontation. Although Nixon, during his 1960 presidential campaign, had vociferously supported Chiang Kai-Shek, by the second half of the decade, he increasingly began to speak of there &quot;being no reason to leave China angry and isolated&quot;. Nixon&#x27;s election as president in 1968 was initially met with hostility by Beijing—an editorial in the &quot;People&#x27;s Daily&quot; denounced him as &quot;a chieftain whom the capitalist world had turned to out of desperation&quot;. Nixon believed it was in the American national interest to forge a relationship with China, even though there were enormous differences between the two countries. He was assisted in this by his National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger. Both Nixon and Kissinger believed that relations with China would help the United States exit the Vietnam War and obtain long-term strategic benefits in confrontations with the Soviet Union.

In 1971, an unexpectedly friendly encounter between the American and Chinese ping-pong athletes called Glenn Cowan and Zhuang Zedong in Japan opened the way for a visit to China, which Chairman Mao personally approved. In April 1971, the athletes became the first Americans to officially visit China since the communist takeover. The smooth acceptance of this created the term ping-pong diplomacy and gave confidence to both sides. Ping-pong diplomacy became one of the most prominent examples of people&#x27;s diplomacy in China-US relations. The ping-pong diplomacy allowed reporters into the country as well, opening up communication to both sides and breaking a barrier that had been there previously. This smoothed out the start of the trade partnership that was going to happen later. China&#x27;s approach to keeping these early exchanges unofficial and conduct them through non-governmental agencies was generally well received by U.S. civil society groups and academics.

In July 1971, Henry Kissinger feigned illness while on a trip to Pakistan and did not appear in public for a day. He was actually on a top-secret mission to Beijing to negotiate with Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai.

Kissinger and his aides did not receive a warm welcome in Beijing, and the hotel they stayed in was equipped with pamphlets excoriating US imperialism. However, the meeting with Zhou Enlai was productive, and the Chinese premier expressed his hope for improved China-US relations. He commented that the US had intentionally isolated China, not vice versa, and any initiative to restore diplomatic ties had to come from the American side. Zhou spoke of the late President Kennedy&#x27;s plans to restore relations with China and told Kissinger, &quot;We are willing to wait as long as we need to. If these negotiations fail, in time another Kennedy or another Nixon will come along.&quot;

On 15 July 1971, President Richard Nixon revealed the mission to the world and that he had accepted an invitation to visit the PRC.

This announcement caused immediate shock around the world. In the United States, some hard-line anti-communists (most notably libertarian Republican Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater) denounced the decision, but most public opinions supported the move and Nixon saw the jump in the polls he had been hoping for. Since Nixon had sterling anti-communist credentials he was all but immune to being called &quot;soft on communism&quot;. Nixon and his aides wanted to ensure that press coverage offered dramatic imagery. Nixon was particularly eager for strong news coverage.

Within the PRC there was also opposition from left-wing elements. This effort was allegedly led by Lin Biao, head of the military, who died in a mysterious plane crash over Mongolia while trying to defect to the Soviet Union. His death silenced most internal dissent over the visit.

Internationally, reactions varied. In the communist world, the Soviets were very concerned that two major enemies seemed to have resolved their differences, and the new world alignment contributed significantly to the policy of &quot;détente&quot;. Romania&#x27;s president Nicolae Ceaușescu praised the US initiative as a &quot;move for world peace&quot;. Several communist nations, including Cuba, Albania, and North Vietnam, accused China of &quot;capitulationism to the imperialists&quot;. North Korea proclaimed that it was the reverse and that the US had been forced to capitulate to China, having failed to isolate it.

America&#x27;s NATO allies were pleased by the initiative, especially since many of them had already recognized the PRC. Throughout the Asia-Pacific, the reaction was far more mixed. Japan was annoyed that it had not been told of the announcement until fifteen minutes before it had been made, and feared that the Americans were abandoning them in favor of the PRC. A short time later, Japan also recognized the PRC and committed to substantial trade with the continental power. South Korea and South Vietnam were both concerned that peace between the United States and the PRC could mean an end to American support for them against their communist enemies. Throughout the period of rapprochement, both countries had to be regularly assured that they would not be abandoned. Taiwan&#x27;s Chiang Kai-Shek criticized the move, saying: &quot;Today any international appease movement to evil power to seek for political power balance would never helpful for the world peace, instead it elongated the hardship of our 700 million people, and expand the disaster of the world.&quot;

From 21 to 28 February 1972, President Nixon traveled to Beijing, Hangzhou, and Shanghai. At the conclusion of his trip, the US and the PRC issued the Shanghai Communiqué, a statement of their respective foreign policy views. In the Communiqué, both nations pledged to work toward the full normalization of diplomatic relations. This did not lead to immediate recognition of the People&#x27;s Republic of China but &#x27;liaison offices&#x27; were established in Beijing and Washington. The US acknowledged the PRC position that all Chinese on both sides of the Taiwan Strait maintain that there is only one China and that Taiwan is part of China. The statement enabled the US and PRC to temporarily set aside the issue of Taiwan and open trade and communication. Also, the US and China both agreed to take action against &#x27;any country&#x27; that is to establish &#x27;hegemony&#x27; in the Asia-Pacific. On several issues, such as the ongoing conflicts in Korea, Vietnam, and Israel, the US and China were unable to reach a common understanding.

The rapprochement with the United States benefited the PRC immensely and greatly increased its security for the rest of the Cold War. It has been argued that the United States, on the other hand, saw fewer benefits than it had hoped for, inasmuch as China continued to back America&#x27;s enemies in Hanoi and Pyongyang. Eventually, however, the PRC&#x27;s suspicion of Vietnam&#x27;s motives led to a break in China-Vietnamese cooperation and, upon the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia in 1979, the Sino-Vietnamese War. Both China and the United States backed combatants in Africa against Soviet and Cuban-supported movements. The economic benefits of normalization were slow as it would take decades for American products to penetrate the vast Chinese market. While Nixon&#x27;s China policy is regarded by many as the highlight of his presidency, others such as William Bundy have argued that it provided very little benefit to the United States.

===Liaison Office (1973–1978)===
In May 1973, in an effort to build toward formal diplomatic relations, the US and the PRC established the United States Liaison Office (USLO) in Beijing and a counterpart PRC office in Washington D.C. From 1973 to 1978, such distinguished Americans as David K. E. Bruce, George H. W. Bush, Thomas S. Gates, Jr., and Leonard Woodcock served as chiefs of the USLO with the personal rank of ambassador. China made clear that it considered the Soviet Union its chief adversary and urged the United States to be powerful, thereby distracting Moscow. Liaison officer George Bush concluded, &quot;China keeps wanting us to be strong, wanting us to defend Europe, wanting us to increase our defense budgets, etc.&quot; Bush concluded that American engagement was essential to support markets, allies, and stability throughout the Asia Pacific and around the world.

President Gerald Ford visited the PRC in 1975 and reaffirmed American interest in normalizing relations with Beijing. Shortly after taking office in 1977, President Jimmy Carter again reaffirmed the goals of the Shanghai Communiqué. Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, Carter&#x27;s National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski, and senior staff member of the National Security Council Michel Oksenberg encouraged Carter to seek full diplomatic and trade relations with China. Although Brzezinski sought to quickly establish a security relationship with Beijing to counter the Soviet Union, Carter sided with Vance in believing that such a deal would threaten existing U.S.-Soviet relations, including the SALT II negotiations. Thus, the administration decided to cautiously pursue political normalization and not military relations. Vance, Brzezinski, and Oksenberg traveled to Beijing in early 1978 to work with Leonard Woodcock, then head of the liaison office, to lay the groundwork to do so. The United States and the People&#x27;s Republic of China announced on 15 December 1978, that the two governments would establish diplomatic relations on 1 January 1979.

===Normalization (1979–1989)===
In the Joint Communiqué on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations, dated 1 January 1979, the United States transferred diplomatic recognition from Taipei to Beijing. The US reiterated the Shanghai Communiqué&#x27;s acknowledgment of the Chinese position that there is only one China, and that Taiwan is a part of China; Beijing acknowledged that the American people would continue to carry on commercial, cultural, and other unofficial contacts with the people of Taiwan.

Taiwan, although fully expecting this step, nonetheless expressed disappointment at having not been consulted first. The reaction of the communist world was similar to 1972, with the Soviet Union and its allies in Eastern Europe mostly being noncommittal, Romania welcoming the move, and Cuba and Albania being strongly against it. North Korea issued a statement congratulating &quot;our brotherly neighbors for ending long-hostile relations with the US&quot;.

Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping&#x27;s January 1979 visit to Washington initiated a series of important, high-level exchanges which continued until the spring of 1989. This resulted in many bilateral agreements, including the January 31, 1979 Agreement on Cooperation in Science and Technology. Scientific cooperation greatly increased thereafter. Since early 1979, the United States and the PRC have initiated hundreds of joint research projects and cooperative programs under the Agreement on Cooperation in Science and Technology, the largest bilateral program.

On 1 March 1979, the two countries formally established embassies in each other&#x27;s capitals. In 1979, outstanding private claims were resolved and a bilateral trade agreement was completed. Vice President Walter Mondale reciprocated Vice Premier Deng&#x27;s visit with an August 1979 trip to China. This visit led to agreements in September 1980 on maritime affairs, civil aviation links, and textile matters, as well as a bilateral consular convention.

The threats of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia were major factors that brought Washington and Beijing closer than ever before. In June 1979, US Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare Josephn A. Califano Jr. led an American delegation to China; the trip resulted in the long-term institutionalization of health and education links between the two countries. US-China military cooperation increased over the course of 1979 and 1980. In 1980, China allowed the United States to establish electronic listening stations in Xinjiang so the United States could monitor Soviet rocket launches in Central Asia. In exchange, the United States authorized the sale of dual-use civilian and military technology and nonlethal military equipment to China.

Chinese demands for advanced technology from the US were not always met, in part due to opposition from Congressmen who either distrusted technology transfer to a communist nation out of principle or concern that there was no guarantee that such technology would not end up in the hands of unfriendly third parties. In 1983, the US State Department changed its classification of China to &quot;a friendly, developing nation&quot;, thereby increasing the amount of technology and armaments that could be sold. The skepticism of some US Congressmen was not entirely unmerited as China, during the 1980s, continued to sell arms to Iran and other states that were openly hostile to American interests.
As a consequence of high-level and working-level contacts initiated in 1980, US dialogue with the PRC broadened to cover a wide range of issues, including global and regional strategic problems, political-military questions, including arms control, UN, and other multilateral organization affairs, and international narcotics matters. New York City and Beijing became sister cities.

High-level exchanges continued to be a significant means for developing US–PRC relations in the 1980s. President Ronald Reagan and Premier Zhao Ziyang made reciprocal visits in 1984. Reagan&#x27;s visit to Beijing went well, however, a speech he made criticizing the Soviet Union and praising capitalism, democracy, and freedom of religion was not aired on Chinese state television. In July 1985, Chinese President Li Xiannian traveled to the United States, the first such visit by a PRC head of state. Vice President Bush visited the PRC in October 1985 and opened the US Consulate General in Chengdu, the US&#x27;s fourth consular post in the PRC. Further exchanges of cabinet-level officials occurred between 1985 and 1989, capped by President Bush&#x27;s visit to Beijing in February 1989.

Shortly after being elected president in 1980, Ronald Reagan made a speech criticizing the PRC and welcoming restoration of ties with Taiwan. These remarks aroused initial concern in Beijing, but Reagan&#x27;s advisers quickly apologized for his comments, and the president-elect soon retracted them. Reagan&#x27;s first two years in office saw some deterioration in US-China relations due to the president&#x27;s vociferous anti-communism, as well as the inability of the two nations to come to a common understanding over the Korean conflict, the Israel–Palestine conflict, or the Falklands War. In 1982, Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping, in a reiteration of Mao Zedong&#x27;s &quot;Three Worlds&quot; theory, criticized both the US and Soviet Union for imperialism. In 1983, there were quarrels over a Chinese tennis player, Hu Na, who defected to the US, and over an incident where an Olympic parade float in New York City displayed the flag of Taiwan rather than the PRC&#x27;s flag. Relations in the early part of 1984 were strained over the issue of United States arms sales to Taiwan, but later improved.

By the late 1980s, China was the US&#x27;s largest partner for science and technology, which had become the largest type of government-to-government exchange between the two countries.

In the period before the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, a growing number of cultural exchange activities gave the American and Chinese peoples broad exposure to each other&#x27;s cultural, artistic, and educational achievements. Numerous mainland Chinese professionals and official delegations visited the United States each month. Many of these exchanges continued after the suppression of the Tiananmen protests.

In the first decade after normalization, the US&#x27;s policy towards China was largely driven by the Executive Branch of the United States, with the notable exception of the Taiwan Relations Act. As a result of the Executive-branch driven approach during this period, China concluded that United States Presidents primarily raised Congressional issues as a negotiating tool and that Congress was not itself a significant force in China-US relations. Consequently, China was slow to develop its Congressional liaison capacity.

=== George H. W. Bush administration (1989–1993) ===

Americans who had been optimistic about the emergence of democratic characteristics in response to the rapid economic growth and China were stunned and disappointed by the brutal crackdown of the pro-democratic Tiananmen Square protests in 1989. The US and other governments enacted a number of measures against China&#x27;s violation of human rights. The US suspended high-level official exchanges with the PRC and weapons exports from the US to the PRC. The US also imposed a number of economic sanctions. In the summer of 1990, at the G7 Houston summit, the West called for renewed political and economic reforms in mainland China, particularly in the field of human rights.

The Tiananmen event disrupted the US-China trade relationship, and US investors&#x27; interest in mainland China dropped dramatically. Tourist traffic fell off sharply. The Bush administration denounced the repression and suspended certain trade and investment programs on 5 and 20 June 1989, however Congress was responsible for imposing many of these actions, and the White House itself took a far less critical attitude of Beijing, repeatedly expressing hope that the two countries could maintain normalized relations. Generally, Bush&#x27;s preference was for sanctions which were not formalized in law in order to provide flexibility for altering or removing them. Some sanctions were legislated while others were executive actions. Examples include:

*The US Trade and Development Agency (TDA): new activities in mainland China were suspended from June 1989 until January 2001, when President Bill Clinton lifted this suspension.
*Overseas Private Insurance Corporation (OPIC): new activities have been suspended since June 1989.
*Development Bank Lending/International Monetary Fund (IMF) Credits: the United States does not support development bank lending and will not support IMF credits to the PRC except for projects that address basic human needs.
*Munitions List Exports: subject to certain exceptions, no licenses may be issued for the export of any defense article on the US Munitions List. This restriction may be waived upon a presidential national interest determination.
*Arms Imports – import of defense articles from the PRC was banned after the imposition of the ban on arms exports to the PRC. The import ban was subsequently waived by the administration and reimposed on 26 May 1994. It covers all items on the BATFE&#x27;s Munitions Import List. During this critical period, J. Stapleton Roy, a career US Foreign Service Officer, served as ambassador to Beijing.

Debate within the United States also began on whether China should continue to receive the annual presidential waiver for most favored nation trading status under the Jackson-Vanik Amendment.

US-China military ties and arms sales were terminated in 1989 and as of 2024 have never been restored. Chinese public opinion became more hostile to the United States after 1989, as typified by the 1996 manifesto China Can Say No. The authors called for Beijing to take more aggressive actions against the United States and Japan in order to build a stronger international position. The Chinese government at first endorsed the manifesto, then repudiated it as irresponsible.

The end of the Cold War and dissolution of the Soviet Union removed the original motives underlying rapprochement between China and the United States. Motivated by concerns that the United States might curtail support for China&#x27;s modernization, Deng adopted a low-profile foreign policy to live with the fact of United States hegemony and focus primarily on domestic development.

===Clinton administration (1993–2001)===

Running for president in 1992, Bill Clinton sharply criticized his predecessor George H. W. Bush for prioritizing profitable trade relationships over human rights issues in China. Clinton&#x27;s May 28, 1993 Executive Order 128950 linked future extension of China&#x27;s most favored nation trading status to China&#x27;s progress on U.S.-defined human rights measures. China made virtually no effort to comply with the U.S. conditions and in mid-1994 Clinton changed his position, de-linking the China&#x27;s most favored nation status from human rights issues.

Congressional pressure, especially from the Republican Party, prompted Clinton to approve arms sales to Taiwan, despite the strong displeasure voiced by Beijing.

In July 1993, a symbolic United States Congressional resolution opposed China&#x27;s efforts to be selected as the host country for the 2000 Summer Olympics. The resolution became a major grievance among the Chinese public, which generally viewed the Resolution as an effort to humiliate China.

In July 1993, the US Navy stopped the &quot;Yinhe&quot;, a Chinese container ship, en route to Kuwait in international waters, cut off its GPS so that it lost direction and was forced to anchor, and held it in place for twenty-four days. The United States incorrectly alleged that the &quot;Yinhe&quot; was carrying precursors of chemical weapons for Iran. It eventually forced an inspection of the ship in Saudi Arabia, but found no chemical precursors. The United States refused China&#x27;s request for a formal apology and refused to pay compensation. This incident was viewed in China as international bullying by the United States. Nonetheless, Chinese leader Jiang Zemin adopted a diplomatic posture of goodwill and a &quot;sixteen-characters formula&quot; to working with the United States: &quot;enhancing confidence, avoiding troubles, expanding cooperation, and avoiding confrontation&quot;.
In 1996, the People&#x27;s Liberation Army conducted military exercises in the Taiwan Strait in an apparent effort to intimidate the Republic of China electorate before the pending presidential elections, triggering the Third Taiwan Strait Crisis. The United States dispatched two aircraft carrier battle groups to the region. Subsequently, tensions in the Taiwan Strait diminished and relations between the US and the PRC improved, with increased high-level exchanges and progress on numerous bilateral issues, including human rights, nuclear proliferation, and trade.

China&#x27;s leader Jiang Zemin visited the United States in the fall of 1997, the first state visit to the US by a paramount leader since 1979. In connection with that visit, the two sides came to a consensus on implementation of their 1985 agreement on Peaceful Nuclear Cooperation, as well as a number of other issues. President Clinton visited the PRC in June 1998. He traveled extensively in mainland China, and had direct interaction with the Chinese people, including live speeches and a radio show which allowed the President to convey a sense of American ideals and values. In a speech at Peking University, he referred to the 21st century as &quot;your century&quot;, and expressed his view that technology, including the internet, would help ease any tensions China&#x27;s economic growth might cause. President Clinton was criticized by some, however, for failing to pay adequate attention to human rights abuses in mainland China. When Clinton visited Shanghai, he declared the &quot;three nos&quot; for United States foreign policy towards China: (1) not recognizing two Chinas, (2) not supporting Taiwanese independence, and (3) not supporting Taiwanese efforts to join international organizations for which sovereignty is a membership requirement.

Relations were damaged for a time by the United States bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade on May 7, 1999, which was stated by the White House to be miscoordination between intelligence and the military. The bombing created outrage among Chinese people, who did not accept the United States claim that the bombing was accidental. For several days, Beijing was rocked by massive anti-US demonstrations. Deeming the importance of the bilateral relationship too great to be harmed by the embassy bombing, President Jiang sought to calm the Chinese public outrage. By the end of 1999, relations began to gradually improve. In October 1999, the two countries reached an agreement on compensation for families of those who were victims, as well as payments for damages to respective diplomatic properties in Belgrade and China. US-China relations in 1999 were also damaged by accusations that a Chinese-American scientist at the Los Alamos National Laboratory had given US nuclear secrets to Beijing.

===George W. Bush administration (2001–2009)===
As a presidential candidate in 2000, George W. Bush repeatedly criticized the Clinton-Gore administration for being too friendly with China, which he warned was a strategic competitor.

In the Hainan Island incident of April 1, 2001, a United States US EP-3 surveillance aircraft collided mid-air with a Chinese Shenyang J-8 jet fighter over the South China Sea. China sought a formal apology, and accepted United States Secretary of State Colin Powell&#x27;s expression of &quot;very sorry&quot; as sufficient. The incident nonetheless created negative feelings towards the United States by the Chinese public and increased public feelings of Chinese nationalism.

Early on as President Bush increased arms sales to Taiwan, including 8 submarines. Bush&#x27;s hostile position toward China was suddenly reversed after the September 11 terrorist attacks, and his friendly attitude toward Taiwan became a casualty. Soon he was calling China a strategic partner in the war on terror and postponing deals with Taiwan.

Two PRC citizens died in the attacks on the World Trade Center. President Jiang Zemin sent a telegram to Bush within hours of the attack expressing China&#x27;s condolences and opposition to terror; Bush responded with a phone call the next day stating that he looked forward to working with Jiang and other world leaders to oppose terrorism. Chinese companies and individuals also sent expressions of condolences to their American counterparts. The PRC, itself troubled by Muslim separatists in Xinjiang, offered strong public support for the War on Terror in APEC China 2001. The PRC voted in favor of UNSCR 1373, publicly supported the coalition campaign in Afghanistan, and contributed $150 million of bilateral assistance to Afghan reconstruction following the defeat of the Taliban. Shortly after the 11 September terrorist attacks, the US and PRC also commenced a counterterrorism dialogue. In a March 2002 trip to Beijing, Bush articulated his desire for a &quot;constructive, cooperative, and candid&quot; relationship with China. The third round of that dialogue was held in Beijing in February 2003.

In the United States, the threat of terrorist attacks by al-Qaeda greatly changed the nature of its security concerns. It was no longer plausible to argue, as the Blue Team had earlier asserted, that the PRC was the primary security threat to the United States, and the need to focus on the Middle East and the War on Terror made the avoidance of potential distractions in East Asia a priority for the United States.

There were initial fears among the PRC leadership that the war on terrorism would lead to an anti-PRC effort by the US, especially as the US began establishing bases in Central Asian countries like Uzbekistan and Tajikistan and renewed efforts against Iraq. The Chinese government was relieved after the United States tied up major national resources with its 2003 invasion of Iraq. China believed that the United States&#x27; Middle East meant that the United States would need China&#x27;s help on issues such as counterterrorism, Middle Eastern stability, and nuclear non-proliferation and viewed the United States&#x27; focus as conducive to China&#x27;s emphasis on stability and domestic development.

China and the United States worked closely on regional issues, including those pertaining to North Korea and its nuclear weapons program. China has stressed its opposition to North Korea&#x27;s decision to withdraw from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, its concerns over North Korea&#x27;s nuclear capabilities, and its desire for a non-nuclear Korean Peninsula. It also voted to refer North Korea&#x27;s noncompliance with its International Atomic Energy Agency obligations to the UN Security Council.

In 2001, a presidential plane built in the United States for Chinese leader Jiang Zemin was found to have listening devices installed. Chinese authorities located at least 20 devices, including one in the headboard of the presidential bed. The listening devices were capable of being operated via satellite.

In the mid-2000s, the United States focused relatively less on China issues. This approach was reinforced by the economic benefits to the United States from its relations with China, including cheaper consumer products like clothing and electronics. During this period, the United States also issued significant debt to fund its military interventions and China became the largest foreign purchaser of U.S. government debt.

Taiwan remained a volatile issue, but one that remained under control. The United States policy toward Taiwan involved emphasizing the Four Noes and One Without. On occasion the United States rebuked Republic of China (Taiwan) President Chen Shui-bian for provocative pro-independence rhetoric. As Bush made his opposition to Taiwan independence clear, the PRC saw the United States as playing a positive role in restraining the separatist movement. In 2005, the PRC passed the Anti-Secession Law which stated that the PRC would be prepared to resort to &quot;non-peaceful means&quot; if Taiwan declared formal independence. Many critics of the PRC, such as the Blue Team, argue that the PRC was trying to take advantage of the US war in Iraq to assert its claims on Republic of China&#x27;s territory. In 2008, Taiwan voters elected Ma Ying-jeou. Ma, representing the Kuomintang, campaigned on a platform that included rapprochement with mainland China. His election has significant implications for the future of cross-strait relations.

The 2003 United States invasion of Iraq and the failure of the United States to find evidence of weapons of mass destruction decreased China&#x27;s respect for America&#x27;s power and realism.

China&#x27;s paramount leader Hu Jintao visited the United States in April 2006. Bush visited Beijing in August for four days to attend the 2008 Summer Olympics. The president and his wife Laura were accompanied by Bush&#x27;s father, the former president, and his mother Barbara.

===Obama administration (2009–2017)===
The 2008 US presidential election centered on issues of war and economic recession, but candidates Barack Obama and John McCain also spoke extensively regarding US policy toward China. Both favored cooperation with China on major issues, but they differed with regard to trade policy. Obama expressed concern that the value of China&#x27;s currency was being deliberately set low to benefit China&#x27;s exporters. McCain argued that free trade was crucial and was having a transformative effect in China. Still, McCain noted that while China might have shared interests with the US, it did not share American values.

The election of Barack Obama in 2008 generated positive reactions from most locals and state-run media outlets in China. His presidency fostered hopes for increased co-operation and heightened levels of friendship between the two nations. On 8 November 2008, Chinese leader Hu Jintao and Obama shared a phone conversation in which Hu congratulated Obama on his election victory. During the conversation both parties agreed that the development of Sino-American relations is not only in the interest of both nations, but also in the interests of the international community.

During the Obama administration, the US signed more bilateral agreements with China than it had during any other US administration, particularly with regard to addressing climate change. The two countries signed seven clean energy agreements on November 17, 2009, during Obama&#x27;s visit to China, including an agreement establishing the U.S.-China Clean Energy Research Center (CERC). CERC was the most ambitious clean energy technology cooperation mechanism between the two. The many technical exchanges on climate issues during the Obama era helped both sides of the relationship to better understand each other&#x27;s emissions models and data, leading to increased mutual trust.

Following the 2007-2008 global financial crisis, both US and Chinese governments addressed the economic downturn with massive stimulus initiatives. The Chinese expressed concern that &quot;Buy American&quot; components of the US plan discriminate against foreign producers, including those in China.

As the two most influential and powerful countries in the world, there have been increasingly strong suggestions within American political circles of creating a G-2 (Chimerica) relationship for the United States and China to work out solutions to global problems together.
The Strategic Economic Dialogue initiated by then-US President Bush and Hu and led by US Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson and Chinese Vice Premier Wu Yi in 2006 was broadened by the Obama administration into the U.S.–China Strategic and Economic Dialogue. It was then led by US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and US Secretary of the Treasury Timothy Geithner for the United States and Vice Premier Wang Qishan and Chinese State Councilor Dai Bingguo for China. The focus of the first set of meetings in July 2009 was in response to the economic crisis, finding ways to cooperate to stem global warming and addressing issues such as the proliferation of nuclear weapons and humanitarian crises.

Obama visited China on 15–18 November 2009 to discuss economic worries, concerns over nuclear weapon proliferation, and the need for action against climate change.

In January 2010, the US proposed a $6.4 billion arms sale to the Republic of China (Taiwan). In response, the PRC threatened to impose sanctions on US companies supplying arms to Taiwan and suspend cooperation on certain regional and international issues.
On 19 February 2010, Obama met with the Dalai Lama, accused by China of &quot;fomenting unrest in Tibet.&quot; After the meeting, China summoned the US ambassador to China, Jon Huntsman, but &quot;Time&quot; has described the Chinese reaction as &quot;muted&quot;, speculating that it could be because &quot;the meeting came during the Chinese New Year... when most officials are on leave&quot;. Some activists criticized Obama for the relatively low profile of the visit.
In 2012, the PRC criticized Obama&#x27;s new defense strategy, which it said was aimed at isolating China in East Asia. Obama is looking to increase US military influence in the area with a rotating presence of forces in friendly countries.

In March 2012, China suddenly began cutting back its purchases of oil from Iran, which along with some signs on sensitive security issues like Syria and North Korea, showed some coordination with the Obama administration.

In March 2013, the US and China agreed to impose stricter sanctions on North Korea for conducting nuclear tests, which sets the stage for UN Security Council vote. Such accord might signal a new level of cooperation between the US and China.

In an effort to build a &quot;new model&quot; of relations, Obama met Paramount leader Xi Jinping for two days of meetings, between 6 and 8 June 2013, at the Sunnylands estate in Rancho Mirage, California. The summit was considered &quot;the most important meeting between an American president and a Chinese Communist leader in 40 years, since President Nixon and Chairman Mao,&quot; according to Joseph Nye, a political scientist at Harvard University. The leaders concretely agreed to combat climate change and also found strong mutual interest in curtailing North Korea&#x27;s nuclear program. However, the leaders remained sharply divided over cyber espionage and US arms sales to Taiwan. Xi was dismissive of American complaints about cyber security. Tom Donilon, the outgoing US National Security Adviser, stated that cyber security &quot;is now at the center of the relationship&quot;, adding that if China&#x27;s leaders were unaware of this fact, they know now.

Obama supported the One-China policy. In 2014, Obama stated that &quot;We recognize Tibet as part of the People&#x27;s Republic of China. We are not in favor of independence.&quot;

Beginning in 2015, China&#x27;s People&#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force began patrolling the South China Sea, including the disputed Paracel and Spratly Islands. In China&#x27;s view, these disputed areas are within its Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ). The United States Air Force does not accept this view, and flies its military planes through the area without informing China.

In May 2015, U.S. Secretary of Defense Ashton Carter warned China to halt its rapid island-building in the South China Sea.

Obama hosted Xi for a bilateral meeting on the margins of the Nuclear Security Summit on 31 March 2016.

===First Trump administration (2017–2021)===
 

The presidency of Donald Trump led to a negative shift in US relations with China.

President-elect Trump&#x27;s telephone conversation with the president of Taiwan Tsai Ing-wen on 2 December 2016 was the first such contact with Taiwan by an American president-elect or president since 1979. It provoked Beijing to lodge a diplomatic protest (&quot;stern representations&quot;). Trump went on to clarify his move: &quot;I fully understand the &#x27;one China&#x27; policy, but I don&#x27;t know why we have to be bound by a &#x27;one China&#x27; policy unless we make a deal with China having to do with other things, including trade.&quot;

On President Trump&#x27;s inauguration day, an official from the China&#x27;s People&#x27;s Liberation Army wrote on the official website that the American military build-up in East Asia and the Asia Pacific, and its push to arm South Korea with the THAAD missile-defense system were provocative &quot;hot spots getting closer to ignition&quot; and that the chances of war had become &quot;more real.&quot;

On taking office, the Trump administration stopped negotiations on a bilateral investment treaty with China which had begun in 2008. According to Michael Froman, the lead negotiator during the preceding four years, the effort to reach an agreement was &quot;more than 90 percent complete.&quot;

On 23 January, speaking about China&#x27;s claims to sovereignty over the Spratly Islands in the South China Sea, White House spokesman Sean Spicer said, &quot;It&#x27;s a question of if those islands are in fact in international waters and not part of China proper, then yeah, we&#x27;re going to make sure that we defend international territories from being taken over by one country.&quot;
On 4 January, on a visit to Japan, US Defense Secretary James Mattis reaffirmed Washington&#x27;s commitment under the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan to defending Japan, including the Senkaku Islands (the East China Sea) that are claimed by China.

On 9 February, Trump spoke with China&#x27;s leader Xi Jinping over the phone discussing a wide range of issues; Trump was said to have re-iterated the United States&#x27; commitment to the status quo &#x27;one-China&#x27; policy.

In a 3 July 2017 telephone conversation with Trump, Xi stated, &quot;China-US relations have made great progress in recent days, but they have also been affected by some negative factors.&quot; By &quot;negative factors&quot;, Geng Shuang, a Chinese government spokesmen, explained in a televised briefing: &quot;Under the pretext of navigational freedom, the American side once again sent military vessels into the Chinese territorial waters of Xisha (Paracel) Islands. It has violated Chinese and international law, infringed upon Chinese sovereignty, and disrupted order, peace and security of the relevant waters and put in jeopardy facilities and personnel on the relevant Chinese islands. It is a serious political and military provocation. The Chinese side is strongly dissatisfied with and firmly opposed to the relevant actions by the US.&quot;

In 2017, the Trump administration terminated the Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade (JCCT) between China and the United States. The JCCT had met annually from 1983 to 2016 and had been a generally effective mechanism to address various trade issues between the two countries. The Trump administration also terminated the Strategic and Economic Dialogue after holding the June 2017 meeting under the name &quot;Comprehensive Economic Dialogue.&quot;

China enforced punitive tariffs on 128 categories of American goods on 1 April 2018 in retaliation for the Trump administration&#x27;s national-security levies on steel and aluminum imports the previous month. The Chinese Government&#x27;s response is measured, affecting $3 billion in annual trade or about 2% of US goods exports to China. By late September 2018, the Trump administration had placed tariffs (25% tax increase) on $250 billion worth of Chinese goods, in an attempt to offset the trade imbalance between the two major economic world powers.

In what put additional strain on US-China relations, Huawei&#x27;s vice-chair and CFO Meng Wanzhou was arrested in Canada on 1 December 2018 at the behest of US authorities. US Senator Ben Sasse accused China of undermining U.S. national security interests, often &quot;using private sector entities&quot; to by-pass US sanctions against the sale of telecom equipment to Iran.

According to political analyst, Andrew Leung, &quot;China is perceived as the antagonist and rival of the United States,&quot; and that China&#x27;s economic growth is seen as a &quot;threat to the world order underpinned by American dominance or American values.&quot; He claimed, moreover, that the arrest of the CFO of Huawei on 1 December 2018 corresponded with the suspicious death on that same day of a leading Chinese national quantum physicist and venture capitalist at Stanford University, Shoucheng Zhang, who was on a H-1B visa, giving rise to conspiracy theories. In August 2018, the US government signed an update to legislation for the Committee on Foreign Investment in the U.S., broadening governmental scrutiny to vetting VC-backed, and especially Chinese state-funded, investments in US tech startups.

Both sides signed the US–China Phase One trade deal on 15 January. Unlike other trade agreements, the agreement did not rely on arbitration through an intergovernmental organization like the World Trade Organization, but rather through a bilateral mechanism.

====Rapid deterioration of relations (2019–2020)====

Michael D. Swaine warned in 2019, &quot;The often positive and optimistic forces, interests, and beliefs that sustained bilateral ties for decades are giving way to undue pessimism, hostility, and a zero-sum mindset in almost every area of engagement.&quot;

According to two experts on US-China relations, Rosemary Foot and Amy King, the consensus of experts is that:
:The relationship began to deteriorate in the second decade of the 21st century, and that the Trump administration has accelerated the deterioration. Explanations...have ranged over a large number of factors, all of which have played some role. Some relate to changes in official personnel in both the United States and China, others to the shifts and relative power between the two countries after the global financial crisis of 2007–2008, and yet others to China&#x27;s greater determination to reform global governance institutions and to play more of a global leadership role.

Foot and King emphasize China&#x27;s aggressive efforts in developing cutting-edge technologies with significant military and commercial implications, while the United States sees the need to defend itself aggressively against technological theft.

U.S. academics have made various policy prescriptions for the United States within the context of its deteriorating relationship with China.

According to Lawrence J. Lau, a major cause of the deterioration is the growing battle between China and the United States for global economic and technological dominance. More generally, he argues, &quot;It is also a reflection of the rise of populism, isolationism, nationalism and protectionism almost everywhere in the world, including in the US.&quot; According to Ian Bremmer, the US and China are in a technology cold war and Trump&#x27;s technology war against the PRC has been his administration&#x27;s biggest foreign policy win, saying, &quot;on the issue of tech decoupling that it was America out front with most allies on board.&quot; According to Greg Autry, an academic at the University of Southern California, Trump&#x27;s China policy was working, pointing to increased revenue intakes by the Treasury Department and offshoring by US manufacturing supply chains from China, and crediting the administration for being the first to fully recognize that globalization had not delivered for Americans and that China was an existential threat.

Former Obama administration officials Samantha Power and Susan Rice have criticized China&#x27;s actions on trade, over the Meng Wenzhou affair and in Hong Kong while simultaneously criticizing the Trump administration for inadequate pushback.

In 2018, the US Department of Justice initiated a &quot;China Initiative&quot; to &quot;combat economic espionage&quot;. DOJ ended the program on 23 February 2023. No one was charged or convicted of spying in any China Initiative case.

The Director of Policy Planning at the United States Department of State, Kiron Skinner drew international attention in April 2019 for stating at a foreign policy forum that the US competition with China would be especially bitter, because unlike the Cold War with the Soviet Union which is &quot;a fight within the Western family&quot;, &quot;it&#x27;s the first time that we will have a great-power competitor that is not Caucasian&quot;.

In 2019, prominent Americans, including some with ties to the administration, formed the Committee on the Present Danger: China (CPDC) to advocate for a more hawkish foreign policy against China.

On 29 January 2020, the Interior Department&#x27;s fleet of more than 800 Chinese-made drones, including those by DJI, were grounded, citing security concerns.

On 18 February 2020, the US government announced five Chinese state media firms would be designated &quot;foreign missions&quot;, requiring them to be legally registered with the US government as a foreign government entity. On the following day, China took action against three American journalists with &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; by revoking their press credentials over a coronavirus opinion column which their paper had run. According to China, the column was racist and libelous; the CEO of the company that published the WSJ defended the article, as did the State department. A March 2020 article by Reuters said that Washington slashed the number of journalists allowed to work at US offices of major Chinese media outlets to 100 from 160 due to Beijing&#x27;s &quot;long-standing intimidation and harassment of journalists&quot;. In response, China expelled about a dozen American correspondents with &quot;The New York Times&quot;, News Corp&#x27;s Wall Street Journal and the Washington Post, which prompted criticism from the State Department. On 8 May, the US moved Chinese citizens at non-American news outlets from open-ended work visas to extendable 90-day work visas and in June the State Department designated a further four Chinese media outlets as foreign embassies.
By May 2020 relations had deteriorated as both sides were accusing the other of guilt for the worldwide coronavirus pandemic. Washington has mobilized a campaign of investigations, prosecutions and export restrictions. Beijing, meanwhile, has stepped up military activities in the contested South China Sea, and launched denunciations of American Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, and publicly speculating that the American military deliberately unleashed the virus in China. In the growing aspersion, on 15 May 2020, the US blocked shipments of semi-conductors to Huawei, while China, for its part, has threatened to place Apple, Boeing, and other US firms on &quot;unreliable entities&quot; lists, and has blamed the US government of using state power under the excuse of national security, and of abusing export control measures to continuously oppress and contain specific enterprises of other countries. Orville Schell, the director of the Center on US-China Relations at the Asia Society, summed up the situation as follows: &quot;The consequences of the breakdown in US-China relations is going to be very grave for the world and for the global economy because the ability of the US and China to work together was the keystone of the whole arch of globalization and global trade. With that pulled out, there&#x27;s going to be a tremendous amount of disturbance&quot;, often compared to the Cold War. However Tony Blair noted there is &quot;an interconnectedness, economically and in trade terms between the US and China that just wasn&#x27;t there in the US-Soviet Cold War&quot; that makes it an imperfect analogy. He further felt the China-U.S. relations would be the &quot;determining geopolitical relationship of the 21st century.&quot;

In June 2020, US Ambassador to the United Nations Kelly Craft sent a letter to the U.N. secretary general explaining the US position on China&#x27;s &quot;excessive maritime claims&quot;.

On 17 June 2020, President Trump signed the Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act, which authorizes the imposition of U.S. sanctions against Chinese government officials responsible for detention camps holding more than 1 million members of the country&#x27;s Uyghur Muslim minority. On 9 July 2020, the Trump administration imposed sanctions and visa restrictions against senior Chinese officials, including Chen Quanguo, a member of China&#x27;s powerful Politburo.

A research paper by the Begin–Sadat Center for Strategic Studies said that Chinese state-controlled media enthusiastically covered the protests and rioting attending the Murder of George Floyd, comparing the American protests to the protests in Hong Kong and used the rioting and violence in the United States as evidence that the democratic system was hypocritical and morally bankrupt. A report by the Australian Strategic Policy Institute said that racial tensions in the United States was a key area of focus for &quot;a campaign of cross-platform inauthentic activity, conducted by Chinese-speaking actors and broadly in alignment with the political goal of the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC) to denigrate the standing of the US.&quot;

In July 2020, FBI Director Christopher Wray called China the &quot;greatest long-term threat&quot; to the United States. He said that &quot;the FBI is now opening a new China-related counterintelligence case every 10 hours. Of the nearly 5,000 active counterintelligence cases currently under way across the country, almost half are related to China.&quot;

In July 2020, the Trump administration ordered the closure of the Chinese consulate in Houston. In response, the Chinese government ordered the closure of the US consulate in Chengdu.

On 20 July 2020, the United States sanctioned 11 Chinese companies, restricting any trade deal with America for what the US government said was their involvement in human rights violations in Xinjiang, accusing them specifically of using Uyghurs and other Muslim minorities in forced labor.

On 23 July 2020, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo announced the end of what he called &quot;blind engagement&quot; with the Chinese government. He also criticized CCP general secretary Xi Jinping as &quot;a true believer in a bankrupt totalitarian ideology&quot;.

In August 2020, Washington imposed sanctions on 11 Hong Kong and Chinese officials over what it said was their role in curtailing political freedoms in Hong Kong through the imposition of the Hong Kong national security law; China retaliated by sanctioning 6 Republican lawmakers and 5 individuals at non-profit and rights groups.

In September 2020 the United States had under a 29 May presidential proclamation revoked more than 1,000 visas for PRC students and researchers visas who the US government said had ties to the Chinese military in order to prevent them from stealing and otherwise appropriating sensitive research.

On 26 September 2020, the US Commerce Department put restrictions on Chinese chip maker, Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corporation (SMIC), following which the suppliers were required to have an export license for exporting the chip. The restrictions were imposed after the US concluded that an &quot;unacceptable risk&quot; equipment supplied to SMIC could potentially be used for military purposes.

On 6 October 2020, Germany&#x27;s ambassador to the UN, on behalf of the group of 39 countries including Germany, the U.K. and the U.S., made a statement to denounce China for its treatment of ethnic minorities and for curtailing freedoms in Hong Kong.

On 9 October 2020, the Department of Justice disallowed the use of its fund to purchase DJI drones, which the DoJ classified as a &quot;Covered Foreign Entity&quot;.

On October 21, 2020, the US approved arms sales of $1.8 billion to Taiwan. It involved three packages that included high technology weapons such as SLAM-ER missiles, HIMARS M142 Launchers and Recce Pods. On 26 October 2020, China announced its intentions to impose sanctions on US businesses and individuals, including Boeing, Raytheon and Lockheed Martin. Taiwan welcomed the arms sales and disapproved of the sanctions. Taiwan also said it would continue buying arms from America.

In a December 2020 report, US intelligence officials claimed that China had supervised a bounty program that paid Afghan militants to kill US soldiers deployed in the country.

On 5 December 2020, the US State Department ended five cultural exchange programs with China, which are - &quot;the Policymakers Educational China Trip Program, the U.S.-China Friendship Program, the U.S.-China Leadership Exchange Program, the U.S.-China Transpacific Exchange Program and the Hong Kong Educational and Cultural Program.&quot; They described these programs as soft power propaganda tools of Chinese government.

In December 2020, an investigation by &quot;Axios&quot; was published that detailed the suspected activities of Christine Fang, a Chinese national who has been suspected by US officials of having conducted political espionage for the Chinese Ministry of State Security (MSS) while she was in the United States from 2011 to 2015. While Fang&#x27;s suspected activities prior to the Axios investigation had already drawn scrutiny from federal law enforcement agencies, the subsequent reactions to its publication drew further scrutiny from politicians and the media.

===Biden administration (2021–2025)===
Following his election, relations with the new Biden administration in 2021 included heightened tensions over trade, technology, and human rights, particularly regarding Hong Kong, and the treatment of minorities in China. In addition international tensions regarding control of the South China Sea remained high. Biden has largely continued the China policies of his predecessor, Donald Trump. However, the Biden and Xi administrations agreed to collaborate on long-term projects regarding climate change, nuclear proliferation, and the global COVID-19 pandemic.

On 20 January 2021, China imposed sanctions against outgoing US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, former secretary of health and human services Alex Azar, former under secretary of state Keith J. Krach, outgoing US ambassador to the United Nations Kelly Craft, and 24 other former Trump officials. Biden&#x27;s National Security Council called the sanctions &quot;unproductive and cynical&quot;. In his nomination hearing, Blinken endorsed Pompeo&#x27;s report that China is committing a genocide against Uyghurs, reaffirming Biden&#x27;s campaign stance.

The new US Secretary of State, Antony Blinken, called-out China on its treatment of the ethnic Uighurs. President Biden, in his first foreign policy address, labeled China as &quot;the most serious competitor&quot; to the US. During his first visit to the Pentagon on 9 February 2021, Biden urged the United States Department of Defense to review its national security policy concerning China.

On March 12, 2021, Huawei, ZTE, Hytera, Hikvision, and Dahua Technology were designated as national security threats by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).

From March 18–19, 2021, bilateral talks in Alaska took place. Blinken and national security advisor Jake Sullivan met with Politburo member Yang Jiechi and Chinese foreign minister Wang Yi. The Americans unleashed heated attacks on China&#x27;s policies regarding human rights, cyberattacks, Taiwan, and its crackdown in Xinjiang and Hong Kong. The Chinese side countered by attacking the U.S&#x27;s standing in the world and defending China&#x27;s sovereign rights and model of development. In the week ahead of the talks, the administration met with US allies in Asia and imposed sanctions on senior Chinese officials amidst Beijing&#x27;s contemporaneous crackdown on Hong Kong.

On March 22, 2021, in conjunction with the European Union, United Kingdom and Canada, the United States imposed sanctions against Chinese officials in relation to the human rights violations in Xinjiang. The sanctions marked the first time the Biden administration took such coordinated action against Beijing.

On April 8, 2021, the US Commerce Department added seven Chinese supercomputing entities to its Entity List on national security grounds. This was the first action taken by the Biden administration to restrict Chinese access to US technology.

On June 3, 2021, Biden signed Executive Order 14032 which saw the expansion of Executive Order 13959 signed by the Trump administration as preventing American investors from investing in Chinese companies identified by the US government as having ties to China&#x27;s military or surveillance industry.

On June 13, 2021, leaders from the G7 democracies sharply criticized China for a series of abuses. The G7 nations—the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, France, Italy, Canada and Japan—had been hesitant about acting separately. Pressured by US President Joe Biden, they unanimously agreed on a sharp criticism, followed the next day by a similar strong unanimous attack by NATO members. The criticisms focused on the mistreatment of the Muslim Uyghur minority, the systematic destruction of democracy in Hong Kong, repeated military threats against Taiwan, unfair trade practices, and lack of transparency regarding the origins of COVID-19. China rejected the criticism as interference in what it considers to be its internal policy matters.
In August 2021, China tested a nuclear-capable hypersonic missile, hypothesized as part of a Fractional Orbital Bombardment System, that circled the globe before speeding towards its target. The &quot;Financial Times&quot; reported that &quot;the test showed that China had made astounding progress on hypersonic weapons and was far more advanced than US officials realized.&quot;

On August 18, while discussing the larger ramifications of the US withdrawal from Afghanistan on cross-strait relations, Biden said that the two cases were incomparable as the United States had an Article Five commitment to defend Taiwan. The remarks, which were the first by Biden to touch directly on US policy towards Taiwan, were interpreted as signalling a shift in the country&#x27;s position of strategic ambiguity. A Biden administration official later said there had been no change to US policy on Taiwan, and analysts said Biden appeared to have mischaracterized America&#x27;s defense commitment to Taiwan.

On 15 September 2021, the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia formed AUKUS. Australia will be provided with conventionally-armed submarines powered by nuclear energy. See SSN-AUKUS. These submarines will be based on Britain&#x27;s advanced nuclear submarine design and will incorporate the latest technology from the United States. The partnership involves the construction and utilization of these submarines by both the U.K. and Australia. The long-term strategic goal is to help neutralize Chinese military expansion to the South. China has denounced the agreement as &quot;extremely irresponsible&quot;.

In November 2021, the United States updated its assessment of China&#x27;s nuclear weapon stockpile, showing that China will have 700 nuclear warheads by 2027, and that number will reach 1,000 by 2030.

Biden held his first virtual meeting with Xi on 15 November 2021.

On 24 November 2021, the Biden administration invited Taiwan to attend the &#x27;Summit for Democracy&#x27; - to be held in December 2021. China&#x27;s Foreign Ministry reacted by saying it was &quot;firmly opposed&quot; to the invitation.

On 2 December 2021, the US Securities and Exchange Commission finalized rules which would enable it to delist Chinese firms which have been determined to be non-compliant with the disclosure requirements as stipulated in the Holding Foreign Companies Accountable Act from US stock exchanges.

On 6 December 2021, the United States announced that its diplomats would boycott the Beijing Olympics.

On 23 December 2021, Biden signed the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act into law.

On 27 December 2021, Biden signed his first defense bill into law. Certain provisions of the act called for the enhancements to the security of Taiwan, including inviting the Taiwanese navy to the 2022 Rim of the Pacific exercise in the face of &quot;increasingly coercive and aggressive behavior&quot; by China.

On 27 February 2022, the White House urged China to condemn Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine. China accused the United States of being responsible for the war in Ukraine.

On 18 March 2022, Joe Biden and Xi Jinping directly communicated with each other for the first time since Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine.

In May 2022, Chinese officials ordered government agencies and state-backed companies to remove personal computers produced by American corporations and replace them with equipment from domestic companies. Bloomberg said the decision was one of China&#x27;s most aggressive moves to eliminate the usage of foreign technology from the most sensitive parts of its government and spur its campaign to substitute foreign technology with domestic ones.

In late May 2022, the State Department restored a line on its fact sheet on US-Taiwan relations which it removed earlier in the month and stated it did not support Taiwanese independence. However, another line which was also removed in the earlier fact sheet that acknowledged China&#x27;s sovereignty claims over Taiwan was not restored while a line that stated the US would maintain its capacity to resist any efforts by China to undermine the security, sovereignty and prosperity of Taiwan in a manner that was consistent with the Taiwan Relations Act was added to the updated fact sheet.

On 11 June 2022, US Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin condemned China&#x27;s &quot;provocative, destabilising&quot; military activity near Taiwan, a day after China&#x27;s Defence Minister Wei Fenghe warned Austin that &quot;if anyone dares to split Taiwan from China, the Chinese army will definitely not hesitate to start a war no matter the cost.&quot;

In July 2022, speaker of the house Nancy Pelosi announced that she would be leading a congressional delegation to the Indo-Pacific region. She has planned to visit Singapore, Malaysia, South Korea and Japan, as well as the island of Taiwan. China has responded to this by saying &quot;it would constitute a gross interference in China&#x27;s internal affairs&quot;, and continued military exercises within Chinese territories. When Pelosi visited the island the following month, the act was strongly condemned by China. As a result, China severed ties in all cooperation activities with the United States in several areas, including military matters, global climate cooperation, and drug trafficking enforcement. Later the State Department summoned Chinese ambassadors to complain about Chinese aggression. China claimed that the Pelosi visit served no other purpose than to provoke China and to deteriorate Sino-American relations while the United States, pointing to past precedent, said that Pelosi had the right to visit Taiwan and attacked the Chinese response as disproportionate. After Pelosi&#x27;s departure, the PRC began military exercises encircling Taiwan.

On 7 October 2022, the US implemented new export controls targeting China&#x27;s ability to access and develop advanced computing and semiconductor manufacturing items. The new export controls reflect the United States&#x27; ambition to counter the accelerating advancement of China&#x27;s high-tech capabilities in these spaces to address foreign policy and national security concerns.

On 14 November 2022, Joe Biden and Xi Jinping met on the sidelines of the G20 summit in Bali for their first in-person encounter since Biden became president. The meeting lasted for more than 3 hours and they discussed a range of issues which included tensions over Taiwan and North Korea, and the war in Ukraine.

Some geoeconomics experts see an acceleration of the US–China rivalry as &quot;inevitable&quot; given the tensions manifested openly in the last months of 2022 and early 2023. In a series of interviews with BBC News and Asharq News, Nicolas Firzli, director, EU ASEAN Centre, argued that &quot;Cold War 2 with China [was] part of the Biden Doctrine, and the only remaining point of convergence between Biden and a Republic dominated Congress [...] January 2023 is the moment when things crystalized irreversibly&quot;.

On 2 February 2023, a Chinese reconnaissance balloon was spotted flying over US airspace in the state of Montana, potentially to collect information related to nuclear silos in the area. Two days later, the United States shot it down over the Atlantic Ocean, citing national security concerns. The balloon incident followed previous Chinese government actions targeting the U.S., including the Chinese theft of the designs for the F-35 about fifteen years earlier and successful Chinese government-sponsored cyberattacks targeting the Office of Personnel Management security clearance files (2015), the healthcare company Anthem (2015), and the Marriott International system (2018). In 2022, the US and its allies imposed stringent additional export controls on the sale of &quot;foundational technologies&quot; (including advanced semiconductor chips and related technology) to China, with the aim of inhibiting any Chinese military buildup. The Biden administration has also sought to maintain critical-sector supply chains independent from China.&lt;ref name=&quot;nytimes/2023/02/09/china-balloon-program&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The Beijing government expressed strong dissatisfaction and protest against the US&#x27;s use of force, calling it a violation of international practice. The US claimed the balloon was a violation of its sovereignty.

On 11 February 2023, the US Commerce Department prohibited six Chinese companies connected to the aerospace programs of the Chinese army from acquiring US technology without authorization from the government. These six businesses include Nanjiang Aerospace Technology of Beijing; The 48th Research Institute of China Electronics Technology Group Corporation; Technology for Dongguan Lingkong Remote Sensing; Aviation Science and Technology Group of the Eagles Men; Tian-Hai-Xiang Aviation Technology in Guangzhou; together with the Shanxi Eagles Men Aviation Science and Technology Group.

In April 2023, China sanctioned US Representative Michael McCaul in response to a legislative trip for Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-wen.

In May 2023, an American citizen living in Hong Kong named John Shing-Wan Leung was sentenced to life in prison on charges of espionage. Leung was arrested in 2021 by China&#x27;s counterintelligence agency.
On 23 September 2024,The Biden administration is banning Chinese software from U.S. internet-connected vehicles, citing national security risks. This move builds on previous actions against Chinese tech, deepening the digital divide between the two nations.

====Attempts to fix relationship (2023–2024)====

In mid-2023, both countries started to increase meetings between high-level officials in the hope of stabilizing the relationship; on 11 May, US national security adviser Jake Sullivan met with Wang Yi, director of the Office of the Central Foreign Affairs Commission, with the topics including Taiwan and Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine. On 21 May, Biden commented during the G7 summit in Hiroshima that he expected a thaw in relations with China soon, commenting that the two countries were moving towards more dialogue but &quot;this silly balloon that was carrying two freight cars worth of spy equipment was flying over the United States and it got shot down and everything changed in terms of talking to one another&quot;. On 26 May, Chinese minister of commerce Wang Wentao met with US secretary of commerce Gina Raimondo, where Raimondo raised concerns about treatment of US companies by China. US officials also announced in June that Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) director William J. Burns travelled to China in May. However, a meeting in the Shangri-La Dialogue between Chinese minister of national defense Li Shangfu and US secretary of defense Lloyd Austin failed to take place, after China rebuffed US requests to meet. In late June 2023, Blinken traveled to China and met with Xi; subsequent public statements by both countries were largely positive, with Xi and Blinken emphasizing that both sides have a responsibility to manage relations. However, relations became more contentious after Biden called Xi a &quot;dictator&quot;.

The trips further continued as between 6–9 July, United States secretary of treasury Janet Yellen visited China, her first trip to the country during her tenure as well as the first trip to the country by a US Treasury secretary in four years. During the visit, she met with various Chinese officials, including former vice premier Liu He, governor of the People&#x27;s Bank of China (PBC) Yi Gang, minister of finance Liu Kun, CCP secretary of PBC Pan Gongsheng, vice premier He Lifeng, and premier Li Qiang. During her visit to, Yellen criticized China&#x27;s treatment of American companies with foreign connections, stating to Li Qiang: &quot;We seek healthy economic competition that is not winner-take-all but that, with a fair set of rules, can benefit both countries over time.&quot; She also said that the US national security restrictions on investment in China were intended to be narrowly focused and not have broad effects on the Chinese economy.

On July 13, 2023, Secretary of State Antony Blinken met the Director of the Office of the Central Commission for Foreign Affairs Wang Yi in Jakarta at the ASEAN Post-Ministerial Conference at the request of Blinken to discuss the removal of obstacles that complicate US-China relations, such as the Taiwan question and sanctions the U.S. is imposing against China&#x27;s high-technology sector, as well as to promote the pragmatic approach with regard to regional cooperation. Former Minister of Foreign Affairs of China Qin Gang had just been replaced by his predecessor Wang Yi due to an extramarital affair of Gang in July of the same year. This meeting also paved the way for a further encounter of China&#x27;s top diplomat Wang Yi before year&#x27;s end when he will be invited to meet Blinken in Washington DC. Later on the sidelines of the U.N General Assembly (UNGA) in NY on September 26, Vice-president Han Zheng met with US Secretary of State Antony Blinken to further nurture the strained bilateral ties of both superpowers. The absence of Xi-Jinping at the 2023 G20 New Delhi summit in India on September 9 and 10 was regretful, according to a statement by U.S. President Joe Biden, however, recent news reports indicate that both Chinese Premier Xi as well as Foreign Minister Wang Yi will meet Biden and Blinken before year&#x27;s end to hopefully ease the strained relations between the two nations.

Yellen&#x27;s visit was followed by a visit by United States secretary of commerce Gina Raimondo between 27 and 30 August, where she met minister of culture and tourism Hu Heping, minister of commerce Wang Wentao, vice premier He Lifeng, and premier Li Qiang. Raimondo also visited Shanghai, where she met with Shanghai Communist Party secretary Chen Jining, and visited Shanghai Disneyland. During the meeting, the two sides announced a working group on commercial issues and an export control enforcement “information exchange” dialogue. The working group, upon its launch on September 22, 2023, was divided into two segments: one economic subgroup and one financial subgroup.
On November 2, 2023, a report from the Wall Street Journal was released saying that the U.S. and China would hold nuclear arms talks, a rarity, ahead of Xi Jinping&#x27;s visit to the United States.

At the beginning of November 2023, insiders cautiously expressed hope for a climate agreement between China and United States ahead of the 2023 United Nations Climate Change Conference, similar to the agreement of 2014 which paved the way for the Paris Agreement. One contentious topic is a plan for reduction of methane emissions in China. According to China&#x27;s climate envoy Xie Zhenhua &quot;progress on a plan reflected the state of US-China relations.&quot; Another is a reduction in coal use in China. China says it expands coal use for improving energy security, even though many think there are better ways to improve it. Talks between Janet Yellen and He Lifeng yielded a decision to enhance cooperation between China and the United States in several domains, including climate, debt relief. Much is expected from the meeting between Joe Biden and Xi Jinping. According to Kate Logan from the Asia Society Policy Institute, cooperation between the 2 countries, can &quot;set the stage for a successful outcome at the COP28&quot;.

On November 15, 2023, President Joe Biden met with Xi Jinping at the 2023 APEC Summit in San Francisco. This was speculated to be their last meeting of 2023 before Biden&#x27;s 2024 reelection campaign.

The US and China resumed semi-official nuclear arms talks in March 2024, with China reassuring the US it wouldn&#x27;t use nuclear weapons over Taiwan and reaffirming its no-first-use policy. Despite broader tensions, both sides plan to continue discussions in 2025.

In October 2024 American drone maker Skydio was sanctioned by China after its products were approved for use by fire departments in Taiwan. The Chinese government forbade components suppliers and other businesses in China from doing business with Skydio.

On 16 November 2024, Xi Jinping and Joe Biden discussed stabilizing U.S.-China relations at APEC Summit in Lima, as Trump&#x27;s return raises concerns over potential trade and Taiwan tensions. Beijing seeks dialogue but braces for challenges.

On 1 December 2024, China condemned a U.S. arms sale to Taiwan, valued at $385 million, which included F-16 jet parts and radar support. The sale was approved by the U.S. just before Lai Ching-te began a Pacific tour with stops in Hawaii and Guam. China criticized the sale for encouraging Taiwan&#x27;s independence and damaging U.S.-China relations, and objected to Lai&#x27;s U.S. transit, calling him a &quot;separatist.&quot; Despite the lack of formal diplomatic ties, the U.S. is required by law to assist Taiwan in defending itself, which continues to provoke Beijing. Taiwan rejects China&#x27;s claims of sovereignty.
After Washington announced more military aid and sales to Taiwan, China called it &quot;playing with fire&quot; and said such actions by the United States contradict the solemn commitments of its leaders not to support Taiwan independence.

===Second Trump administration (2025–present)===
Following his second election victory as President of the United States in November 2024, Donald Trump nominated Florida Senator Marco Rubio as Secretary of State and Representative Michael Waltz as National Security Advisor in his second administration. According to Neil Thomas, a fellow in Chinese politics at the Asia Society Policy Institute&#x27;s Center for China Analysis, the selection of Rubio and Waltz—both known as hardliners on China—signals that Trump&#x27;s foreign policy will prioritize China above all else. Just before Trump&#x27;s second inauguration in January 2025, Vice President JD Vance and ally Elon Musk each held separate meetings with China&#x27;s vice president Han Zheng, who was in Washington attending the event as China&#x27;s president Xi Jinping&#x27;s special representative. Han&#x27;s presence at the capitol was seen by commentators as representative of Xi&#x27;s interest in strengthening the two countries&#x27; relationship under Trump&#x27;s tenure.

On 2 February 2025, China criticized Trump&#x27;s 10% tariff on imports, vowed to challenge it at the WTO, and rejected U.S. fentanyl claims, calling for dialogue to avoid escalation.

==Economic relations==
As part of China&#x27;s foreign-exchange reserves, China has a preference for dollar-denominated assets, including United States treasury securities. In turn, the United States benefits because it lacks the domestic savings to fund its budget deficit. After the global financial crisis of 2007-2008, Chinese policymakers and the general public viewed China&#x27;s holdings of US debt as unwisely overexposing China to volatility. China remains a major holder of United States treasury securities, although the amount has decreased as of at least 2022.
In trade matters, the United States has benefitted from China&#x27;s demand for United States export products, which grew rapidly from 2000 to at least 2021. As of 2021, China was the third largest market for United States export merchandise. Inexpensive Chinese exports to the United States increase the purchasing power of American consumers and American business profits. Both countries are benefitted by the demand for their respective exports to the other.

In 1991, China only accounted for 1% of total imports to the United States. For many years, China was the most important country which required an annual waiver to maintain free trade status. The waiver for the PRC had been in effect since 1980. Every year between 1989 and 1999, legislation was introduced in Congress to disapprove the President&#x27;s waiver. The legislation had sought to tie free trade with China to meeting certain human rights conditions that go beyond freedom of emigration. All such attempted legislation failed to pass. The requirement of an annual waiver was inconsistent with the rules of the World Trade Organization, and for the PRC to join the WTO, congressional action was needed to grant permanent normal trade relations (PNTR) to China. This was accomplished in 2000 (United States–China Relations Act of 2000), allowing China to join WTO in 2001. China&#x27;s most favoured nation (MFN) status was made permanent on 27 December 2001.

Since the entry of China into the WTO in December 2001, the decline in U.S. manufacturing jobs has accelerated (the China shock). The Economic Policy Institute estimated that the trade deficit with China cost about 2.7 million jobs between 2001 and 2011, including manufacturing and other industries.

The PRC and the US resumed trade relations in 1972 and 1973. Direct investment by the US in mainland China covers a wide range of manufacturing sectors, several large hotel projects, restaurant chains, and petrochemicals. US companies have entered agreements establishing more than 20,000 equity joint ventures, contractual joint ventures, and wholly foreign-owned enterprises in mainland China. More than 100 US-based multinationals have projects in mainland China, some with multiple investments. Cumulative US investment in mainland China is valued at $48 billion. The US trade deficit with mainland China exceeded $350 billion in 2006 and was the United States&#x27; largest bilateral trade deficit. Some of the factors that influence the US trade deficit with mainland China include:

*US Import Valuation Overcounts China: there has been a shift of low-end assembly industries to mainland China from newly industrialized countries in East Asia and the Asia-Pacific. Mainland China has increasingly become the last link in a long chain of value-added production. Because US trade data attributes the full value of a product to the final assembler, mainland Chinese value added is overcounted. Using a statistical model that eliminates these global value chain-related distortions, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) researchers and World Trade Organization (WTO) researchers conclude that the United States&#x27; measures may overstate the value of Chinese exports by as much as 35%. According to Pascal Lamy: &quot;The statistical bias created by attributing commercial value to the last country of origin perverts the true economic dimension of the bilateral trade imbalances. This affects the political debate, and leads to misguided perceptions. Take the bilateral deficit between China and the US. A series of estimates based on true domestic content can cut the overall deficit – which was $252bn in November 2010 – by half, if not more.&quot;
*US demand for labor-intensive goods exceeds domestic output: the PRC has restrictive trade practices in mainland China, which include a wide array of barriers to foreign goods and services, often aimed at protecting state-owned enterprises. These practices include high tariffs, lack of transparency, requiring firms to obtain special permission to import goods, inconsistent application of laws and regulations, and leveraging technology from foreign firms in return for market access. Mainland China&#x27;s accession into the World Trade Organization is meant to help address these barriers.
*The undervaluation of the Renminbi relative to the United States dollar.

Beginning in 2009, the US and China agreed to hold regular high-level talks about economic issues and other mutual concerns by establishing the Strategic Economic Dialogue, which meets biannually. Five meetings have been held, the most recent in December 2008. Economic nationalism seems to be rising in both countries, a point the leaders of the two delegations noted in their opening presentations. The United States and China have also established the high-level US-China Senior Dialogue to discuss international political issues and work out resolutions.
In September 2009 a trade dispute emerged between the United States and China, which came after the US imposed tariffs of 35 percent on Chinese tire imports. The Chinese commerce minister accused the United States of a &quot;grave act of trade protectionism,&quot; while an USTR spokesperson said the tariff &quot;was taken precisely in accordance with the law and our international trade agreements&quot;. Additional issues were raised by both sides in subsequent months.

When a country joins the World Trade Organization they commit to keep their Tariffs beneath the bound rate, which is generally around 39 percent. China&#x27;s reaction is due to the fact that nations usually keep their Tariffs at an average of 9 percent, but when the US raised their Tariff on Chinese imported tires to 35 percent, it was still below the average bound rate.


In early 2012, a dispute over rare earth minerals was brought into the light between the two countries. President Obama made an announcement that the United States would be one of a few countries to file a trade dispute with China. Amongst the United States, Japan and other Western European countries would also be filing disputes as well. This is simply just one of few disputes between the United States and China. It is believed by many experts, including Chris Isidore, a writer for CNN Money, that &quot;any one of the disputes could damage the economies of both countries as well as the relationship between them&quot;. The dispute was filed, and China was charged with putting unfair restrictions on the exportation of rare earth minerals. These minerals were crucial and in high demand by all countries. President Obama believed the United States should have those minerals in the United States whereas China disagreed. China denied all of the said charges brought forth &quot;saying its rules are defensible on grounds of environmental and economic sustainability, and suggests there would be consequences if the United States presses the case.&quot; It is important to understand the relationship between the United States and China, especially economically. There is not one without the other. China&#x27;s state news agency commented that &quot;past experiences have shown that policymakers in Washington should treat such issues with more prudence, because maintaining sound Sino-American trade relations is in the fundamental interests of both sides&quot;

China was the biggest trading partner of the United States until 2019, when it dropped to the third place because of the ongoing trade war.

In November 2021, US producer Venture Global LNG signed a twenty-year contract with China&#x27;s state-owned Sinopec to supply liquefied natural gas (LNG). China&#x27;s imports of US natural gas will more than double. US exports of liquefied natural gas to China and other Continental Asian countries surged in 2021, with Continental Asian buyers willing to pay higher prices than European importers.

On 25 March 2023, Apple CEO Tim Cook made an official visit to Beijing to attend the China Development Forum. Cook praised China&#x27;s innovation, and long history of cooperation with Apple Inc. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Apple supplier Foxconn was heavily disrupted by workers protesting China&#x27;s zero-COVID policies. Cook also presented an expanded rural education program for 100 million yuan to further improve the skill-set of Chinese workers.

In February 2025, Donald Trump signed an executive order that directed the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) to restrict Chinese investment in strategic economic areas.

===Currency dispute===
China engaged in currency manipulation from 2003 to 2014. Economist C. Fred Bergsten, writing for the Peterson Institute for International Economics, said that, during this period, &quot;China bought more than $300 billion annually to resist upward movement of its currency by artificially keeping the exchange rate of the dollar strong and the renminbi&#x27;s exchange rate weak. China&#x27;s competitive position was thus strengthened by as much as 30 to 40 percent at the peak of the intervention. Currency manipulation explained most of China&#x27;s large trade surpluses, which reached a staggering 10 percent of its entire GDP in 2007.&quot; China&#x27;s currency manipulation was a point of conflict with the United States. Domestic leaders within the United States pressured the Obama administration to take a hardline stance against China and compel China to raise the value of its currency, and legislation was introduced to the United States Congress calling on the President to impose tariffs on Chinese imports until China properly values its currency. Nonetheless, the United States was not willing to label China as a &quot;currency manipulator&quot; at that time, on the theory that doing so would risk China&#x27;s cooperation on other issues.

In 2014, China stopped manipulating its currency, as the growth in the Chinese economy slowed and Chinese investors made more investments outside the country, leading to a drop in the yuan&#x27;s value in relation to the dollar, as well as a decline in China&#x27;s reserves.

In August 2019, five years after China had stopped manipulating its currency, the US Treasury designated China as a currency manipulator. Some US analysts characterized the belated designation as &quot;embarrassing&quot;, &quot;without factual basis&quot;, or &quot;a stretch&quot;. On 13 January 2020, the United States removed the designation as part of the Phase One efforts to reach a deal on the trade war.

==Important issues==
Relations between the two world powers have historically been stable, punctuated by several periods of open conflict, most notably during the Korean War and the Vietnam War. The United States and China have mutual environmental, political, economic, and security interests, such as climate change and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, but there remain perennial concerns, such as human rights in China, as well as cross-strait relations and the US&#x27;s attitude towards the One China policy. China is the second largest foreign creditor of the United States, after Japan. China&#x27;s expansion in the Indo-Pacific has triggered pushback from the US and its partners in the region. The two countries remain in dispute over territorial issues in the South China Sea; China claims sovereignty over large swaths of the South China Sea; the United States instead sees much of this ocean as international waters, and as such claims the right of its warships and aircraft to conduct military operations within them.

===Military spending and planning===

China&#x27;s investment in its military is growing rapidly; the United States remains convinced that the PRC conceals the real extent of this expansion, a view shared by many independent analysts. China claims it spent a total of $45 billion over the course of 2007, an average of $123 million per day. That same year, the US military spent $548.8 billion, or an average $1.66 billion per day. US estimates of Chinese military expenditure range between $85 billion and $125 billion.
Concerns over the Chinese military budget may come from US worries that the PRC is attempting to threaten its neighbors or to challenge the United States. Concerns have been raised that China is developing a large naval base near the South China Sea and has diverted resources from the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Ground Force to the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy and to air force and missile development.

On 27 October 2009, US Defense Secretary Robert Gates praised the steps China has taken to increase transparency of defense spending. In June 2010, however, he said that the Chinese military was resisting efforts to improve military-to-military relations with the United States. Gates also said that the United States would &quot;assert freedom of navigation&quot; in response to Chinese complaints about US Navy deployments in international waters near China. Admiral Michael Mullen said that the United States sought closer military ties to China but would continue to operate in the western Pacific.

James R. Holmes, a specialist on China at the US Naval War College, has said that China&#x27;s investments towards a potential future conflict are closer to those of the United States than may first appear because the Chinese understate their spending, the internal price structures of the two countries are different, and the Chinese need to concentrate only on projecting military force a short distance from their own shores. The balance may shift to the advantage of the Chinese very quickly if they continue double-digit annual growth, and the US and their allies cut back.

In line with power transition theory, the idea that &quot;wars tend to break out... when the upward trajectory of a rising power comes close to intersecting the downward trajectory of a declining power,&quot; some political scientists and international relations scholars have argued that a potential conflict between China, an emerging power, and the United States, the current superpower, is all but inevitable. Many academics disagree with applying power transition theory to the China-U.S. relationship. Robert Art states that these perspectives generally ignore China&#x27;s peaceful rise strategy. Steve Chan concludes that the China-U.S. power transition will be more similar to the U.K.-U.S. power transition than the Anglo-German power transition in which World War I arose.

===Taiwan issue===

Since the renewal of US-China relations in early 1979, the Taiwan issue remained a major source of contention. After the announcement of the intention to establish diplomatic relations with Mainland China (PRC) on 15 December 1978, the Republic of China (Taiwan) immediately condemned the United States, leading to rampant protests in both Taiwan and in the US. In April 1979, the US Congress signed into law the Taiwan Relations Act, permitting unofficial relations with Taiwan to flourish and granting the right to provide Taiwan with arms of a defensive character. Its passage prompted Deng to begin to view the United States as an insincere partner willing to abandon its prior commitments to China. The expanding relationship that followed normalization was threatened in 1981 by PRC objections to the level of US arms sales to the Republic of China on Taiwan. Secretary of State Alexander Haig visited China in June 1981 in an effort to resolve Chinese concerns about America&#x27;s unofficial relations with Taiwan. Vice President Bush visited the PRC in May 1982. Eight months of negotiations produced the US-PRC Joint Communiqué of 17 August 1982. In this third communiqué, the US stated its intention to gradually reduce the level of arms sales to the Republic of China, and the PRC described as a fundamental policy their effort to strive for a peaceful resolution to the Taiwan question.

When Donald Trump won the 2016 presidential election, contention over the Taiwan issue intensified; President Trump became the first sitting US president since Jimmy Carter in 1979 to have any formal political or diplomatic contacts with Taiwan when he decided to receive a phone call from president Tsai Ing-Wen. Trump expanded the duties of the US&#x27; &quot;de facto&quot; embassy in Taipei - the American Institute in Taiwan - by adding more security personnel, and oversaw increasing non-diplomatic visits of Tsai Ing-Wen and Congressmen to each other&#x27;s countries/regions. In addition, American warships reportedly crossed the Taiwan strait and increased military drills with Taiwan, which mainland China views as a direct threat to its sovereignty.
Chinese leader Xi Jinping told European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen in April 2023 that the United States was trying to trick China into attacking Taiwan, but he would not take the bait.

===Human rights===

In 2003, the United States declared that despite some positive momentum that year and despite greater signs which showed that the People&#x27;s Republic of China was willing to engage in discussions about human rights with the US and other nations, there was still serious backsliding. In principle, China has acknowledged the importance of the protection of human rights and it has claimed that it has taken steps to bring its own human rights practices into conformity with international norms. Among those steps are China&#x27;s signing of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in October 1997, which was ratified in March 2001, and China&#x27;s signing of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in October 1998, which has not been ratified yet. In 2002, China released a significant number of political and religious prisoners and it also agreed to hold discussions about torture, arbitrary detention, and religion with UN experts. However, international human rights groups assert that there has been virtually no movement with regard to those promises, with more people having been arrested for similar offences since then. Those groups maintain that China still has a long way to go in instituting the kind of fundamental systemic change that will protect the rights and liberties of all its citizens in mainland China. The US State Department publishes an annual report on human rights around the world, which includes an evaluation of China&#x27;s human rights record.

In a decision that was criticized by human rights groups, the United States State Department did not list China as one of the world&#x27;s worst human rights violators in its 2007 report of human rights practices in countries and regions outside the United States. However, the assistant secretary of the State Department&#x27;s Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor Jonathan D. Farrar stated that China&#x27;s overall human rights record in 2007 remained poor.

Since 1998, China has annually published a White Paper detailing the human rights abuses by the United States and since 2005 has also published a White Paper on its own political system and democratic progress.

On 27 February 2014, the United States released its China report on human rights practices for 2013, which, according to its executive summary, described the PRC as an authoritarian state and a place in which repression and coercion were routine. On 28 February 2014, China published a report on human rights in the United States that cited surveillance on its own citizens, mistreatment of inmates, gun violence, and homelessness, despite having a vibrant economy, as important issues.

American criticism of China on human rights, especially on the issue of the Xinjiang internment camps, significantly expanded at the end of 2018 and in 2019. In March 2019, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo indirectly compared China to the Nazi Germany by saying that the roundup of Muslim minorities to into camps had not been seen &quot;since the 1930s&quot;. In May 2019, the United States government accused China of putting Uyghurs in &quot;concentration camps&quot;. The US government has also considered sanctioning Chinese officials involved in the camps, including Chen Quanguo, the Chinese Communist Party Committee Secretary of Xinjiang and a member of the 19th Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party although no CCP Politburo member has ever been sanctioned by the US government. In July 2019, Vice President Mike Pence accused China of persecuting Christians, Muslims and Buddhists.

On 4 October 2019, the Houston Rockets&#x27; general manager, Daryl Morey, issued a tweet that supported the 2019–20 Hong Kong protests. Morey&#x27;s tweet resulted in the Chinese Basketball Association&#x27;s suspension of its relationship with the Houston Rockets and the issuance of a statement of dissatisfaction from the consulate office of China in Houston. On 6 October, both Morey and the NBA issued separate statements addressing the original tweet. Morey said that he never intended his tweet to cause any offense, and the NBA said the tweet was &quot;regrettable&quot;. The statements were criticized by US politicians and third-party observers for the perceived exercise of economic statecraft by the PRC and insufficiency of the NBA&#x27;s defense of Morey&#x27;s tweet. Critics also contrasted the league&#x27;s disparate response to Morey&#x27;s tweet with its history of political activism The statements also drew criticism from PRC state-run media for their perceived insufficiency, as Morey did not apologize.

In June 2020, the White House on 31st anniversary of the Tiananmen Square crackdown, asked Beijing to respect human rights, carry out its due commitments 
on Hong Kong, as well as flog persecution of ethnic and religious minorities. On 9 July 2020, the United States announced sanctions against Chinese politicians, who as per its record were responsible for human rights violations against Muslim minorities in Xinjiang.

On 20 July 2020, US government sanctioned 11 new Chinese companies from purchasing American technology and products over human rights violations in China targeting Uyghurs in the Xinjiang region.

Many American companies, including Delta Air Lines, Coach New York, Marriott International, Calvin Klein and Tiffany &amp; Co. have apologized to China after &quot;offending&quot; the country and China&#x27;s ruling Communist Party.

On September 15, 2020, the US government decided to take steps to block some exports from Xinjiang, over the country&#x27;s alleged human rights abuses directed mostly against Uyghurs of the region.

In 2020, Chinese diplomats increasingly adopted &quot;wolf warrior diplomacy&quot; to deny all accusations of human rights abuses. Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian tweeted that as long as the US had problems itself, it &quot;had no right&quot; to criticize China on human rights abuses.

On 19 January 2021, Mike Pompeo officially declared that China is committing a genocide against Uyghurs in the Xinjiang region. Pompeo called for &quot;all appropriate multilateral and relevant juridical bodies, to join the United States in our effort to promote accountability for those responsible for these atrocities&quot;. Salih Hudayar, the prime minister of the East Turkistan Government-in-Exile (who claim to be the legitimate government of Xinjiang), has said, &quot;We hope that this designation will lead to real strong actions to hold China accountable and bring an end to China&#x27;s genocide.&quot;

On 20 January 2021, China imposed sanctions against outgoing US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, former secretary of health and human services Alex Azar, former under secretary of state Keith J. Krach, outgoing US ambassador to the United Nations Kelly Craft, and 24 other former Trump officials. Biden&#x27;s National Security Council called the sanctions &quot;unproductive and cynical&quot;. In his nomination hearing, Blinken endorsed Pompeo&#x27;s report that China is committing a genocide against Uyghurs, reaffirming Biden&#x27;s campaign stance.

=== Competition for regional influence ===
China&#x27;s economic rise has led to some geo-political friction between the US and China in East Asia as well as to an extent in Southeast Asia and in Central Asia including Afghanistan. For example, in response to China&#x27;s response to the bombardment of Yeonpyeong by North Korea, &quot;Washington is moving to redefine its relationship with South Korea and Japan, potentially creating an anti-China bloc in Northeast Asia that officials say they don&#x27;t want but may need.&quot; The Chinese government fears a conspiracy by the US to encircle it.

China and the United States have recently led competing efforts to gain Influence in East Asian and the Greater Asian-Pacific trade and development. In 2015, China led the creation of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank with the goal of financing projects that would spur the development of the lower-tier Asian economies, thus facilitating improved economic ties across the region. It has been suggested that the United States considered the AIIB to be a challenge to the US-backed Asian Development Bank and the World Bank and saw the Chinese effort as an attempt to set the global economic agenda on terms that would be formulated by the Chinese government. The Obama administration led an effort to enact the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement, a multilateral trade pact between a number of Pacific Rim countries, which excluded China. According to the US Trade Representative, the agreement was designed to &quot;promote economic growth; support the creation and retention of jobs; enhance innovation, productivity and competitiveness; raise living standards; reduce poverty in the signatories&#x27; countries; and promote transparency, good governance, and enhanced labor and environmental protections.&quot; The Partnership was anticipated to impose costs on businesses dependent on regional markets. The deal was placed on hold after the US withdrew from the agreement on 23 January 2017. The efforts are among the attempts by both the US and China to increase their influence over the Asia-Pacific by strengthening their economic ties within the region.

In 2009, the United States requested China to open the Wakhjir Pass on the Sino-Afghan border as an alternative supply route for the US and NATO during their operations in Afghanistan. China refused the request.

ASEAN and the various Southeast Asian states have responded to Chinese claims for sea areas by seeking closer relations with the United States. American Defense Secretary Leon Panetta said that in spite of budget pressures, the United States would expand its influence in the region to counter China&#x27;s military buildup.

Shared concerns in the face of China have prompted the United States to step up cooperation with China&#x27;s geopolitical rivals such as India, drawing greater opposition from China.

In the Chinese view, the United States has broken trust in the bilateral relationship through a containment strategy implemented via the Obama administration&#x27;s pivot to East Asia and the Asia-Pacific, the development of the TPP, and the trade war launched by the Trump administration.

===Cyberwarfare and election interference===
The US Department of Justice investigation into fundraising activities uncovered evidence that Chinese agents sought to direct contributions from foreign sources to the Democratic National Committee (DNC) before the 1996 presidential campaign. The Chinese embassy in Washington, D.C., was used to co-ordinate contributions to the DNC.

In 2014, Chinese hackers hacked the computer system of the US Office of Personnel Management, resulting in the theft of approximately 22 million personnel records that were handled by the office. Former FBI Director James Comey stated, &quot;It is a very big deal from a national security perspective and from a counterintelligence perspective. It&#x27;s a treasure trove of information about everybody who has worked for, tried to work for, or works for the United States government.&quot;

In October 2018, the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee held a hearing on the threat to the US posed by China. Before the hearing, Bloomberg released an article that stated that China is embedding technology in microchips that are sent to America that collect data on American consumers. However, both FBI Director Christopher Wray and Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen declined to confirm that statement. Nielsen said that China has become a major threat to the US and also confirmed, in an answer to a question from a senator, that China is trying to influence US elections.

In 2019, two Chinese nationals were indicted for the Anthem medical data breach. About 80 million company records were hacked, stoking fears that the stolen data could be used for identity theft. In February 2020, the United States government indicted members of China&#x27;s PLA for hacking into Equifax and plundering sensitive data as part of a massive heist that also included stealing trade secrets. Private records of more than 145 million Americans were compromised in the 2017 Equifax data breach.

According to a report by Reuters, in 2019 the United States CIA began a clandestine campaign on Chinese social media to spread negative narratives about the Xi Jinping administration in an effort to influence Chinese public opinion against the government. The CIA promoted narratives that CCP leaders were hiding money overseas and that the Belt and Road Initiative was corrupt and wasteful. As part of the campaign, the CIA also targeted foreign countries where the United States and China compete for influence.

Voice of America reported in April 2020 that &quot;Internet security researchers say there have already been signs that China-allied hackers have engaged in so-called &quot;spear-phishing&quot; attacks on American political targets&quot; ahead of the 2020 United States elections. As of 7 July 2020, the US government was &#x27;looking at&#x27; banning Chinese video streaming application, TikTok due to national security concerns. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said the Trump administration had been aware of the potential threat and has &quot;worked on this issue for a long time&quot;. On 19 September 2020, a complaint was filed in Washington by TikTok and its parent company, ByteDance, challenging the recent moves made by the Trump administration to prevent the application from operating in the US. The court documents argued that the US government took the step for political reasons rather than to stop an &quot;unusual and extraordinary threat&quot;. In April 2024, the House of Representatives passed a bill requiring TikTok to divest from ByteDance within 9–12 months or face a potential ban, Biden signed the bill into law soon afterwards.

In December 2024, Chinese state-sponsored hackers reportedly breached the U.S. Treasury Department’s security systems, exploiting vulnerabilities in the cybersecurity services of third-party provider BeyondTrust. Using a compromised digital key, the attackers accessed a cloud-based service that provided technical support for Treasury end users, enabling them to override security measures and retrieve certain unclassified documents. Treasury officials, alerted to the breach by BeyondTrust on 8 December 2024, collaborated with the FBI and CISA to investigate the incident, which was attributed to a China-linked Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) group.

=== Nuclear security ===
The field of nuclear security (preventing nuclear material from being used to make illicit weapons) is a well-established area of successful U.S.-China cooperation.

Precipitated by a 2010 Nuclear Security Summit convened by the Obama administration, China and the United States launched a number of initiatives to secure potentially dangerous, Chinese-supplied, nuclear material in countries such as Ghana or Nigeria. Through these initiatives, China and the US have converted Chinese-origin Miniature Neutron Source Reactors (MNSRs) from using highly enriched uranium to using low-enriched uranium fuel (which is not directly usable in weapons, thereby making reactors more proliferation resistant).

China and the United States collaborated to build the China Center of Excellence on Nuclear Security, which opened in 2015. The center is a forum for nuclear security exchange, training, and demonstration in the Asia Pacific region.

In May 2023, Chinese Defense Spokesperson Tan Kefei urged the United States to fulfill its commitments and adhere to the Chemical Weapons Convention by taking &quot;concrete actions&quot;.

=== Opioid epidemic ===
According to the United States Drug Enforcement Agency in 2023, China continued to be the primary source of fentanyl being imported into the United States, killing over 100 Americans every day. Over a two-year period, close to $800million worth of fentanyl pills were illegally sold online to the US by Chinese distributors. The drug is usually manufactured in China, then shipped to Mexico, where it is processed and packaged, which is then smuggled into the US by Mexican drug cartels. A large amount is also purchased online and shipped through the US Postal Service. It can also be purchased directly from China, which has become a major manufacturer of various synthetic drugs illegal in the US. According to Assistant US Attorney, Matt Cronin:
In June 2023, U.S. federal prosecutors announced criminal indictments of fentanyl precursor producers in China. In October 2023, OFAC sanctioned a China-based network of fentanyl manufacturers and distributors.

===COVID-19===

In relation to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on politics, the Trump administration referred to the coronavirus as the &quot;Wuhan virus&quot;, terms which have been criticized for being racist and &quot;distract[ing] from the Trump administration&#x27;s failure to contain the disease&quot;. In return, some Chinese officials, including Zhao Lijian, rejected an earlier acknowledgement of the coronavirus outbreak starting in Wuhan, in favor of conspiracy theories that the virus originated in the U.S.&quot;The Daily Beast&quot; obtained a US government cable outlining a communications strategy with apparent origins in the National Security Council, quoted as &quot;Everything is about China. We&#x27;re being told to try and get this messaging out in any way possible&quot;. Multiple U.S. intelligence agencies have reportedly been pressured by the Trump administration to find intelligence supporting conspiracy theories regarding the origins of the virus in China.

According to a New York Times report in April 2020, the U.S. intelligence community says China intentionally under-reported its number of coronavirus cases. Some outlets such as &quot;Politico&quot; and &quot;Foreign Policy&quot; have said China&#x27;s efforts to send aid to virus-stricken countries is part of a propaganda push for global influence. EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell warned there is &quot;a geo-political component including a struggle for influence through spinning and the &#x27;politics of generosity&#x27;&quot;. Borrell also said &quot;China is aggressively pushing the message that, unlike the U.S., it is a responsible and reliable partner.&quot; China has also called for the US to lift its sanctions from Syria, Venezuela and Iran, while reportedly sending aid to the latter two countries. Donations of 100,000 masks to Cuba made by Chinese businessman Jack Ma was blocked by US sanctions on April 3. Trade in medical supplies between the United States and China has also become politically complicated. Exports of face masks and other medical equipment to China from the United States (and many other countries) spiked in February, according to statistics from Trade Data Monitor, prompting criticism from &quot;The Washington Post&quot; that the United States government failed to anticipate the domestic needs for that equipment. Similarly, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, citing Trade Data Monitor to show that China is the leading source of many key medical supplies, raised concerns that US tariffs on imports from China threaten imports of medical supplies into the United States.

By May 2020, the relationship had deteriorated to the lowest point as both sides were recruiting allies to attack the other regarding guilt for the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic.
In September 2020, the trade war between China and the US alongside Beijing&#x27;s behavior during the COVID-19 crisis combined to worsen American public opinion about China. This also affected American perceptions of China-Taiwan tensions as a serious national security concern.

On September 22, 2020, President Donald Trump called on the United Nations to &quot;hold China accountable for their actions&quot;, in a speech to the world body&#x27;s General Assembly. President Trump blamed the Chinese government for the global spread of COVID-19, which had infected 31 million people worldwide and killed more than 965,000, by then.

On May 26, 2021, Joe Biden tasked the US intelligence community with investigating the origins of the pandemic. By August 2021, the intelligence probe assessed that the Chinese government did not have foreknowledge of the outbreak, yet the investigation did not render conclusive results on the origins. Of eight assembled teams, one (the Federal Bureau of Investigation) leaned towards a lab leak theory, four others (and the National Intelligence Council) were inclined to uphold a zoonotic origin, and three were unable to reach a conclusion. In February 2023, the U.S. Department of Energy revised its previous estimate of the origin from &quot;undecided&quot; to &quot;low confidence&quot; in favor of a laboratory leak. Following the Energy Department&#x27;s revised conclusion, the Chinese foreign ministry called on the United States to &quot;stop defaming China&quot; with the lab leak theory, adding that the US was politicizing a scientific issue. In January 2025, after John Ratcliffe became its director, the Central Intelligence Agency revised its previous estimate of the origin from &quot;undecided&quot; to &quot;low confidence&quot; in favor of a laboratory leak.
According to a report by Reuters, the United States ran a propaganda campaign to spread disinformation about the Sinovac Chinese COVID-19 vaccine, including using fake social media accounts to spread the disinformation that the Sinovac vaccine contained pork-derived ingredients and was therefore &quot;haram&quot; under Islamic law. The campaign was described as &quot;payback&quot; for COVID-19 disinformation by China directed against the U.S. The campaign primarily targeted people in the Philippines and used a social media hashtag for &quot;China is the virus&quot; in Tagalog. The campaign ran from the spring of 2020 to mid-2021.

=== Clean energy and climate change ===
The United States and China are the highest greenhouse gas emitters among developed countries and developing countries, respectively. Clean energy and climate cooperation were generally viewed by both China and the United States as a relative safe harbor for cooperation, even during many of the most contentious periods in the bilateral relationship. A record number of bilateral cooperation agreements, including related to climate issues, were signed during the tenure of US President Barack Obama.

However, cooperation on clean energy and climate change issues were also limited by lack of consistent funding and lack of dialogue at high political levels, and ended almost entirely after US President Donald Trump de-prioritized environmental issues during his term. The subsequent Joseph Biden administration ended the U.S.-China Clean Energy Research Center (CERC) established under Obama. CERC had been the most ambitious clean energy cooperation platform between the two countries, and one of the few cooperation mechanisms to have survived the Trump administration.

On 18 July 2023, U.S. climate envoy John Kerry emphasized the goal of redefining the China-U.S. relationship through climate cooperation. The subsequent day&#x27;s discussions centered on climate financing, coal consumption, and methane reduction. Kerry&#x27;s visit signifies the renewed focus on high-level climate diplomacy between the two nations.

In November 2023, The representatives of the United States and China issued the &quot;&quot;Sunnylands Statement on Enhancing Cooperation to Address the Climate Crisis&quot; published immediately in both countries. The statement contains a plan of further cooperation on climate issues between the sides. In the statement both countries pledged among others to:

* Make common efforts to stop climate change, limit temperature rise to 1.5 degrees as defined in the Paris agreement.
* Make the common efforts as at national so at the subnational level (cooperation between districts, cities in the 2 countries) including information exchange, dialog. The 2 countries will meet regularly for discussing the problem.
* Activate a US-China climate group named &quot;Working Group on Enhancing Climate Action in the 2020s&quot;&quot; that will regularly coordinate those efforts. 
* Push for climate action at 2023 United Nations Climate Change Conference. Ensure climate finance to low income countries, including the long-awaited 100 billion dollars per year, increase 2 times adaptation finance and create new financial pledges in COP 29.
* Reactivate the US-China Energy Efficiency Forum, for coordinate bilateral efforts on energy conservation in the industry, buildings, transportation, equipment sectors, including cooling equipment.
* Make efforts to triple global renewable energy capacity by 2030, deploy it in the US and China replacing fossil fuels, so the emissions from energy sector will decline in the 2020s.
* Reduce methane emissions and create immediately a special group dealing with this.
* Manage nitrous oxide emission and implement the Kigali Amendment to zero emissions from hydrofluorocarbons.
* Support efforts to achieve resource efficiency and circular economy.
* End plastic pollution, fight Air pollution, 
* Stop and reverse deforestation by 2030, including by stopping illegal imports.
* Create new, economy wide NDC for the year 2035, with targets, compatible with the Paris Agreement goals.

== Cultural relations ==
The United States used to have substantial soft power in China. However, with China&#x27;s rise in the 21st century, American culture has declined in popularity in China.

=== Cuisine ===
=== Sports ===
A major element of China&#x27;s modern sports policy is to surpass other nations, particularly the United States, in Olympic gold medals. In the 2024 Olympics, the two countries tied at 40 gold medals.

== Public perceptions ==

Despite tensions during Barack Obama&#x27;s presidency, the Chinese population&#x27;s favorability of the US stood at 51% in Obama&#x27;s last year of 2016, only to fall during the Trump administration.

American public opinion of China and of General secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Xi Jinping has deteriorated sharply since the start of the China–United States trade war and during the COVID-19 pandemic, with many expressing economic, human-rights, and environmental concerns.

In 2024, 81% of US adults viewed China unfavorably, according to the Pew Research Center. In 2023, a Gallup survey showed above 50% Americans are most likely to mention China as the United States’ greatest enemy in the world since 2021. A February 2023 Gallup survey found that a record-low 15% of Americans view China favorably, marking a five-percentage-point, one-year decline in this rating, which Gallup has measured since 1979. A 2024 poll by the Chicago Council on Global Affairs found that Americans&#x27; perceptions of China hit a record low, with 55 percent saying that the United States should actively work to limit the growth of China&#x27;s power.

Despite the mutually negative views, the public on both sides overwhelmingly want the relationship to improve. Two-thirds of US respondents in a Harris poll published in 2023 agreed that the US should &quot;engage in dialogue as much as possible to reduce tensions&quot; with China. US public support for engaging in dialogue increased by five percentage points since 2021. According to 2023 polling by &quot;The Economist&quot; and YouGov, Americans aged 18–44 are much more likely than older age groups to have a friendly view of China.

== Resident diplomatic missions ==
;Chinese Missions in the U.S.

* Washington, D.C. (Embassy)
* Chicago (Consulate General)
* Los Angeles (Consulate General)
* New York City (Consulate General)
* San Francisco (Consulate General)

;U.S. Missions in China

* Beijing (Embassy)
* Guangzhou (Consulate General)
* Shanghai (Consulate General)
* Shenyang (Consulate General)
* Wuhan (Consulate General)
** Hong Kong (Consulate General)

==See also==
=== Geostrategic ===

* American espionage in China
* Blue Team (U.S. politics)
* Chinese espionage in the United States
* China Lobby
* Chinese Century
* China–United States trade war
* United States sanctions against China
* Clash of Civilizations
* Foreign relations of China
* Foreign relations of the United States
* List of Chinese spy cases in the United States of America
* Cox Report
* Peaceful Evolution theory
* Quadrilateral Security Dialogue
* String of Pearls (Indian Ocean)
* Thucydides Trap
=== General ===

* Americans in China
* Anti-American sentiment in mainland China
* Anti-Chinese sentiment in the United States
* Beijing–Washington hotline
* Chinese Americans
* Document Number Nine
* Group of Two
* Strategic Economic Dialogue
* Taiwan–United States relations
* U.S.–China Strategic and Economic Dialogue
=== Historic ===

* History of Chinese Americans
* History of the Republic of China
* History of the People&#x27;s Republic of China
* History of China–United States relations
* East Asia–United States relations
* 1996 United States campaign finance controversy
* China Hands, American experts on China
* Hainan Island incident
* Operation Beleaguer
* Nixon in China
* Ping-pong diplomacy
* United States-China Economic and Security Review Commission
* U.S. immigration policy toward the People&#x27;s Republic of China
* US Department of Defense China Task Force
* Xenophobia and racism related to the COVID-19 pandemic
==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==

* Burt, Sally. &quot;The Ambassador, the General, and the President: FDR&#x27;s mismanagement of interdepartmental relations in wartime China.&quot; &quot;Journal of American-East Asian Relations&quot; 19.3-4 (2012): 288–310.
* Chang, Gordon H. &quot;Fateful Ties: A History of America&#x27;s Preoccupation with China.&quot; (Harvard UP, 2015). excerpt
* Cohen, Warren I. &quot;America&#x27;s Response to China: A History of Sino-American Relations&quot; (5th ed. 2010) online
* Dulles, Foster Rhea. &quot;China and America: The Story of Their Relations Since 1784&quot; (1981), general survey online
* Fairbank, John King. &quot;The United States and China&quot; (4th ed. Harvard UP, 1976). online
* Green, Michael J. &quot;By more than providence: Grand strategy and American power in the Asia Pacific since 1783&quot; (Columbia UP, 2017). online; 725pp; comprehensive scholarly survey.
* Hunt, Michael H. &quot;Americans in the China Market: Economic Opportunities and Economic Nationalism, 1890s-1931.&quot; &quot;Business History Review&quot; 51.3 (1977): 277–307. online
* Jackson, Carl T. &quot;The Influence of Asia upon American Thought: A Bibliographical Essay.&quot; &quot;American Studies International&quot; 22#1 (1984), pp. 3–31, online covers China, India &amp; Japan
* Matray, James I. ed. &quot;East Asia and the United States: An Encyclopedia of relations since 1784&quot; (2 vol. Greenwood, 2002). excerpt v 2
* Pomfret, John. &quot;The Beautiful Country and the Middle Kingdom: America and China, 1776 to the Present&quot; (2016) review
* Schaller, Michael. &quot;The United States and China: Into the Twenty-First Century&quot; 4th ed 2015) 
* Song, Yuwu, ed. &quot;Encyclopedia of Chinese-American Relations&quot; (McFarland, 2006)
* Spence, Jonathan D. &quot;To Change China: Western Advisers in China&quot; (1980) excerpt
* Spence, Jonathan. &quot;Western Perceptions of China from the Late Sixteenth Century to the Present&quot; in Paul S. Ropp, ed.&quot;Heritage of China: Contemporary Perspectives on Chinese Civilization&quot; (1990) excerpts
* Sutter, Robert G. &quot;Historical Dictionary of United States-China Relations&quot; (2005).
* Varg, Paul A. &quot;Sino-American Relations Past and Present.&quot; &quot;Diplomatic History&quot; 4.2 (1980): 101–112. online
* Wang, Dong. &quot;The United States and China: A History from the Eighteenth Century to the Present&quot; (2013)
* Westad, Odd Arne. &quot;Decisive encounters: the Chinese civil war, 1946-1950&quot; (Stanford University Press, 2003). excerpt

===Recent===

* Blackwill, Robert D., and Richard Fontaine. &quot;Lost Decade: The US Pivot to Asia and the Rise of Chinese Power&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2024) covers Clinton to Biden years; online reviews of this book.

* Blanchard, Jean-Marc F., and Simon Shen, eds. &quot;Conflict and Cooperation in Sino-US Relations: Change and Continuity, Causes and Cures&quot; (Routledge, 2015)
* Brazinsky, Gregg A. &quot;Winning the Third World: Sino-American Rivalry during the Cold War&quot; (U of North Carolina Press, 2017); four online reviews &amp; author response 
* Chang, Gordon H. &quot;Friends and Enemies: The United States, China, and the Soviet Union, 1948–1972&quot; (Stanford UP, 1990). online
* deLisle, Jacques. &quot;International law in the Obama administration&#x27;s pivot to Asia: the China seas disputes, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, rivalry with the PRC, and status quo legal norms in US foreign policy.&quot; &quot;Case Western Reserve Journal of International Law&quot; 48 (2016): 143+ online.
* Del Rosso, Stephen J. &quot;Ask the Experts: How to Stabilize U.S.-China Relations&quot; online
* Doshi, Rush. &quot;The Long Game: China&#x27;s Grand Strategy to Displace American Order&quot; (Oxford UP, 2021) online review
* Dulles, Foster Rhea. &quot;American policy toward Communist China, 1949-1969&quot; (1972) online
* Dumbaugh, Kerry. &quot;China-U.S. relations: current issues and implications for U.S. policy.&quot; (Congressional Research Service (CRS) Reports and Issue Briefs, Congressional Research Service, 2009) online
* Fenby, Jonathan and Trey McArver. &quot;The Eagle and the Dragon: Donald Trump, Xi Jinping and the Fate of US/China Relations&quot; (2019)
* Foot, Rosemary. &quot;The practice of power: US relations with China since 1949&quot; (Oxford UP, 1995). online
* Foot, Rosemary, and Amy King. &quot;Assessing the deterioration in China–US relations: US governmental perspectives on the economic-security nexus.&quot; &quot;China International Strategy Review&quot; 1.1 (2019): 39–50. online
* Fravel, M. Taylor. &quot;Active Defense: China&#x27;s Military Strategy since 1949&quot; (Princeton UP, 2019) online reviews
* Garson, Robert. &quot;The Road to Tiananmen Square: The United States and China, 1979-1989&quot; &quot;Journal of Oriental Studies&quot; .ISSN 0022-331X (1992) 30#1/2 pp. 119–135
* Garver, John W. 
** &quot;China&#x27;s Quest: The History of the Foreign Relations of the People&#x27;s Republic&quot; (2015), 59–91, 232–58, 286–314, 557–578. 607–673. 
** &quot;Foreign relations of the People&#x27;s Republic of China&quot; (1992) online
* Goh, Evelyn. &quot;Nixon, Kissinger, and the &#x27;Soviet card&#x27; in the US opening to China, 1971–1974.&quot; &quot;Diplomatic history&quot; 29.3 (2005): 475–502. online 
* Pdf.
* Haddick, Robert. &quot;Fire on the Water: China, America, and the Future of the Pacific&quot; (2nd ed. Naval Institute Press, 2022). online review
* Hilsman, Roger. &quot;To move a nation; the politics of foreign policy in the administration of John F. Kennedy&quot; (1967) pp 275–357; on 1961–63. online
* Hu, XueYing. &quot;Legacy of Tiananmen Square Incident in Sino-US Relations (post-2000).&quot; &quot;East Asia&quot; 33.3 (2016): 213–232. abstract
* Isaacs, Harold R. &quot;Scratches on Our Minds: American Images of China and India&quot; (1958) online
* Kissinger, Henry. &quot;On China&quot; (2011) online
* Lasater, Martin L. &quot;The Taiwan Issue in Sino-American Strategic Relations&quot; (Routledge, 2019).
* Li, Cheng. &quot;Assessing US-China Relations Under the Obama Administration&quot; (The Brookings Institution, 30 August 2016) online
* Li, Hongshan. &quot;Fighting on the Cultural Front: U.S.-China Relations in the Cold War&quot; (Columbia University Press, 2024) online review of this book
* MacMillan, Margaret. &quot;Nixon and Mao: the week that changed the world&quot; (2008). online
* Mahbubani, Kishore, &quot;What China Threat? How the United States and China can avoid war&quot;, &quot;Harper&#x27;s Magazine&quot;, vol. 338, no. 2025 (February 2019), pp. 39–44. &quot;China could... remain a different polity—... not a liberal democracy—and still not be a threatening one.&quot; (p. 44.)
* Mann, Jim. &quot;About face: A history of America&#x27;s curious relationship with China, from Nixon to Clinton&quot; (Knopf, 1999)
* Mastanduno, Michael. &quot;A grand strategic transition?: Obama, Trump and the Asia Pacific political economy.&quot; in &quot;The United States in the Indo-Pacific&quot; (Manchester UP, 2020) online.
* Meltzer, Joshua P. &quot;The U.S.-China trade agreement – a huge deal for China.&quot; &quot;Brookings&quot; (2017) online
* Rich, Wilbur C. ed. &quot;Looking Back on President Barack Obama&#x27;s Legacy: Hope and Change&quot; (2018) online
* Roach, Stephen S. &quot;Unbalanced: the codependency of America and China&quot; (Yale UP, 2015).
* Roberts, Priscilla. &quot;New Perspectives on Cold War History from China,&quot; &quot;Diplomatic History&quot; 41:2 (April 2017) online
* Rose, Robert S. et al. &quot;Re-examining the Cold War: U.S.-China Diplomacy, 1954–1973&quot; (2002)
* Kevin Rudd (Prime Minister of Australia June - September 2013): &quot;The Avoidable War: The Dangers of a Catastrophic Conflict between the US and Xi Jinping&#x27;s China&quot; (PublicAffairs, March 2022, ISBN 978-1541701298)
* Schmitt, Gary J. &quot;The China Dream: America&#x27;s, China&#x27;s, and the Resulting Competition.&quot; &quot;AEI Paper &amp; Studies&quot; (American Enterprise Institute, 2019), p. 1J+. online
* Schoen, Douglas E. and Melik Kaylan. &quot;Return to Winter: Russia, China, and the New Cold War Against America&quot; (2015)
* Steinberg, James and Michael E. O&#x27;Hanlon, eds. &quot;Strategic Reassurance and Resolve: US-China Relations in the Twenty-First Century&quot; (Princeton UP, 2014).
* Suettinger, Robert. &quot;Beyond Tiananmen: The Politics of US-China Relations, 1989–2000&quot; (Brookings Institution Press, 2004). online
* Tucker, Nancy Bernkopf, ed. &quot;China confidential: American diplomats and Sino-American relations, 1945-1996&quot; (Columbia University Press, 2001).
* Tyler, Patrick. &quot;A Great Wall: Six Presidents and China&quot; (1999) online
* Wang, Dong. &quot;Grand Strategy, Power Politics, and China&#x27;s Policy toward the United States in the 1960s,&quot; &quot;Diplomatic History&quot; 42:1 (April 2017): 265–287; 
* Westad, Odd Arne, &quot;The Sources of Chinese Conduct: Are Washington and Beijing Fighting a New Cold War?&quot;, &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, 98#5 (September / October 2019), pp. 86–95. &quot;If some unifying factor does not intervene, the decline in the United States&#x27; ability to act purposefully will, sooner than most people imagine, mean not just a multipolar world but an unruly world – one in which fear, hatred, and ambition hold everyone hostage to the basest instincts of the human imagination.&quot; (p. 95.) online
* Wheeler, Norton. &quot;Role of American NGOs in China&#x27;s Modernization: Invited Influence&quot; (Routledge, 2014) 240 pp. online review
* Worden, Robert L. et al. eds. &quot;China: a country study&quot; (Federal Research Division, U.S. Library of Congress, 1986) comprehensive Library of Congress Country Studies 732pp report on Chinese history, society, economy, military and foreign relations; as a US government document it is not copyright. The Library produced separate reports on 82 countries; it ended the program in 1989. online
* Xia, Yafeng and Zhi Liang. &quot;China&#x27;s Diplomacy toward the United States in the Twentieth Century: A Survey of the Literature,&quot; Diplomatic History 42:1 (April 2017): 241–264.
* Yim, Kwan Ha. 
** &quot;China and the US: 1955-63&quot; (1973). online
** &quot;China 1964-72&quot; (1975). online
** &quot;China since Mao&quot; (1980) pp 129–60 online
* Zhang, Biwu. &quot;Chinese Perceptions of the U.S.: An Exploration of China&#x27;s Foreign Policy Motivations&quot; (Lexington Books; 2012) 266 pages; Chinese views of America&#x27;s power, politics, and economics, as well as the country as a source of threat or opportunity.

===Historiography===
* Brazinsky, Gregg. &quot;The Birth of a Rivalry: Sino-American Relations During the Truman Administration&quot; in Daniel S. Margolies, ed. &quot;A Companion to Harry S. Truman&quot; (2012) pp 484–497; emphasis on historiography.
* Sutter, Robert. &quot;The Importance of the &#x27;pan-Asian&#x27; versus the &#x27;China-first&#x27; Emphasis in US Policy toward China, 1969-2008: A Review of the Literature.&quot; &quot;American Journal of Chinese Studies&quot; (2009): 1–18.
* Sutter, Robert. &quot;US Domestic Debate Over Policy Toward Mainland China and Taiwan: Key Findings, Outlook and Lessons.&quot; &quot;American Journal of Chinese Studies&quot; (2001): 133–144.
* Zhu Yongtao. &quot;American Studies in China&quot; &quot;American Studies International&quot; 25#2 (1987) pp. 3–19 online

===Primary sources===
* May, Ernest R. ed. &quot;The Truman Administration and China 1945–1949&quot; (1975) summary plus primary sources. online

====China White Paper 1949====
*Lyman Van Slyke, ed. &quot;The China White Paper: August 1949&quot; (1967: 2 vol. Stanford U.P.); 1124 pp.; copy of official US Department of State. &quot;China White Paper: 1949&quot; vol 1 online at Google; online vol 1 pdf; vol 1 consists of history; vol 2 consists of primary sources and is not online; see library holdings via World Cat
**excerpts appear in Barton Bernstein and Allen J. Matusow, eds. &quot;The Truman Administration: A Documentary History&quot; (1966) pp. 299–355</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="29" end="60" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="75" end="99" title="United States of America" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872057" start="152" end="176" title="Proclamation of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="establishment of the PRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165653" start="185" end="245" title="Kuomintang&amp;#x27;s retreat to Taiwan" label="retreat of the government of the Republic of China to Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q706243" start="385" end="411" title="political status of Taiwan" label="political status of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405450" start="413" end="456" title="territorial disputes in the South China Sea" label="territorial disputes in the South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754778" start="480" end="492" title="Persecution of Uyghurs in China" label="treatment of"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="493" end="500" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="504" end="512" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q30687934" start="639" end="660" title="strategic competition" label="strategic competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="743" end="794" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="second-largest and largest economies by nominal GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="811" end="860" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="largest and second-largest economies by GDP (PPP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326406" start="1066" end="1083" title="Treaty of Wanghia" label="Treaty of Wangxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="1263" end="1278" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="1351" end="1366" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="Boxer Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051734" start="1388" end="1404" title="Open Door Policy" label="Open Door Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29092765" start="1575" end="1590" title="Taft presidency" label="Taft presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="1664" end="1685" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="1713" end="1737" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="1757" end="1774" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="1840" end="1863" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="1928" end="1945" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872057" start="2098" end="2150" title="Proclamation of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="establishment of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="2335" end="2345" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2358" end="2372" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="2781" end="2798" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="Sino-Soviet split"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="2824" end="2835" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="2855" end="2874" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q862054" start="2907" end="2947" title="Richard Nixon&amp;#x27;s 1972 visit to China" label="Richard Nixon&amp;#x27;s 1972 visit to China"/>
<link wikidata="Q476667" start="3221" end="3241" title="Taiwan Relations Act" label="Taiwan Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="3439" end="3451" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="3456" end="3465" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379733" start="3471" end="3491" title="Obama administration" label="Obama administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327744" start="3621" end="3645" title="East Asian foreign policy of the Barack Obama administration" label="rebalancing towards Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52161605" start="3693" end="3710" title="China under Xi Jinping" label="Xi administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="3829" end="3841" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q20121517" start="3907" end="3919" title="Donald Trump 2016 presidential campaign" label="his campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100822" start="4093" end="4131" title="Chinese espionage in the United States" label="Chinese espionage in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q51557538" start="4254" end="4274" title="China–United States trade war" label="trade war with China"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754778" start="4380" end="4411" title="Persecution of Uyghurs in China" label="human rights abuses in Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="4467" end="4473" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q136484" start="4478" end="4481" title="ZTE Corporation" label="ZTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="4529" end="4538" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q95976070" start="4594" end="4615" title="2020 Hong Kong national security law" label="national security law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314462" start="4698" end="4732" title="Taiwan–United States relations" label="strengthened relations with Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q95565442" start="4767" end="4789" title="wolf warrior diplomacy" label="wolf warrior diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072770" start="4825" end="4844" title="Human rights in China" label="human rights abuses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4916" end="4928" title="Second Cold War#Usage in the context of China–United States tensions" label="new Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="5090" end="5097" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754778" start="5110" end="5123" title="Persecution of Uyghurs in China" label="as a genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q101369347" start="5152" end="5161" title="Presidency of Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="5169" end="5209" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5336" end="5350" title="Foreign policy of the Joe Biden administration#China, Taiwan, and the South China Sea" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="6213" end="6233" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="6279" end="6302" title="Communist International" label="Communist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q835396" start="6382" end="6394" title="United front (China)" label="united front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076970" start="6431" end="6444" title="Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="6574" end="6588" title="Empire of Japan" label="imperial Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970542" start="6736" end="6747" title="Yan&amp;#x27;an Soviet" label="Yan&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q65068114" start="7273" end="7284" title="China White Paper" label="white paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328177" start="7382" end="7395" title="loss of China" label="loss of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q214758" start="7429" end="7441" title="Dean Acheson" label="Dean Acheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q836865" start="8280" end="8301" title="John Leighton Stuart" label="John Leighton Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8592" end="8623" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="8655" end="8684" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="8699" end="8716" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="8729" end="8752" title="Nationalist government" label="Kuomintang nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872057" start="8774" end="8785" title="Proclamation of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="established"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="8830" end="8836" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501943" start="8864" end="8875" title="Martial law in Taiwan" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="9005" end="9022" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="9175" end="9186" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="9211" end="9222" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q493866" start="9321" end="9334" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 82" label="Resolution 82"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060616" start="9997" end="10014" title="China–North Korea border" label="China-North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127031" start="10286" end="10299" title="Taiwan Strait" label="Taiwan strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490579" start="10360" end="10376" title="Kuomintang in Burma" label="Nationalist army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190484" start="10580" end="10589" title="Southwestern China" label="southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076970" start="10778" end="10787" title="Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q959664" start="10951" end="10958" title="Premier" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="10959" end="10969" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="11595" end="11606" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il-Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871945" start="12710" end="12726" title="Battle of Onjong" label="Battle of Onjong"/>
<link wikidata="Q493313" start="12739" end="12780" title="Battle of the Ch&amp;#x27;ongch&amp;#x27;on River" label="Battle of the Ch&amp;#x27;ongch&amp;#x27;on River"/>
<link wikidata="Q488945" start="12786" end="12814" title="People&amp;#x27;s Volunteer Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Volunteer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q493922" start="13234" end="13255" title="Third Battle of Seoul" label="Third Battle of Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q11121336" start="13264" end="13283" title="Battle of Hoengsong" label="Battle of Hoengsong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862267" start="13634" end="13660" title="Korean Armistice Agreement" label="Korean Armistice Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q498735" start="13727" end="13740" title="Division of Korea" label="divided Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="13923" end="13939" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="14234" end="14247" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q547247" start="14382" end="14407" title="Operation Rolling Thunder" label="Operation Rolling Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936506" start="14647" end="14668" title="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam" label="North Vietnamese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="14721" end="14734" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="15107" end="15124" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q191999" start="15150" end="15165" title="Robert McNamara" label="Robert McNamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q557081" start="15473" end="15483" title="Edgar Snow" label="Edgar Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q482407" start="16418" end="16440" title="1954 Geneva Conference" label="1954 Geneva Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="16442" end="16460" title="United States Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="16461" end="16479" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16636" end="16661" title="Foreign policy of the John F. Kennedy administration#China" label="President John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="16686" end="16706" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q208694" start="16953" end="16975" title="Sino-Indian War" label="Sino-Indian border war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="17514" end="17528" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420139" start="17683" end="17712" title="596 (nuclear test)" label="PRC developed nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454958" start="18264" end="18280" title="Great Chinese Famine" label="sparked a famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="18590" end="18596" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="18617" end="18623" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q605269" start="18752" end="18766" title="American imperialism" label="US imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083688" start="18771" end="18789" title="Revisionism (Marxism)" label="Soviet revisionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468233" start="18815" end="18851" title="Foreign Claims Settlement Commission" label="Foreign Claims Settlement Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="19112" end="19122" title="Paramount leader" label="top leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="19124" end="19137" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="19542" end="19555" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q244932" start="19827" end="19854" title="Sino-Soviet border conflict" label="Sino-Soviet border conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122271" start="20053" end="20069" title="Premier of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Premier of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708520" start="20149" end="20188" title="Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="20546" end="20553" title="Socialist Republic of Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="20555" end="20563" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="20568" end="20574" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394780" start="20635" end="20651" title="John K. Fairbank" label="John K. Fairbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q11956614" start="20656" end="20671" title="A. Doak Barnett" label="A. Doak Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971709" start="20775" end="20826" title="National Committee on United States–China Relations" label="National Committee on United States–China Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="20944" end="20951" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="20953" end="20961" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="20967" end="20971" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q550255" start="21220" end="21240" title="J. William Fulbright" label="J. William Fulbright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806257" start="21255" end="21289" title="United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations" label="Senate Foreign Relations Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454200" start="21367" end="21384" title="First inauguration of Richard Nixon" label="inaugural address"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414246" start="22145" end="22170" title="National Security Advisor (United States)" label="National Security Advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="22171" end="22186" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568742" start="22483" end="22494" title="Glenn Cowan" label="Glenn Cowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q198153" start="22499" end="22512" title="Zhuang Zedong" label="Zhuang Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048465" start="22757" end="22776" title="ping-pong diplomacy" label="ping-pong diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758100" start="22877" end="22900" title="people&amp;#x27;s diplomacy" label="people&amp;#x27;s diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181865" start="23324" end="23337" title="civil society" label="civil society"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="24491" end="24506" title="Anti-communism" label="anti-communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4270386" start="24521" end="24543" title="libertarian Republican" label="libertarian Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="24560" end="24575" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q315475" start="25064" end="25072" title="Lin Biao" label="Lin Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q212056" start="25138" end="25146" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155705" start="25483" end="25490" title="détente" label="détente"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="25523" end="25540" title="Nicolai Ceausescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="25891" end="25895" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="26651" end="26657" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q862054" start="26983" end="27007" title="1972 Nixon visit to China" label="President Nixon traveled"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="27011" end="27018" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="27020" end="27028" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="27034" end="27042" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q874682" start="27105" end="27124" title="Shanghai Communiqué" label="Shanghai Communiqué"/>
<link wikidata="Q608889" start="27544" end="27567" title="One-China policy" label="there is only one China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="28130" end="28138" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q623171" start="28505" end="28524" title="Sino-Vietnamese War" label="Sino-Vietnamese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="28580" end="28586" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="28606" end="28610" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006135" start="28870" end="28883" title="William Bundy" label="William Bundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q325810" start="29241" end="29258" title="David K. E. Bruce" label="David K. E. Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="29260" end="29277" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361114" start="29279" end="29299" title="Thomas S. Gates, Jr." label="Thomas S. Gates, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1506554" start="29305" end="29321" title="Leonard Woodcock" label="Leonard Woodcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="29857" end="29868" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="30012" end="30024" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q296661" start="30099" end="30110" title="Cyrus Vance" label="Cyrus Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q168041" start="30152" end="30171" title="Zbigniew Brzezinski" label="Zbigniew Brzezinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q11989302" start="30230" end="30246" title="Michel Oksenberg" label="Michel Oksenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q623994" start="30550" end="30557" title="Strategic Arms Limitation Talks" label="SALT II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269155" start="31051" end="31112" title="Joint Communiqué on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations" label="Joint Communiqué on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q608889" start="31301" end="31329" title="One China policy" label="that there is only one China"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="31982" end="31996" title="Paramount leader" label="Chinese leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="31997" end="32010" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q78494823" start="32018" end="32036" title="1979 visit by Deng Xiaoping to the United States" label="January 1979 visit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="33023" end="33053" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q635533" start="33058" end="33089" title="Cambodian-Vietnamese War" label="Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706385" start="33231" end="33254" title="Joseph A. Califano Jr." label="Josephn A. Califano Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="33566" end="33574" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262529" start="33704" end="33712" title="Dual-use technology" label="dual-use"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="34418" end="34422" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="34985" end="34998" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q99829" start="35011" end="35022" title="Zhao Ziyang" label="Zhao Ziyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q655407" start="35269" end="35286" title="President of China" label="Chinese President"/>
<link wikidata="Q311413" start="35287" end="35298" title="Li Xiannian" label="Li Xiannian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="35466" end="35473" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q21422559" start="36195" end="36210" title="Korean conflict" label="Korean conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q151622" start="36216" end="36241" title="Israeli–Palestinian conflict" label="Israel–Palestine conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="36250" end="36263" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q455713" start="36491" end="36496" title="Hu Na" label="Hu Na"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="36988" end="37021" title="Tiananmen Square protests of 1989" label="Tiananmen Square protests of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q476667" start="37558" end="37578" title="Taiwan Relations Act" label="Taiwan Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="38176" end="38209" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests" label="Tiananmen Square protests in 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072770" start="38303" end="38315" title="Human rights in China" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248258" start="38453" end="38471" title="economic sanctions" label="economic sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="38503" end="38505" title="G7 (major advanced economies)" label="G7"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552151" start="38506" end="38520" title="16th G7 summit" label="Houston summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077698" start="39406" end="39437" title="United States Trade and Development Agency" label="US Trade and Development Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="39543" end="39555" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="39706" end="39733" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890769" start="39906" end="39920" title="United States Munitions List" label="Munitions List"/>
<link wikidata="Q434371" start="40380" end="40385" title="Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives" label="BATFE"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40393" end="40414" title="Munitions Import List" label="Munitions Import List"/>
<link wikidata="Q9029185" start="40445" end="40461" title="J. Stapleton Roy" label="J. Stapleton Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q827518" start="40656" end="40675" title="Most favoured nation" label="most favored nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627542" start="40701" end="40724" title="Jackson–Vanik amendment" label="Jackson-Vanik Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099618" start="40940" end="40956" title="China Can Say No" label="China Can Say No"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="41232" end="41263" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="41663" end="41675" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="42240" end="42256" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053742" start="42681" end="42736" title="Yinhe incident" label="stopped the &amp;quot;Yinhe&amp;quot;, a Chinese container ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="42750" end="42756" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639228" start="42985" end="43000" title="chemical weapon" label="chemical weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="43062" end="43074" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="43306" end="43320" title="Paramount leader" label="Chinese leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="43321" end="43332" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q431657" start="43731" end="43761" title="1996 Republic of China presidential election" label="pending presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q705373" start="43778" end="43804" title="Third Taiwan Strait Crisis" label="Third Taiwan Strait Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434110" start="43839" end="43869" title="Carrier battle group" label="aircraft carrier battle groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364891" start="44094" end="44115" title="nuclear proliferation" label="nuclear proliferation"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="44245" end="44261" title="paramount leader" label="paramount leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952" start="44727" end="44744" title="Peking University" label="Peking University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418042" start="45435" end="45491" title="United States bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade" label="United States bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="46203" end="46211" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="46324" end="46354" title="Los Alamos National Laboratory" label="Los Alamos National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137047" start="46638" end="46660" title="Hainan Island incident" label="Hainan Island incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137534" start="46698" end="46702" title="Lockheed EP-3" label="EP-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q39642" start="46757" end="46769" title="Shenyang J-8" label="Shenyang J-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q150851" start="46885" end="46897" title="Colin Powell" label="Colin Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058841" start="47089" end="47108" title="Chinese nationalism" label="Chinese nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="47268" end="47298" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="47505" end="47523" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="48005" end="48018" title="War on Terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496593" start="48022" end="48037" title="APEC China 2001" label="APEC China 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974993" start="48065" end="48075" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1373" label="UNSCR 1373"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646470" start="48100" end="48118" title="United States invasion of Afghanistan" label="coalition campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="48122" end="48133" title="Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11972070" start="48191" end="48212" title="Reconstruction in Afghanistan" label="Afghan reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="48241" end="48248" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="48630" end="48638" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567868" start="48736" end="48745" title="Blue Team (U.S. politics)" label="Blue Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="48864" end="48875" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="49160" end="49172" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="49189" end="49199" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="49204" end="49214" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="49243" end="49247" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="49351" end="49372" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q65038587" start="49812" end="49835" title="North Korea and weapons of mass destruction" label="nuclear weapons program"/>
<link wikidata="Q186444" start="49923" end="49973" title="Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons" label="Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="50067" end="50083" title="Korean Peninsula" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="50150" end="50184" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q696680" start="51095" end="51120" title="Four Noes and One Without" label="Four Noes and One Without"/>
<link wikidata="Q22368" start="51197" end="51211" title="Chen Shui-bian" label="Chen Shui-bian"/>
<link wikidata="Q574556" start="51438" end="51456" title="Anti-Secession Law" label="Anti-Secession Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="52208" end="52224" title="paramount leader" label="paramount leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q15029" start="52225" end="52234" title="Hu Jintao" label="Hu Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="52335" end="52355" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="52520" end="52549" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 US presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="52615" end="52627" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="52632" end="52643" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379733" start="53256" end="53270" title="Presidency of Barack Obama" label="His presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q120210189" start="54050" end="54089" title="US–China Clean Energy Research Center" label="U.S.-China Clean Energy Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="54334" end="54343" title="Greenhouse gas emissions" label="emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="54411" end="54444" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007-2008 global financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052825" start="54859" end="54862" title="Group of Two" label="G-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621788" start="54975" end="55002" title="Strategic Economic Dialogue" label="Strategic Economic Dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q311025" start="55079" end="55092" title="Henry Paulson" label="Henry Paulson"/>
<link wikidata="Q50952" start="55118" end="55123" title="Wu Yi (politician)" label="Wu Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379733" start="55153" end="55173" title="Presidency of Barack Obama" label="Obama administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049207" start="55183" end="55225" title="U.S.–China Strategic and Economic Dialogue" label="U.S.–China Strategic and Economic Dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="55268" end="55283" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q311211" start="55317" end="55333" title="Timothy Geithner" label="Timothy Geithner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18113" start="55373" end="55384" title="Wang Qishan" label="Wang Qishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134304" start="55413" end="55424" title="Dai Bingguo" label="Dai Bingguo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17293" start="56131" end="56141" title="14th Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q17269" start="56189" end="56194" title="Tibet Autonomous Region" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11607" start="56264" end="56276" title="Jon Huntsman, Jr." label="Jon Huntsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="56288" end="56292" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="56427" end="56443" title="Chinese New Year" label="Chinese New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="56949" end="56954" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="57342" end="57358" title="Paramount leader" label="Paramount leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="57359" end="57369" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640821" start="57430" end="57440" title="Sunnylands" label="Sunnylands"/>
<link wikidata="Q506446" start="57451" end="57464" title="Rancho Mirage" label="Rancho Mirage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="57548" end="57566" title="American president" label="American president"/>
<link wikidata="Q556184" start="57573" end="57597" title="Leader of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="57646" end="57649" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao"/>
<link wikidata="Q210362" start="57670" end="57680" title="Joseph Nye" label="Joseph Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q898653" start="57760" end="57781" title="climate change mitigation" label="combat climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q65038587" start="57853" end="57868" title="North Korea and weapons of mass destruction" label="nuclear program"/>
<link wikidata="Q618727" start="58029" end="58040" title="Thomas E. Donilon" label="Tom Donilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414246" start="58058" end="58083" title="National Security Advisor (United States)" label="National Security Adviser"/>
<link wikidata="Q608889" start="58265" end="58281" title="One-China policy" label="One-China policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075369" start="58406" end="58418" title="Tibetan independence movement" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q607832" start="58459" end="58498" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q274388" start="58560" end="58567" title="Paracel Islands" label="Paracel"/>
<link wikidata="Q215664" start="58572" end="58587" title="Spratly Islands" label="Spratly Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q290329" start="58647" end="58678" title="Air defense identification zone" label="Air Defense Identification Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="58691" end="58714" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="58828" end="58853" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="U.S. Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806029" start="58854" end="58867" title="Ashton Carter" label="Ashton Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405450" start="58899" end="58914" title="Territorial disputes in the South China Sea" label="island-building"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="58922" end="58937" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="59111" end="59123" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q233984" start="59258" end="59270" title="Tsai Ing-wen" label="Tsai Ing-wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q608889" start="59536" end="59564" title="One-China policy" label="&amp;#x27;one China&amp;#x27; policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q523156" start="59985" end="59990" title="Terminal High Altitude Area Defense" label="THAAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671773" start="60212" end="60239" title="bilateral investment treaty" label="bilateral investment treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830434" start="60289" end="60303" title="Michael Froman" label="Michael Froman"/>
<link wikidata="Q215664" start="60513" end="60528" title="Spratly Islands" label="Spratly Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="60536" end="60551" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27829251" start="60575" end="60586" title="Sean Spicer" label="Sean Spicer"/>
<link wikidata="Q267902" start="60888" end="60900" title="James Mattis" label="James Mattis"/>
<link wikidata="Q694604" start="60951" end="61028" title="Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan" label="Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29460" start="61063" end="61078" title="Senkaku Islands" label="Senkaku Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q45341" start="61084" end="61098" title="East China Sea" label="East China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27612210" start="61587" end="61598" title="Geng Shuang" label="Geng Shuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q274388" start="61813" end="61820" title="Paracel Islands" label="Paracel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="62776" end="62796" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="63280" end="63286" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q623268" start="63309" end="63312" title="Chief financial officer" label="CFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q59485866" start="63313" end="63325" title="Meng Wanzhou" label="Meng Wanzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192221" start="63412" end="63421" title="Ben Sasse" label="Ben Sasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978379" start="63451" end="63483" title="National security of the United States" label="U.S. national security interests"/>
<link wikidata="Q623268" start="63920" end="63923" title="CFO" label="CFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="64039" end="64056" title="quantum physicist" label="quantum physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="64083" end="64102" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280104" start="64104" end="64119" title="Shoucheng Zhang" label="Shoucheng Zhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q974595" start="64134" end="64143" title="H-1B visa" label="H-1B visa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115724" start="64255" end="64297" title="Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States" label="Committee on Foreign Investment in the U.S"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="64344" end="64346" title="Venture capital" label="VC"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="64577" end="64607" title="intergovernmental organization" label="intergovernmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="64617" end="64641" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829671" start="64740" end="64757" title="Michael D. Swaine" label="Michael D. Swaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368362" start="65047" end="65060" title="Rosemary Foot (writer)" label="Rosemary Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504308" start="66095" end="66110" title="Lawrence J. Lau" label="Lawrence J. Lau"/>
<link wikidata="Q98410220" start="66744" end="66754" title="Greg Autry" label="Greg Autry"/>
<link wikidata="Q454970" start="67179" end="67193" title="Samantha Power" label="Samantha Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q50612" start="67198" end="67208" title="Susan Rice" label="Susan Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q110267398" start="67442" end="67458" title="China Initiative" label="China Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q730465" start="67627" end="67654" title="Director of Policy Planning" label="Director of Policy Planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="67662" end="67695" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388410" start="67697" end="67710" title="Kiron Skinner" label="Kiron Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="67874" end="67882" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="67892" end="67904" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986804" start="68154" end="68199" title="Committee on the Present Danger" label="Committee on the Present Danger: China (CPDC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324556" start="68485" end="68496" title="state media" label="state media"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="68734" end="68757" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="68807" end="68818" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="coronavirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="68896" end="68902" title="Racism" label="racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="69812" end="69842" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="worldwide coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="70262" end="70277" title="Semiconductor" label="semi-conductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="70340" end="70345" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="70347" end="70353" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4522678" start="70625" end="70639" title="Orville Schell" label="Orville Schell"/>
<link wikidata="Q842828" start="70697" end="70709" title="Asia Society" label="Asia Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="70971" end="70984" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="71114" end="71122" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="71132" end="71142" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q112177529" start="71480" end="71515" title="US Ambassador to the United Nations" label="US Ambassador to the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q28871485" start="71516" end="71527" title="Kelly Craft" label="Kelly Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q67936634" start="71699" end="71729" title="Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act" label="Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892479" start="71766" end="71780" title="United States sanctions" label="U.S. sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q55506436" start="71834" end="71849" title="Xinjiang re-education camps" label="detention camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="71908" end="71914" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078412" start="71915" end="71921" title="Islam in China" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q551462" start="72057" end="72069" title="Chen Quanguo" label="Chen Quanguo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880478" start="72141" end="72181" title="Begin–Sadat Center for Strategic Studies" label="Begin–Sadat Center for Strategic Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q95579249" start="72287" end="72309" title="Murder of George Floyd" label="Murder of George Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q95965839" start="72325" end="72342" title="George Floyd protests" label="American protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q64509602" start="72350" end="72371" title="2019–2020 Hong Kong protests" label="protests in Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q97355513" start="72385" end="72392" title="Violence and controversies during the George Floyd protests" label="rioting"/>
<link wikidata="Q97355513" start="72397" end="72426" title="Violence and controversies during the George Floyd protests" label="violence in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q30148517" start="72893" end="72909" title="Christopher A. Wray" label="Christopher Wray"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73263" end="73318" title="Chinese Consulate-General, Houston#2020 closure" label="ordered the closure of the Chinese consulate in Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q12972993" start="73383" end="73406" title="Consulate General of the United States, Chengdu" label="US consulate in Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q95976070" start="74159" end="74190" title="2020 Hong Kong national security law" label="Hong Kong national security law"/>
<link wikidata="Q648533" start="74686" end="74739" title="Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corporation" label="Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="75468" end="75478" title="arms sales" label="arms sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="75655" end="75660" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q795324" start="75750" end="75756" title="Boeing Defense, Space &amp;amp; Security" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="75758" end="75766" title="Raytheon" label="Raytheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="75771" end="75786" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="76385" end="76394" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230873" start="76564" end="76569" title="Axios (website)" label="Axios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068951" start="76754" end="76788" title="Ministry of State Security (China)" label="Chinese Ministry of State Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q101369347" start="77168" end="77192" title="Presidency of Joe Biden" label="new Biden administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305968" start="77793" end="77831" title="United States Secretary of Health and Human Services" label="secretary of health and human services"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716651" start="77832" end="77841" title="Alex Azar" label="Alex Azar"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063604" start="77875" end="77889" title="Keith J. Krach" label="Keith J. Krach"/>
<link wikidata="Q28871485" start="77936" end="77947" title="Kelly Craft" label="Kelly Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="77999" end="78024" title="United States National Security Council" label="National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821917" start="78276" end="78290" title="Antony Blinken" label="Antony Blinken"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="78340" end="78347" title="Uighurs" label="Uighurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="78497" end="78509" title="the Pentagon" label="the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="78546" end="78581" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q136484" start="78667" end="78670" title="ZTE" label="ZTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4264364" start="78672" end="78678" title="Hytera" label="Hytera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760704" start="78680" end="78689" title="Hikvision" label="Hikvision"/>
<link wikidata="Q18111506" start="78695" end="78711" title="Dahua Technology" label="Dahua Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="78764" end="78797" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q106088434" start="78830" end="78855" title="United States–China talks in Alaska" label="bilateral talks in Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978320" start="78880" end="78905" title="national security advisor" label="national security advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730147" start="78906" end="78919" title="Jake Sullivan" label="Jake Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q58211" start="78946" end="78957" title="Yang Jiechi" label="Yang Jiechi"/>
<link wikidata="Q701801" start="78987" end="78994" title="Wang Yi (politician)" label="Wang Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q95976070" start="79448" end="79486" title="2020 Hong Kong national security law" label="contemporaneous crackdown on Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299083" start="80075" end="80096" title="Executive Order 14032" label="Executive Order 14032"/>
<link wikidata="Q104839188" start="80124" end="80145" title="Executive Order 13959" label="Executive Order 13959"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="80300" end="80321" title="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="China&amp;#x27;s military"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113427" start="80325" end="80346" title="Mass surveillance in China" label="surveillance industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="80384" end="80386" title="G7" label="G7"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523908" start="81143" end="81161" title="Hypersonic flight" label="hypersonic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440379" start="81189" end="81226" title="Fractional Orbital Bombardment System" label="Fractional Orbital Bombardment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="81297" end="81312" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q108556886" start="82179" end="82184" title="AUKUS" label="AUKUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q108933923" start="82281" end="82290" title="SSN-AUKUS" label="SSN-AUKUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q109536021" start="83070" end="83090" title="Summit for Democracy" label="Summit for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155502" start="83128" end="83157" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China&amp;#x27;s Foreign Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q96381174" start="83455" end="83496" title="Holding Foreign Companies Accountable Act" label="Holding Foreign Companies Accountable Act"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83596" end="83603" title="Concerns and controversies at the 2022 Winter Olympics#United States" label="boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q104696204" start="83665" end="83699" title="Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act" label="Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q108821985" start="83768" end="83776" title="National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022" label="into law"/>
<link wikidata="Q633954" start="83913" end="83940" title="Rim of the Pacific Exercise" label="Rim of the Pacific exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="84085" end="84118" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q941013" start="85423" end="85435" title="Lloyd Austin" label="Lloyd Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929529" start="85571" end="85581" title="Wei Fenghe" label="Wei Fenghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q170581" start="85774" end="85786" title="Nancy Pelosi" label="Nancy Pelosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q113375803" start="86171" end="86216" title="2022 visit by Nancy Pelosi to Taiwan" label="Pelosi visited the island the following month"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="86462" end="86478" title="State Department" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q113435201" start="86871" end="86907" title="2022 Chinese military exercises around Taiwan" label="military exercises encircling Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q115822275" start="86952" end="86967" title="United States New Export Controls on Advanced Computing and Semiconductors to China" label="export controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q61056685" start="87372" end="87382" title="2022 G20 Bali summit" label="G20 summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="87386" end="87390" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469844" start="87618" end="87630" title="geoeconomics" label="geoeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="87820" end="87828" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q104765389" start="87833" end="87844" title="Asharq News" label="Asharq News"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122653" start="87872" end="87887" title="Singapore Forum" label="EU ASEAN Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q116652301" start="88153" end="88185" title="2023 Chinese balloon incident" label="a Chinese reconnaissance balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100822" start="88527" end="88555" title="Chinese espionage in the United States" label="Chinese theft of the designs"/>
<link wikidata="Q29261" start="88564" end="88568" title="F-35" label="F-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q20047262" start="88641" end="88698" title="Office of Personnel Management data breach" label="cyberattacks targeting the Office of Personnel Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864250" start="88736" end="88761" title="Anthem medical data breach" label="healthcare company Anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141173" start="88778" end="88800" title="Marriott International" label="Marriott International"/>
<link wikidata="Q96377540" start="88876" end="88890" title="export control" label="export control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570432" start="88956" end="88984" title="Semiconductor device fabrication" label="advanced semiconductor chips"/>
<link wikidata="Q101369347" start="89080" end="89100" title="Biden administration" label="Biden administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q539509" start="90122" end="90136" title="Michael McCaul" label="Michael McCaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q233984" start="90195" end="90207" title="Tsai Ing-wen" label="Tsai Ing-wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730147" start="90898" end="90911" title="Jake Sullivan" label="Jake Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q701801" start="90921" end="90928" title="Wang Yi (politician)" label="Wang Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10875058" start="90960" end="90994" title="Central Foreign Affairs Commission" label="Central Foreign Affairs Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843625" start="91106" end="91128" title="47th G7 summit" label="G7 summit in Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q8292723" start="91498" end="91509" title="Wang Wentao" label="Wang Wentao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562913" start="91544" end="91557" title="Gina Raimondo" label="Gina Raimondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="91673" end="91700" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276563" start="91716" end="91732" title="William J. Burns (diplomat)" label="William J. Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488585" start="91786" end="91805" title="Shangri-La Dialogue" label="Shangri-La Dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q19825651" start="91851" end="91861" title="Li Shangfu" label="Li Shangfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q941013" start="91890" end="91902" title="Lloyd Austin" label="Lloyd Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q183318" start="92263" end="92271" title="dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q263725" start="92365" end="92377" title="Janet Yellen" label="Janet Yellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8294074" start="92612" end="92618" title="Liu He (politician)" label="Liu He"/>
<link wikidata="Q249203" start="92636" end="92663" title="People&amp;#x27;s Bank of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743711" start="92670" end="92677" title="Yi Gang" label="Yi Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q8990322" start="92699" end="92706" title="Liu Kun" label="Liu Kun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309080" start="92729" end="92742" title="Pan Gongsheng" label="Pan Gongsheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q8291839" start="92757" end="92766" title="He Lifeng" label="He Lifeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414390" start="92780" end="92788" title="Li Qiang" label="Li Qiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821917" start="93278" end="93292" title="Antony Blinken" label="Antony Blinken"/>
<link wikidata="Q701801" start="93370" end="93377" title="Wang Yi (politician)" label="Wang Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="93381" end="93388" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="93396" end="93401" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7216297" start="93762" end="93770" title="Qin Gang" label="Qin Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q701801" start="93813" end="93820" title="Wang Yi (politician)" label="Wang Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q48405" start="94155" end="94164" title="Han Zheng" label="Han Zheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q115133886" start="94312" end="94337" title="2023 G20 New Delhi summit" label="2023 G20 New Delhi summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562913" start="94742" end="94755" title="Gina Raimondo" label="Gina Raimondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8292447" start="94828" end="94837" title="Hu Heping" label="Hu Heping"/>
<link wikidata="Q8292723" start="94860" end="94871" title="Wang Wentao" label="Wang Wentao"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364514" start="95005" end="95016" title="Chen Jining" label="Chen Jining"/>
<link wikidata="Q865312" start="95030" end="95049" title="Shanghai Disneyland" label="Shanghai Disneyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27493" start="95097" end="95110" title="working group" label="working group"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="95377" end="95396" title="Wall Street Journal" label="Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="95452" end="95464" title="nuclear arms" label="nuclear arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="95640" end="95645" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="95650" end="95663" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q111208159" start="95677" end="95722" title="2023 United Nations Climate Change Conference" label="2023 United Nations Climate Change Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707860" start="95785" end="95800" title="Paris Agreement" label="Paris Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="95851" end="95858" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023448" start="95919" end="95930" title="Xie Zhenhua (politician)" label="Xie Zhenhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150588" start="96031" end="96048" title="Coal in China" label="coal use in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700433" start="96095" end="96110" title="energy security" label="energy security"/>
<link wikidata="Q263725" start="96186" end="96198" title="Janet Yellen" label="Janet Yellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8291839" start="96203" end="96212" title="He Lifeng" label="He Lifeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="96321" end="96328" title="Climate change" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q651936" start="96330" end="96341" title="debt relief" label="debt relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q842828" start="96444" end="96473" title="Asia Society Policy Institute" label="Asia Society Policy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q115799072" start="96651" end="96667" title="APEC United States 2023" label="2023 APEC Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q117842677" start="96759" end="96783" title="Joe Biden 2024 presidential campaign" label="2024 reelection campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q97321374" start="97091" end="97097" title="Skydio" label="Skydio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498663" start="97166" end="97181" title="fire department" label="fire department"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847080" start="97738" end="97750" title="Lai Ching-te" label="Lai Ching-te"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="98487" end="98510" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="second election victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q324546" start="98602" end="98613" title="Marco Rubio" label="Marco Rubio"/>
<link wikidata="Q55386653" start="98655" end="98668" title="Michael Waltz" label="Michael Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q842828" start="98790" end="98802" title="Asia Society" label="Asia Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q126616223" start="99012" end="99044" title="Second inauguration of Donald Trump" label="Trump&amp;#x27;s second inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q28935729" start="99077" end="99085" title="JD Vance" label="JD Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q317521" start="99095" end="99104" title="Elon Musk" label="Elon Musk"/>
<link wikidata="Q48405" start="99166" end="99175" title="Han Zheng" label="Han Zheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="99245" end="99255" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468395" start="99688" end="99726" title="Foreign-exchange reserves of China" label="China&amp;#x27;s foreign-exchange reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561771" start="99792" end="99825" title="United States Treasury security" label="United States treasury securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979674" start="99884" end="99900" title="National saving" label="domestic savings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138777" start="99913" end="99927" title="National debt of the United States" label="budget deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="99939" end="99975" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="global financial crisis of 2007-2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="100865" end="100875" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072770" start="101129" end="101141" title="Human rights in China" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="101313" end="101337" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169287" start="101413" end="101445" title="permanent normal trade relations" label="permanent normal trade relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863496" start="101494" end="101535" title="United States–China Relations Act of 2000" label="United States–China Relations Act of 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q827518" start="101587" end="101607" title="most favoured nation" label="most favoured nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099981" start="101672" end="101716" title="China and the World Trade Organization" label="entry of China into the WTO in December 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753122" start="101733" end="101756" title="Manufacturing in the United States" label="U.S. manufacturing jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q65045206" start="101778" end="101789" title="China shock" label="China shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282092" start="101796" end="101821" title="Economic Policy Institute" label="Economic Policy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364904" start="102170" end="102183" title="petrochemical" label="petrochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="102260" end="102273" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q376860" start="102870" end="102900" title="newly industrialized country" label="newly industrialized countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="102904" end="102913" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070940" start="102922" end="102934" title="Asia-Pacific" label="Asia-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q17154120" start="103210" end="103228" title="global value chain" label="global value chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="103254" end="103307" title="OECD" label="Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q277183" start="103496" end="103507" title="Pascal Lamy" label="Pascal Lamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="104166" end="104188" title="state-owned enterprise" label="state-owned enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="104220" end="104226" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099981" start="104437" end="104502" title="China and the World Trade Organization" label="Mainland China&amp;#x27;s accession into the World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="104571" end="104579" title="Renminbi" label="Renminbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="104596" end="104616" title="United States dollar" label="United States dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621788" start="104763" end="104790" title="Strategic Economic Dialogue" label="Strategic Economic Dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450673" start="105094" end="105109" title="Senior Dialogue" label="Senior Dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="105422" end="105435" title="protectionism" label="protectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574977" start="105452" end="105456" title="Office of the United States Trade Representative" label="USTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="105677" end="105701" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716140" start="106046" end="106078" title="Rare earths trade dispute" label="dispute over rare earth minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="106133" end="106148" title="Barack Obama" label="President Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q51557538" start="107730" end="107739" title="China–United States trade war" label="trade war"/>
<link wikidata="Q831445" start="107851" end="107858" title="Sinopec" label="Sinopec"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="107869" end="107890" title="liquefied natural gas" label="liquefied natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q108904013" start="108043" end="108057" title="2021 global energy crisis" label="surged in 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q265852" start="108172" end="108180" title="Tim Cook" label="Tim Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q121665402" start="108229" end="108252" title="China Development Forum" label="China Development Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="108329" end="108338" title="Apple Inc" label="Apple Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="108351" end="108368" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q463094" start="108385" end="108392" title="Foxconn" label="Foxconn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25530138" start="108543" end="108547" title="yuan (currency)" label="yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115724" start="108677" end="108729" title="Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States" label="Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983653" start="108839" end="108860" title="currency manipulation" label="currency manipulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006458" start="108890" end="108906" title="C. Fred Bergsten" label="C. Fred Bergsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981447" start="108924" end="108970" title="Peterson Institute for International Economics" label="Peterson Institute for International Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="109761" end="109783" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="110443" end="110454" title="United States Department of the Treasury" label="US Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="110937" end="110947" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="110956" end="110967" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="111077" end="111091" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364891" start="111100" end="111136" title="nuclear proliferation" label="non-proliferation of nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072770" start="111183" end="111204" title="human rights in China" label="human rights in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q591903" start="111217" end="111239" title="cross-strait relations" label="cross-strait relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q608889" start="111279" end="111295" title="One China" label="One China policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="111370" end="111375" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001749" start="111377" end="111399" title="Chinese expansionism" label="China&amp;#x27;s expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547309" start="111407" end="111419" title="Indo-Pacific" label="Indo-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405450" start="111528" end="111569" title="South China Sea disputes" label="territorial issues in the South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="111621" end="111636" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25855" start="111691" end="111711" title="international waters" label="international waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841179" start="111732" end="111741" title="Freedom of navigation" label="the right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187401" start="112623" end="112665" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Ground Force" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Ground Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q755179" start="112673" end="112707" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212979" start="112792" end="112804" title="Robert Gates" label="Robert Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="113156" end="113163" title="US Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q503161" start="113220" end="113234" title="Michael Mullen" label="Michael Mullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="113345" end="113352" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q575662" start="113401" end="113421" title="US Naval War College" label="US Naval War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036279" start="113948" end="113971" title="power transition theory" label="power transition theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087482" start="114121" end="114136" title="American decline" label="declining power"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="114263" end="114277" title="Potential superpower#China" label="emerging power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="114314" end="114324" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q835450" start="114502" end="114528" title="China&amp;#x27;s peaceful rise" label="China&amp;#x27;s peaceful rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227237" start="114625" end="114634" title="United Kingdom–United States relations" label="U.K.-U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q5552216" start="114661" end="114673" title="Germany–United Kingdom relations" label="Anglo-German"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="114930" end="114944" title="China" label="Mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="114976" end="115002" title="Taiwan" label="Republic of China (Taiwan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q476667" start="115153" end="115173" title="Taiwan Relations Act" label="Taiwan Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601297" start="115277" end="115306" title="List of US arms sales to Taiwan" label="arms of a defensive character"/>
<link wikidata="Q107957" start="115625" end="115639" title="Alexander Haig" label="Alexander Haig"/>
<link wikidata="Q706243" start="116123" end="116138" title="political status of Taiwan" label="Taiwan question"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="116146" end="116158" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="116167" end="116193" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q233984" start="116441" end="116453" title="Tsai Ing-wen" label="Tsai Ing-Wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60772" start="116963" end="116983" title="Ursula von der Leyen" label="Ursula von der Leyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="117328" end="117340" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q30676252" start="117396" end="117407" title="democratic backsliding" label="backsliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q457862" start="117670" end="117732" title="International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights" label="International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q392119" start="117816" end="117868" title="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights" label="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164262" start="118817" end="118912" title="United States&amp;#x27; Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" label="in its 2007 report of human rights practices in countries and regions outside the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033395" start="118978" end="119022" title="Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor" label="Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272877" start="119023" end="119041" title="Jonathan D. Farrar" label="Jonathan D. Farrar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349569" start="119162" end="119173" title="Human Rights Record of the United States" label="White Paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164262" start="119383" end="119430" title="United States&amp;#x27; Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" label="China report on human rights practices for 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166099" start="119672" end="119704" title="Mass surveillance in the United States" label="surveillance on its own citizens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="119706" end="119729" title="Human rights in the United States#Prison system" label="mistreatment of inmates"/>
<link wikidata="Q55506436" start="119895" end="119920" title="Xinjiang internment camps" label="Xinjiang internment camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q473239" start="120014" end="120025" title="Mike Pompeo" label="Mike Pompeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="120059" end="120071" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="120248" end="120255" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="120265" end="120284" title="concentration camps" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q551462" start="120393" end="120405" title="Chen Quanguo" label="Chen Quanguo"/>
<link wikidata="Q988456" start="120411" end="120454" title="Chinese Communist Party Committee Secretary" label="Chinese Communist Party Committee Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="120458" end="120466" title="Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q42410892" start="120487" end="120532" title="19th Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party" label="19th Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="120627" end="120641" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q24313" start="120642" end="120652" title="Mike Pence" label="Mike Pence"/>
<link wikidata="Q908467" start="120682" end="120692" title="Christianity in China" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078412" start="120694" end="120701" title="Islam in China" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q847618" start="120706" end="120715" title="Chinese Buddhism" label="Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="Q161345" start="120741" end="120756" title="Houston Rockets" label="Houston Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226214" start="120780" end="120791" title="Daryl Morey" label="Daryl Morey"/>
<link wikidata="Q64509602" start="120827" end="120853" title="2019–20 Hong Kong protests" label="2019–20 Hong Kong protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073722" start="120890" end="120920" title="Chinese Basketball Association" label="Chinese Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="121073" end="121080" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="121115" end="121118" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q164055" start="121805" end="121821" title="Tiananmen Square" label="Tiananmen Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="122001" end="122014" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892479" start="122025" end="122034" title="US Sanctions" label="sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="122107" end="122119" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="122139" end="122156" title="Uyghurs" label="Muslim minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="122160" end="122168" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242970" start="122220" end="122237" title="List of companies of China" label="Chinese companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="122335" end="122342" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="122350" end="122358" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="122403" end="122418" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q727697" start="122420" end="122434" title="Coach New York" label="Coach New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141173" start="122436" end="122458" title="Marriott International" label="Marriott International"/>
<link wikidata="Q214800" start="122460" end="122472" title="Calvin Klein" label="Calvin Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066858" start="122477" end="122494" title="Tiffany &amp;amp; Co." label="Tiffany &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="122734" end="122753" title="human rights abuses" label="human rights abuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q95565442" start="122856" end="122878" title="wolf warrior diplomacy" label="wolf warrior diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q87084117" start="122971" end="122982" title="Zhao Lijian" label="Zhao Lijian"/>
<link wikidata="Q96337143" start="123435" end="123448" title="Salih Hudayar" label="Salih Hudayar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103925" start="123476" end="123510" title="East Turkistan Government-in-Exile" label="East Turkistan Government-in-Exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q473239" start="123806" end="123817" title="Mike Pompeo" label="Mike Pompeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305968" start="123826" end="123864" title="United States Secretary of Health and Human Services" label="secretary of health and human services"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716651" start="123865" end="123874" title="Alex Azar" label="Alex Azar"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063604" start="123908" end="123922" title="Keith J. Krach" label="Keith J. Krach"/>
<link wikidata="Q28871485" start="123969" end="123980" title="Kelly Craft" label="Kelly Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="124032" end="124057" title="United States National Security Council" label="National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="124415" end="124424" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="124452" end="124466" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q243987" start="124567" end="124592" title="bombardment of Yeonpyeong" label="bombardment of Yeonpyeong"/>
<link wikidata="Q27243" start="124736" end="124750" title="Northeast Asia" label="Northeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109843" start="125068" end="125104" title="Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank" label="Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="125368" end="125390" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="125399" end="125409" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366688" start="125598" end="125633" title="Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement" label="Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574977" start="125743" end="125766" title="US Trade Representative" label="US Trade Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299685" start="126505" end="126517" title="Wakhjir Pass" label="Wakhjir Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088665" start="126525" end="126536" title="Afghanistan-China border" label="Sino-Afghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="126608" end="126633" title="War in Afghanistan (2001-present)" label="operations in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="126663" end="126668" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q244631" start="126834" end="126846" title="Leon Panetta" label="Leon Panetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="127127" end="127132" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327744" start="127339" end="127378" title="East Asian foreign policy of the Barack Obama administration" label="pivot to East Asia and the Asia-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q50335907" start="127416" end="127425" title="First Trump tariffs" label="trade war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="127514" end="127538" title="United States Department of Justice" label="US Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185863" start="127679" end="127708" title="Democratic National Committee" label="Democratic National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q659166" start="127726" end="127752" title="1996 United States presidential election" label="1996 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369818" start="127758" end="127773" title="Embassy of China in Washington, D.C." label="Chinese embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="127777" end="127793" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q108864859" start="127855" end="127870" title="cyberwarfare in China" label="Chinese hackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890847" start="127905" end="127938" title="US Office of Personnel Management" label="US Office of Personnel Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q20047262" start="127957" end="127990" title="Office of Personnel Management data breach" label="theft of approximately 22 million"/>
<link wikidata="Q167607" start="128062" end="128073" title="James Comey" label="James Comey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489338" start="128359" end="128418" title="United States Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs" label="Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q14270642" start="128494" end="128503" title="Bloomberg News" label="Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q38858352" start="128727" end="128743" title="Kirstjen Nielsen" label="Kirstjen Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864250" start="129005" end="129031" title="Anthem medical data breach" label="Anthem medical data breach"/>
<link wikidata="Q16888145" start="129132" end="129146" title="Identity theft in the United States" label="identity theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384453" start="129249" end="129256" title="Equifax" label="Equifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q85730212" start="129432" end="129456" title="2017 Equifax data breach" label="2017 Equifax data breach"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="129484" end="129491" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444179" start="129555" end="129575" title="Internet in China" label="Chinese social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q52161605" start="129616" end="129641" title="Xi Jinping Administration" label="Xi Jinping administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="129974" end="129990" title="Voice of America" label="Voice of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q22019872" start="130225" end="130253" title="2020 United States elections" label="2020 United States elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="130364" end="130370" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="130446" end="130466" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q55606242" start="130656" end="130665" title="ByteDance" label="ByteDance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899911" start="131330" end="131341" title="BeyondTrust" label="BeyondTrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q860762" start="131996" end="132024" title="2010 Nuclear Security Summit" label="2010 Nuclear Security Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q547896" start="132870" end="132897" title="Chemical Weapons Convention" label="Chemical Weapons Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q407541" start="133071" end="133079" title="fentanyl" label="fentanyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q475678" start="133429" end="133449" title="Mexican drug cartels" label="Mexican drug cartels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620015" start="133842" end="133846" title="Office of Foreign Assets Control" label="OFAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q87897344" start="133960" end="134003" title="impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on politics" label="impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="134009" end="134029" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q87084117" start="134284" end="134295" title="Zhao Lijian" label="Zhao Lijian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="134373" end="134378" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q85173778" start="134392" end="134411" title="Misinformation related to the COVID-19 pandemic" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308139" start="134455" end="134470" title="The Daily Beast" label="The Daily Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="134573" end="134598" title="United States National Security Council" label="National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q786878" start="134735" end="134761" title="United States Intelligence Community" label="U.S. intelligence agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q786878" start="134975" end="135002" title="United States Intelligence Community" label="U.S. intelligence community"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109740" start="135103" end="135111" title="Politico" label="Politico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063573" start="135128" end="135142" title="Foreign Policy" label="Foreign Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q846808" start="135233" end="135243" title="propaganda in China" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q312901" start="135295" end="135308" title="Josep Borrell" label="Josep Borrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892479" start="135641" end="135650" title="United States sanctions" label="sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137062" start="135804" end="135811" title="Jack Ma" label="Jack Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q97355106" start="136113" end="136131" title="Trade Data Monitor" label="Trade Data Monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="136164" end="136183" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="136301" end="136324" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q97355106" start="136339" end="136357" title="Trade Data Monitor" label="Trade Data Monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q51557538" start="136450" end="136482" title="China–United States trade war" label="US tariffs on imports from China"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="136703" end="136720" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="137261" end="137269" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="137671" end="137686" title="United States Intelligence Community#Organizational structure and leadership" label="assembled teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="137697" end="137728" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q107674451" start="137747" end="137762" title="COVID-19 lab leak theory" label="lab leak theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973808" start="137785" end="137814" title="National Intelligence Council" label="National Intelligence Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="137926" end="137951" title="U.S. Department of Energy" label="U.S. Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980175" start="138340" end="138354" title="John Ratcliffe (American politician)" label="John Ratcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="138380" end="138407" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407505" start="138598" end="138608" title="Propaganda in the United States" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485048" start="138653" end="138660" title="Sinovac Biotech" label="Sinovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="138669" end="138677" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q223862" start="138843" end="138848" title="haram" label="haram"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="138861" end="138872" title="Sharia" label="Islamic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q105334706" start="138928" end="138960" title="COVID-19 misinformation by China" label="COVID-19 disinformation by China"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="139033" end="139044" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q278485" start="139069" end="139076" title="hashtag" label="hashtag"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="139115" end="139122" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q111208159" start="141554" end="141599" title="2023 United Nations Climate Change Conference" label="2023 United Nations Climate Change Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q380170" start="141873" end="141892" title="energy conservation" label="energy conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="142263" end="142276" title="nitrous oxide" label="nitrous oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q28499112" start="142304" end="142320" title="Kigali Amendment" label="Kigali Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031943" start="142344" end="142362" title="hydrofluorocarbons" label="hydrofluorocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q17120940" start="142393" end="142412" title="resource efficiency" label="resource efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q497743" start="142417" end="142433" title="circular economy" label="circular economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202090" start="142441" end="142458" title="plastic pollution" label="plastic pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="142466" end="142479" title="Air pollution" label="Air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="142501" end="142514" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20051297" start="142590" end="142593" title="Nationally determined contribution" label="NDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="143309" end="143329" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="143372" end="143420" title="General secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="General secretary of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="143421" end="143431" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q51557538" start="143480" end="143509" title="China–United States trade war" label="China–United States trade war"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="143525" end="143542" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="143687" end="143706" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="143719" end="143725" title="Gallup, Inc." label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095561" start="144071" end="144104" title="Chicago Council on Global Affairs" label="Chicago Council on Global Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088696" start="144427" end="144438" title="The Harris Poll" label="Harris poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="144691" end="144704" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470929" start="144715" end="144721" title="YouGov" label="YouGov"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="144890" end="144906" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5369818" start="144908" end="144915" title="Embassy of China, Washington, D.C." label="Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="144919" end="144926" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="144949" end="144960" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100423" start="144962" end="144979" title="Consulate-General of China, Los Angeles" label="Consulate General"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="144983" end="144996" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="145019" end="145032" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="145081" end="145088" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12057126" start="145090" end="145097" title="Embassy of the United States, Beijing" label="Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="145101" end="145110" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q12972990" start="145112" end="145129" title="Consulate General of the United States, Guangzhou" label="Consulate General"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="145133" end="145141" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q12972989" start="145143" end="145160" title="Consulate General of the United States, Shanghai" label="Consulate General"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="145164" end="145172" title="Shenyang" label="Shenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q12972991" start="145174" end="145191" title="Consulate General of the United States, Shenyang" label="Consulate General"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="145195" end="145200" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12972994" start="145202" end="145219" title="Consulate General of the United States, Wuhan" label="Consulate General"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="145224" end="145233" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164576" start="145235" end="145252" title="Consulate General of the United States, Hong Kong and Macau" label="Consulate General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011491" start="145292" end="145319" title="American espionage in China" label="American espionage in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567868" start="145322" end="145347" title="Blue Team (U.S. politics)" label="Blue Team (U.S. politics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100822" start="145350" end="145388" title="Chinese espionage in the United States" label="Chinese espionage in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359570" start="145391" end="145402" title="China Lobby" label="China Lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123574" start="145405" end="145420" title="Chinese Century" label="Chinese Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q51557538" start="145423" end="145452" title="China–United States trade war" label="China–United States trade war"/>
<link wikidata="Q98447439" start="145455" end="145492" title="United States sanctions against China" label="United States sanctions against China"/>
<link wikidata="Q235193" start="145495" end="145517" title="Clash of Civilizations" label="Clash of Civilizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q789920" start="145520" end="145546" title="Foreign relations of China" label="Foreign relations of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043394" start="145549" end="145587" title="Foreign relations of the United States" label="Foreign relations of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q21068005" start="145590" end="145647" title="List of Chinese spy cases in the United States of America" label="List of Chinese spy cases in the United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419647" start="145650" end="145660" title="Cox Report" label="Cox Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840755" start="145663" end="145688" title="Peaceful Evolution theory" label="Peaceful Evolution theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268405" start="145691" end="145722" title="Quadrilateral Security Dialogue" label="Quadrilateral Security Dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648084" start="145725" end="145756" title="String of Pearls (Indian Ocean)" label="String of Pearls (Indian Ocean)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47527016" start="145759" end="145774" title="Thucydides Trap" label="Thucydides Trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745629" start="145794" end="145812" title="Americans in China" label="Americans in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q65965386" start="145815" end="145856" title="Anti-American sentiment in mainland China" label="Anti-American sentiment in mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774136" start="145859" end="145902" title="Anti-Chinese sentiment in the United States" label="Anti-Chinese sentiment in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468934" start="145905" end="145931" title="Beijing–Washington hotline" label="Beijing–Washington hotline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="145934" end="145951" title="Chinese Americans" label="Chinese Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q14927965" start="145954" end="145974" title="Document Number Nine" label="Document Number Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052825" start="145977" end="145989" title="Group of Two" label="Group of Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621788" start="145992" end="146019" title="Strategic Economic Dialogue" label="Strategic Economic Dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314462" start="146022" end="146052" title="Taiwan–United States relations" label="Taiwan–United States relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049207" start="146055" end="146097" title="U.S.–China Strategic and Economic Dialogue" label="U.S.–China Strategic and Economic Dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516704" start="146118" end="146146" title="History of Chinese Americans" label="History of Chinese Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151968" start="146149" end="146181" title="History of the Republic of China" label="History of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q862552" start="146184" end="146230" title="History of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="History of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q106489889" start="146233" end="146273" title="History of China–United States relations" label="History of China–United States relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850475" start="146276" end="146309" title="East Asia–United States relations" label="East Asia–United States relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291044" start="146312" end="146359" title="1996 United States campaign finance controversy" label="1996 United States campaign finance controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099717" start="146362" end="146373" title="China Hands" label="China Hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137047" start="146403" end="146425" title="Hainan Island incident" label="Hainan Island incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203620" start="146428" end="146447" title="Operation Beleaguer" label="Operation Beleaguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q862054" start="146450" end="146464" title="Richard Nixon&amp;#x27;s 1972 visit to China" label="Nixon in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048465" start="146467" end="146486" title="Ping-pong diplomacy" label="Ping-pong diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889184" start="146489" end="146548" title="United States-China Economic and Security Review Commission" label="United States-China Economic and Security Review Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863462" start="146551" end="146617" title="U.S. immigration policy toward the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="U.S. immigration policy toward the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q105677106" start="146620" end="146661" title="US Department of Defense China Task Force" label="US Department of Defense China Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q84318312" start="146664" end="146718" title="Xenophobia and racism related to the COVID-19 pandemic" label="Xenophobia and racism related to the COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830768" start="147466" end="147483" title="Michael Green (political expert)" label="Green, Michael J."/>
<link wikidata="Q112520770" start="150018" end="150034" title="Jacques deLisle" label="deLisle, Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q52156979" start="150558" end="150577" title="Foster Rhea Dulles" label="Dulles, Foster Rhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="152665" end="152681" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Kissinger, Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q933957" start="153217" end="153235" title="Kishore Mahbubani" label="Mahbubani, Kishore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="153321" end="153343" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43135" start="154446" end="154456" title="Kevin Rudd" label="Kevin Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="154458" end="154485" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Prime Minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q464135" start="154818" end="154847" title="American Enterprise Institute" label="American Enterprise Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522520" start="154873" end="154891" title="Douglas E. Schoen" label="Schoen, Douglas E."/>
<link wikidata="Q463641" start="155001" end="155017" title="James Steinberg" label="Steinberg, James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350143" start="155171" end="155189" title="Robert Suettinger" label="Suettinger, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077309" start="155732" end="155748" title="Odd Arne Westad" label="Westad, Odd Arne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="155853" end="155868" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823132" start="156548" end="156583" title="Library of Congress Country Studies" label="Library of Congress Country Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15716472" start="156951" end="156969" title="Diplomatic History (journal)" label="Diplomatic History"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277882" wikidata="Q55018" url="?curid=277882" title="Royal Opera House">
<text>The Royal Opera House (ROH) is a theatre in Covent Garden, central London. The building is often referred to as simply Covent Garden, after a previous use of the site. The ROH is the main home of The Royal Opera, The Royal Ballet, and the Orchestra of the Royal Opera House (now known collectively as the Royal Ballet and Opera). 

The first theatre on the site, the Theatre Royal (1732), served primarily as a playhouse for the first hundred years of its history. In 1734, the first ballet was presented. A year later, the first season of operas, by George Frideric Handel, began. Many of his operas and oratorios were specifically written for Covent Garden and had their premieres there. The current building is the third theatre on the site, following disastrous fires in 1808 and 1856 to previous buildings. The façade, foyer, and auditorium date from 1858, but almost every other element of the present complex dates from an extensive reconstruction in the 1990s. The main auditorium seats 2,256 people, making it the third largest in London, and consists of four tiers of boxes and balconies and the amphitheatre gallery. The proscenium is wide, with the stage of the same depth and high. The main auditorium is a Grade I listed building.

The Royal Opera House companies were rebranded as the Royal Ballet and Opera in 2024, but the building retains the title of The Royal Opera House.
==History==
===Davenant patent===

The foundation of the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden lies in the letters patent awarded by Charles II to Sir William Davenant in 1662, allowing Davenant to operate one of only two patent theatre companies (&quot;The Duke&#x27;s Company&quot;) in London. The letters patent remained in the possession of the patentees&#x27; heirs until the 19th century. Their whereabouts were unknown for some time, but as of 2019 they are held in the Rosenbach Museum &amp; Library, Philadelphia.

===First theatre===

In 1728, John Rich, actor-manager of the Duke&#x27;s Company at Lincoln&#x27;s Inn Fields Theatre, commissioned &quot;The Beggar&#x27;s Opera&quot; from John Gay. The success of this venture provided him with the capital to build the Theatre Royal (designed by Edward Shepherd) at the site of an ancient convent garden. Inigo Jones had developed part of this property in the 1630s with a piazza and St Paul&#x27;s church (now known colloquially as the actors&#x27; church). In addition, a Royal Charter had created a fruit and vegetable market in the area, a market which survived in that location until 1974.

At the opening of the theatre on 7 December 1732, Rich was carried by his actors in procession into the building for its inaugural production of William Congreve&#x27;s &quot;The Way of the World&quot;.

During its first century, the theatre was operated primarily as a playhouse, with the Letters Patent granted by Charles II giving the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden and Theatre Royal, Drury Lane exclusive rights to present spoken drama in London. Despite the frequent interchangeability between the two companies, competition was intense, and the companies often presented the same plays at the same time. Rich introduced pantomime to the repertoire, performing himself, under the stage name &quot;John Lun&quot;, as Harlequin. A tradition of seasonal pantomime continued at the modern theatre until 1939.

In 1734, the theatre presented its first ballet, &quot;Pygmalion&quot;. Marie Sallé discarded tradition and her corset and danced in diaphanous robes. George Frideric Handel was named musical director of the company at Lincoln&#x27;s Inn Fields in 1719, but his first season of opera for the theatre was not presented until 1734. His first opera was &quot;Il pastor fido,&quot; followed by &quot;Ariodante&quot; (1735), and the première of &quot;Alcina&quot;, and &quot;Atalanta&quot; the following year. In 1743 there was a royal performance of &quot;Messiah&quot;; its success resulted in a tradition of Lenten oratorio performances. From 1735 until his death in 1759, Handel gave regular seasons at the theatre; many of his operas and oratorios were written for that venue or had their first London performances there. He bequeathed his organ to John Rich, and it was placed in a prominent position on the stage. It was among many valuable items lost in a fire that destroyed the theatre on 20 September 1808. In 1792 the architect Henry Holland rebuilt the auditorium; he expanded its capacity within the existing shell of the building.

===Second theatre===

Rebuilding began in December 1808, and the second Theatre Royal, Covent Garden (designed by Robert Smirke) opened on 18 September 1809 with a performance of &quot;Macbeth&quot; followed by a musical entertainment called &quot;The Quaker&quot;. The actor-manager John Philip Kemble, raised seat prices to help recoup the cost of rebuilding and the cost of an increased ground rent introduced by the landowner, the Duke of Bedford, but the move was so unpopular that audiences disrupted performances by beating sticks, hissing, booing and dancing. The &quot;Old Price Riots&quot; lasted over two months, and the management was finally forced to accede to the audience&#x27;s demands.

During this time, entertainments were varied; opera and ballet were presented, but not exclusively. Kemble engaged a variety of acts, including the child performer &quot;Master Betty&quot;; the great clown Joseph Grimaldi made his name at Covent Garden. Many famous actors of the day appeared at the theatre, including the tragediennes Sarah Siddons and Eliza O&#x27;Neill, the Shakespearean actors William Macready, Edmund Kean and his son Charles. On 25 March 1833 Edmund Kean collapsed on stage while playing Othello, and died two months later.

In 1806, the pantomime clown Joseph Grimaldi (&quot;The Garrick of Clowns&quot;) had performed his greatest success in &quot;Harlequin and Mother Goose; or the Golden Egg&quot; at Covent Garden, and this was subsequently revived, at the new theatre. Grimaldi was an innovator: his performance as &quot;Joey&quot; introduced the clown to the world, building on the existing role of Harlequin derived from the &quot;Commedia dell&#x27;arte&quot;. His father had been ballet-master at Drury Lane, and his physical comedy, his ability to invent visual tricks and buffoonery, and his ability to poke fun at the audience were extraordinary.

Early pantomimes were performed as mimes accompanied by music, but as Music hall became popular, Grimaldi introduced the pantomime dame to the theatre and was responsible for the tradition of audience singing. By 1821 dance and clowning had taken such a physical toll on Grimaldi that he could barely walk, and he retired from the theatre. By 1828, he was penniless; Drury Lane held a benefit concert for him after Covent Garden refused.

In 1817, bare flame gaslight had replaced the former candles and oil lamps that lighted the Covent Garden stage. This was an improvement, but in 1837 Macready employed limelight in the theatre for the first time, during a performance of a pantomime, &quot;Peeping Tom of Coventry&quot;. Limelight used a block of quicklime heated by an oxygen and hydrogen flame. This allowed the use of spotlights to highlight performers on the stage.

The Theatres Act 1843 broke the patent theatres&#x27; monopoly of drama. At that time Her Majesty&#x27;s Theatre in the Haymarket was the main centre of ballet and opera but after a dispute with the management in 1846 Michael Costa, conductor at Her Majesty&#x27;s, transferred his allegiance to Covent Garden, bringing most of the company with him. The auditorium was completely remodeled after an 1856 fire, during the following 1856–57 seasons, the company performed at the Lyceum Theatre. The theatre reopened as the Royal Italian Opera on 6 April 1857 with a performance of Rossini&#x27;s &quot;Semiramide&quot;.

In 1852, Louis Antoine Jullien the French eccentric composer of light music and conductor presented an opera of his own composition, &quot;Pietro il Grande&quot;. Five performances were given of the &#x27;spectacular&#x27;, including live horses on the stage and very loud music. Critics considered it a complete failure and Jullien was ruined and fled to America.

Costa and his successors presented all operas in Italian, even those originally written in French, German or English, until 1892, when Gustav Mahler presented the debut of Wagner&#x27;s Ring cycle at Covent Garden. The word &quot;Italian&quot; was then quietly dropped from the name of the opera house.

The conjuror John Henry Anderson, who had exposed the Davenport brothers, leased the theatre to stage his shows which were critical of mediums and spiritualism. After a gala performance and &quot;bal masqué&quot; organised by Anderson, the theatre caught fire in the early hours of 5 March 1856 and was destroyed.

===Third theatre===
Work on a third theatre, designed by Edward Middleton Barry, started in 1857, and the new building, which still remains as the nucleus of the present theatre, was built by Lucas Brothers and opened on 15 May 1858 with a performance of Meyerbeer&#x27;s &quot;Les Huguenots&quot;.

The Royal English Opera company under the management of Louisa Pyne and William Harrison, made their last performance at Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, on 11 December 1858 and took up residence at Covent Garden on 20 December 1858 with the premiere of Michael Balfe&#x27;s &quot;Satanella&quot; – the first opera to have its world premiere at the new theatre – and continued there until 1865.

The theatre became the Royal Opera House (ROH) in 1892, and the number of French and German works offered increased. Winter and summer seasons of opera and ballet were given, and the building was also used for pantomime, recitals and political meetings.

During the First World War, the theatre was requisitioned by the Ministry of Works for use as a furniture repository.

From 1934 to 1936, Geoffrey Toye was managing director, working alongside the artistic director Sir Thomas Beecham. Despite early successes, Toye and Beecham eventually fell out, and Toye resigned.

During the Second World War the ROH became a dance hall. There was a possibility that it would remain so after the war but, following lengthy negotiations, the music publishers Boosey &amp; Hawkes acquired the lease of the building. David Webster was appointed General Administrator, and Sadler&#x27;s Wells Ballet was invited to become the resident ballet company. The Covent Garden Opera Trust was created and laid out plans &quot;to establish Covent Garden as the national centre of opera and ballet, employing British artists in all departments, wherever that is consistent with the maintenance of the best possible standards ...&quot;

The Royal Opera House reopened on 20 February 1946 with a performance of &quot;The Sleeping Beauty&quot; in an extravagant new production designed by Oliver Messel. Webster, with his music director Karl Rankl, immediately began to build a resident company. In December 1946, they shared their first production, Purcell&#x27;s &quot;The Fairy-Queen&quot;, with the ballet company. On 14 January 1947, the Covent Garden Opera Company gave its first performance of Bizet&#x27;s &quot;Carmen&quot;.

Before the grand opening, the Royal Opera House presented one of the Robert Mayer Children&#x27;s concerts on Saturday, 9 February 1946.

===Opera at the Royal Opera House after 1945===
===Ballet at the Royal Opera House after 1945===
===Reconstruction from the 1980s forward===

Several renovations had taken place to parts of the house in the 1960s, including improvements to the amphitheatre but the theatre clearly needed a major overhaul. In 1975 the Labour government gave land adjacent to the Royal Opera House for a long-overdue modernisation, refurbishment, and extension. In the early 1980s the first part of a major renovation included an extension to the rear of the theatre on the James Street corner. The development added two new ballet studios, offices, a Chorus Rehearsal Room and the Opera Rehearsal room. Dressing rooms were also added.

By 1995, sufficient funds from the Arts Lottery through Arts Council England and private fundraising had been raised to enable the company to embark upon a major £213 million reconstruction of the building by Carillion, which took place between 1997 and 1999, under the chairmanship of Sir Angus Stirling. This involved the demolition of almost the whole site including several adjacent buildings to make room for a major increase in the size of the complex. The auditorium itself remained, but well over half of the complex is new.

The design team was led by Jeremy Dixon and Edward Jones of Dixon Jones BDP as architects. The acoustic designers were Rob Harris and Jeremy Newton of Arup Acoustics. The building engineer was Arup with Stanhope as developer.
The new building has the same traditional horseshoe-shaped auditorium as before, but with greatly improved technical, rehearsal, office, and educational facilities. Additionally, a new studio theatre, the Linbury, as well as more public space was created. The inclusion of the adjacent old Floral Hall, which had fallen into disrepair and was used as a scenery store before redevelopment, created a new and extensive public gathering place. The venue is now claimed by the ROH to be the most modern theatre facility in Europe.

Surtitles, projected onto a screen above the proscenium, have been used for all opera performances since they were introduced for school matinees in the 1983/4 season. Since the reopening of the theatre in 1999 an electronic libretto system provides translations onto small video screens for some seats, and additional monitors and screens are to be introduced to other parts of the house.

In 2014 design work, known as the Open Up Project, began with the aim of opening the theatre&#x27;s building to the public during the day, as well as improving the entrances, lobby areas and the Linbury Theatre. As part of the Open Up Project, IQ Projects were tasked with the renovation of the upper floor bar area and restaurant utilising various elements of bespoke glazing.

In October 2020, the BBC reported that the Royal Opera House had lost 60% of its income as a result of restrictions implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. As a consequence, the 1971 &quot;Portrait of Sir David Webster&quot; by David Hockney, which had hung in the opera house for several decades, was put up for auction at Christie&#x27;s. It eventually sold for £12.8 million. The funds raised from the sale were needed to ensure the survival of the institution. &quot;Significant redundancies&quot; and an appeal for public donations were also made. In addition, the opera house applied for a loan to the Culture Recovery Fund.

In 2023 members of the orchestra were selected to play at the coronation of Charles III and Camilla.

In 2024, the public branding of the venue and its associated online and media presence was changed from the Royal Opera House to Royal Ballet and Opera to reflect the combined companies that call the physical building their home. The physical building itself remains the Royal Opera House whilst the branding and business operations change their title to reflect this adjustment.

==Facilities==
===Paul Hamlyn Hall===
The Paul Hamlyn Hall is a large iron and glass structure adjacent to, and with direct access to, the main opera house building. The hall now acts as the atrium and main public area of the opera house, with a champagne bar, restaurant and other hospitality services, and also providing access to the main auditorium at all levels.

The building was formerly known as Floral Hall. It was originally built by the Opera House to house a flower market (also selling fruits and vegetables), hence the name. It was designed by Edward Middleton Barry and opened in 1860. After being used as a concert hall, it became part of the Covent Garden Market in 1887. A fire broke out in the building in 1956, after which it sat derelict. It was acquired by the Opera House in 1977 and used as storage space.

The redevelopment of the Floral Hall as part of the 1990s redevelopment project involved lifting up the cast iron structure to accommodate new public areas for the opera house underneath. The southern side of the hall now connected with another building, so the cast iron south portico was dismantled and rebuilt in Borough Market, where it is separately Grade II heritage listed.

The redevelopment had gone ahead on the strength of a pledge of £10m from the philanthropist Alberto Vilar and for a number of years, it was known as the Vilar Floral Hall; however Vilar failed to make good his pledge. As a result, the name was changed in September 2005 to the Paul Hamlyn Hall, after the opera house received a donation of £10m from the estate of Paul Hamlyn, towards its education and development programmes.

As well as acting as a main public area for performances in the main auditorium, the Paul Hamlyn Hall is also used for hosting a number of events, including private functions, dances, exhibitions, concerts, and workshops.

===Linbury Studio Theatre===
The Linbury Studio Theatre is a flexible, secondary performance space, constructed below ground level within the Royal Opera House. It has retractable raked seating and a floor which can be raised or lowered to form a studio floor, a raised stage, or a stage with orchestra pit. The theatre can accommodate up to 400 patrons and host a variety of different events. It has been used for private functions, traditional theatre shows, and concerts, as well as community and educational events, product launches, dinners and exhibitions, etc., and is one of the most technologically advanced performance venues in London with its own public areas, including a bar and cloakroom.
The Linbury is most notable for hosting performances of experimental and independent dance and music, by independent companies and as part of the ROH2, the contemporary producing arm of the Royal Opera House. The Linbury Studio Theatre regularly stages performances by the Royal Ballet School and also hosts the Young British Dancer of the Year competition.

The venue was constructed as part of the 90s redevelopment of the Royal Opera House. It is named in recognition of donations made by the Linbury Trust towards the redevelopment. The Trust is operated by Lord Sainsbury of Preston Candover and his wife Anya Linden, a former dancer with the Royal Ballet. The name Linbury is derived from the names Linden and Sainsbury. It was opened in 1999 with a collaboration from three Croydon secondary schools (including Coloma Convent Girls&#x27; School and Edenham High School) in an original performance called &quot;About Face&quot;.

===Royal Opera House, Manchester===
In 2008 the Royal Opera House and Manchester City Council began planning stages a new development known as Royal Opera House, Manchester. The proposal would have seen the Palace Theatre in Manchester refurbished, to create a theatre capable of staging productions by both the Royal Ballet and the Royal Opera. It was intended that the Royal Opera House would take residence of the theatre for an annual 18-week season, staging 16 performances by the Royal Opera, 28 performances by the Royal Ballet and other small-scale productions. A year later The Lowry sent an open letter to the then Secretary of State for Culture, Olympics, Media and Sport, Ben Bradshaw, Arts Council England, Manchester City Council and the ROH, calling for the scheme, in its current form, to be scrapped. In 2010 it was announced that the project was being shelved as part of larger arts-funding cuts.

===High House Production Park (High House, Purfleet)===

The Royal Opera House opened a scenery-making facility for their operas and ballets at High House, Purfleet, Essex, on 6 December 2010. The building was designed by Nicholas Hare Architects. The East of England Development Agency, which partly funded developments on the park, notes that &quot;the first phase includes the Royal Opera House&#x27;s Bob and Tamar Manoukian Production Workshop and Community areas&quot;.

The Bob and Tamar Manoukian Costume Centre, also designed by Nicholas Hare Associates, opened in September 2015, and provides a costume-making facility for the Royal Opera House and a training centre for students of costume-making from South Essex College. The building also houses the Royal Opera House&#x27;s collection of historically important costumes.

Other elements at High House, Purfleet, include The Backstage Centre, a new technical theatre and music training centre which is currently run by the National College for Creative Industries and was formally opened by Creative &amp; Cultural Skills in March 2013, alongside renovated farm buildings. Acme studios opened a complex of 43 artist studios in Summer 2013.

==Other uses==
In addition to opera and ballet performances, the Royal Opera House has hosted a number of other events including:
* British Academy Film Awards – 2008 to 2016
* Laurence Olivier Awards – 2012 to 2016

== See also ==
* Owners, lessees and managers of the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden
* European Route of Historic Theatres

==References==
===Notes===
===Cited sources===
* 
* 

===Further reading===
* Beauvert, Thierry, &quot;Opera Houses of the World&quot;, The Vendome Press, New York, 1995.
* Donaldson, Frances, &quot;The Royal Opera House in the Twentieth Century&quot;, Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, London, 1988.
* Earl, John and Sell, Michael &quot;Guide to British Theatres 1750–1950&quot;, pp. 136–8 (Theatres Trust, 2000) .
* Haltrecht, Montague, &quot;The Quiet Showman: Sir David Webster and the Royal Opera House&quot;, Collins, London, 1975.
* Isaacs, Jeremy, &quot;Never Mind the Moon&quot;, Bantam Press, 1999.
* Lebrecht, Norman, &quot;Covent Garden: The Untold Story: Dispatches from the English Culture War, 1945–2000&quot;, Northeastern University Press, 2001.
* Lord Drogheda, et al., &quot;The Covent Garden Album&quot;, Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, London, 1981.
* Mosse, Kate, &quot;The House: Inside the Royal Opera House Covent Garden&quot;, BBC Books, London, 1995.
* Robinson, Terry F. National Theatre in Transition: The London Patent Theatre Fires of 1808–1809 and the Old Price Riots. &quot;BRANCH: Britain, Representation, and Nineteenth-Century History.&quot; Web. 29 March 2016.
* Tooley, John, &quot;In House: Covent Garden, Fifty Years of Opera and Ballet&quot;, Faber and Faber, London, 1999.
* Thubron, Colin (text) and Boursnell, Clive (photos), &quot;The Royal Opera House Covent Garden&quot;, Hamish Hamilton, London, 1982.

==External links==
* Royal Opera House Collections Online (Archive Collections Catalogue and Performance Database)
* Royal Opera House elevation
* Select Committee on Culture, Media and Sport&#x27;s 1998 Report on funding and management issues at the Royal Opera House
* Theatre History Articles, Images, and Archive Material</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55018" start="4" end="21" title="Royal Opera House" label="Royal Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q55018" start="23" end="26" title="Royal Opera House" label="ROH"/>
<link wikidata="Q55019" start="44" end="57" title="Covent Garden" label="Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354215" start="59" end="73" title="central London" label="central London"/>
<link wikidata="Q55018" start="119" end="132" title="Royal Opera House" label="Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4266459" start="196" end="211" title="The Royal Opera" label="The Royal Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="213" end="229" title="The Royal Ballet" label="The Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q55018" start="367" end="380" title="Royal Opera House" label="Theatre Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="551" end="573" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q85477" start="605" end="613" title="oratorio" label="oratorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q183061" start="816" end="822" title="façade" label="façade"/>
<link wikidata="Q31948" start="824" end="829" title="foyer" label="foyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q230752" start="835" end="845" title="auditorium" label="auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868004" start="1078" end="1081" title="box (theatre)" label="box"/>
<link wikidata="Q170552" start="1088" end="1097" title="balcony" label="balconies"/>
<link wikidata="Q54831" start="1106" end="1118" title="amphitheatre" label="amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q385348" start="1132" end="1142" title="proscenium" label="proscenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1228" end="1243" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="1491" end="1505" title="letters patent" label="letters patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="1517" end="1527" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q450199" start="1535" end="1551" title="William Davenant" label="William Davenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q381395" start="1606" end="1620" title="patent theatre" label="patent theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041073" start="1642" end="1661" title="Duke&amp;#x27;s Company" label="Duke&amp;#x27;s Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135243" start="1861" end="1891" title="Rosenbach Museum &amp;amp; Library" label="Rosenbach Museum &amp;amp; Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1893" end="1905" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923560" start="1938" end="1947" title="John Rich (producer)" label="John Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q13142759" start="1993" end="2026" title="Lisle&amp;#x27;s Tennis Court" label="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn Fields Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472110" start="2047" end="2070" title="The Beggar&amp;#x27;s Opera" label="The Beggar&amp;#x27;s Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q321660" start="2082" end="2090" title="John Gay" label="John Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048670" start="2190" end="2205" title="Edward Shepherd" label="Edward Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q295929" start="2249" end="2260" title="Inigo Jones" label="Inigo Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q385521" start="2328" end="2349" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s, Covent Garden" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338925" start="2527" end="2537" title="New Covent Garden Market" label="until 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q366805" start="2685" end="2701" title="William Congreve" label="William Congreve"/>
<link wikidata="Q723947" start="2715" end="2735" title="The Way of the World" label="The Way of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756626" start="2911" end="2936" title="Theatre Royal, Drury Lane" label="Theatre Royal, Drury Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="3164" end="3173" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q17298" start="3259" end="3268" title="Harlequin" label="Harlequin"/>
<link wikidata="Q433519" start="3421" end="3432" title="Marie Sallé" label="Marie Sallé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="3500" end="3522" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736153" start="3568" end="3593" title="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn Fields" label="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q477990" start="3705" end="3719" title="Il pastor fido" label="Il pastor fido"/>
<link wikidata="Q662514" start="3745" end="3754" title="Ariodante" label="Ariodante"/>
<link wikidata="Q275627" start="3795" end="3801" title="Alcina" label="Alcina"/>
<link wikidata="Q381411" start="3819" end="3827" title="Atalanta (opera)" label="Atalanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q207732" start="3901" end="3908" title="Messiah (Handel)" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="3955" end="3959" title="Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3962" end="3970" title="Oratorio#Georgian_Britain" label="oratorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q179638" start="4384" end="4397" title="Henry Holland (architect)" label="Henry Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q983719" start="4605" end="4618" title="Robert Smirke (architect)" label="Robert Smirke"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283" start="4676" end="4683" title="Macbeth" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701422" start="4775" end="4793" title="John Philip Kemble" label="John Philip Kemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084782" start="5069" end="5084" title="Old Price Riots" label="Old Price Riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784981" start="5366" end="5378" title="Master Betty" label="Master Betty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358" start="5396" end="5401" title="clown" label="clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q375106" start="5402" end="5417" title="Joseph Grimaldi" label="Joseph Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q234746" start="5532" end="5545" title="Sarah Siddons" label="Sarah Siddons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331123" start="5550" end="5568" title="Elizabeth O&amp;#x27;Neill (actress)" label="Eliza O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q637374" start="5595" end="5611" title="William Macready" label="William Macready"/>
<link wikidata="Q704385" start="5613" end="5624" title="Edmund Kean" label="Edmund Kean"/>
<link wikidata="Q725355" start="5637" end="5644" title="Charles Kean" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q26833" start="5708" end="5715" title="Othello" label="Othello"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="5758" end="5767" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q142305" start="5870" end="5915" title="Mother Goose" label="Harlequin and Mother Goose; or the Golden Egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q17298" start="6126" end="6135" title="Harlequin" label="Harlequin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191890" start="6159" end="6182" title="Commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte" label="Commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte"/>
<link wikidata="Q148442" start="6293" end="6299" title="Magic (illusion)" label="tricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q215548" start="6304" end="6311" title="buffoon" label="buffoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q674067" start="6416" end="6420" title="mime" label="mime"/>
<link wikidata="Q940462" start="6451" end="6461" title="Music hall" label="Music hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131885" start="6502" end="6516" title="pantomime dame" label="pantomime dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q555987" start="6988" end="6997" title="limelight" label="limelight"/>
<link wikidata="Q185006" start="7133" end="7142" title="quicklime" label="quicklime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777548" start="7261" end="7278" title="Theatres Act 1843" label="Theatres Act 1843"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155331" start="7343" end="7369" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Theatre" label="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931081" start="7475" end="7488" title="Michael Costa (conductor)" label="Michael Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661445" start="7734" end="7748" title="Lyceum Theatre, London" label="Lyceum Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9726" start="7836" end="7843" title="Gioacchino Rossini" label="Rossini"/>
<link wikidata="Q900744" start="7857" end="7867" title="Semiramide" label="Semiramide"/>
<link wikidata="Q660539" start="7885" end="7906" title="Louis Antoine Jullien" label="Louis Antoine Jullien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="8377" end="8390" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q190237" start="8428" end="8438" title="Ring cycle" label="Ring cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809328" start="8559" end="8578" title="John Henry Anderson" label="John Henry Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q478846" start="8600" end="8618" title="Davenport brothers" label="Davenport brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q583271" start="8681" end="8688" title="mediumship" label="mediums"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578143" start="8693" end="8705" title="Spiritualism (beliefs)" label="spiritualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641292" start="8742" end="8752" title="masked ball" label="bal masqué"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048610" start="8918" end="8940" title="Edward Middleton Barry" label="Edward Middleton Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696097" start="9053" end="9067" title="Lucas Brothers (company)" label="Lucas Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q105237" start="9116" end="9132" title="Giacomo Meyerbeer" label="Meyerbeer&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q466848" start="9139" end="9152" title="Les Huguenots" label="Les Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688551" start="9217" end="9228" title="Louisa Pyne" label="Louisa Pyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q18672785" start="9233" end="9249" title="William Harrison (singer)" label="William Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756626" start="9282" end="9307" title="Theatre Royal, Drury Lane" label="Theatre Royal, Drury Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q434171" start="9409" end="9422" title="Michael Balfe" label="Michael Balfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599071" start="9436" end="9445" title="Satanella (Balfe)" label="Satanella"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9817" end="9832" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534939" start="9944" end="9957" title="Geoffrey Toye" label="Geoffrey Toye"/>
<link wikidata="Q313714" start="10021" end="10039" title="Thomas Beecham" label="Sir Thomas Beecham"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10135" end="10151" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q834648" start="10301" end="10320" title="Boosey &amp;amp; Hawkes" label="Boosey &amp;amp; Hawkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240901" start="10357" end="10370" title="David Webster (opera manager)" label="David Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="10412" end="10438" title="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells Ballet" label="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q838051" start="10844" end="10863" title="The Sleeping Beauty (ballet)" label="The Sleeping Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161581" start="10915" end="10928" title="Oliver Messel" label="Oliver Messel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920145" start="10963" end="10973" title="Karl Rankl" label="Karl Rankl"/>
<link wikidata="Q9695" start="11076" end="11083" title="Henry Purcell" label="Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743188" start="11097" end="11112" title="The Fairy-Queen" label="The Fairy-Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q56158" start="11227" end="11232" title="Bizet" label="Bizet"/>
<link wikidata="Q185968" start="11246" end="11252" title="Carmen" label="Carmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400795" start="12174" end="12194" title="Arts Council England" label="Arts Council England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039561" start="12327" end="12336" title="Carillion" label="Carillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764253" start="12404" end="12422" title="Angus Stirling" label="Sir Angus Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343818" start="12696" end="12708" title="Edward Jones (English architect)" label="Edward Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927772" start="12724" end="12727" title="Building Design Partnership" label="BDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q716737" start="12845" end="12849" title="Arup Group Limited" label="Arup"/>
<link wikidata="Q334058" start="13406" end="13414" title="Surtitle" label="Surtitle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358381" start="13620" end="13639" title="electronic libretto" label="electronic libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="14197" end="14200" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="14323" end="14340" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104861229" start="14375" end="14404" title="Portrait of Sir David Webster" label="Portrait of Sir David Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q159907" start="14414" end="14427" title="David Hockney" label="David Hockney"/>
<link wikidata="Q503176" start="14510" end="14525" title="Christie&amp;#x27;s" label="Christie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462531" start="14669" end="14681" title="Layoff" label="redundancies"/>
<link wikidata="Q104763512" start="14794" end="14815" title="Culture Recovery Fund" label="Culture Recovery Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q113857620" start="14880" end="14917" title="coronation of Charles III and Camilla" label="coronation of Charles III and Camilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048610" start="15859" end="15881" title="Edward Middleton Barry" label="Edward Middleton Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q894072" start="16448" end="16462" title="Borough Market" label="Borough Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749910" start="16607" end="16620" title="Alberto Vilar" label="Alberto Vilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10567458" start="16879" end="16890" title="Paul Hamlyn" label="Paul Hamlyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455391" start="18143" end="18162" title="Royal Ballet School" label="Royal Ballet School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057989" start="18182" end="18214" title="Young British Dancer of the Year" label="Young British Dancer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701670" start="18432" end="18466" title="Lord Sainsbury of Preston Candover" label="Lord Sainsbury of Preston Candover"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778203" start="18480" end="18491" title="Anya Linden" label="Anya Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="18651" end="18658" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147864" start="18688" end="18721" title="Coloma Convent Girls&amp;#x27; School" label="Coloma Convent Girls&amp;#x27; School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16890848" start="18726" end="18745" title="Edenham High School" label="Edenham High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302252" start="18876" end="18899" title="Manchester City Council" label="Manchester City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360751" start="19013" end="19027" title="Palace Theatre, Manchester" label="Palace Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="19118" end="19130" title="The Royal Ballet" label="Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521692" start="19389" end="19398" title="The Lowry" label="The Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297079" start="19431" end="19488" title="Secretary of State for Culture, Olympics, Media and Sport" label="Secretary of State for Culture, Olympics, Media and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q264618" start="19490" end="19502" title="Ben Bradshaw" label="Ben Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755698" start="19866" end="19886" title="High House, Purfleet" label="High House, Purfleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567197" start="20435" end="20454" title="South Essex College" label="South Essex College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183482" start="20776" end="20806" title="Creative &amp;amp; Cultural Skills" label="Creative &amp;amp; Cultural Skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="21058" end="21085" title="British Academy Film Awards" label="British Academy Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q28470" start="21103" end="21125" title="Laurence Olivier Award" label="Laurence Olivier Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q30512319" start="21160" end="21228" title="Owners, lessees and managers of the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden" label="Owners, lessees and managers of the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376017" start="21231" end="21266" title="European Route of Historic Theatres" label="European Route of Historic Theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110410" start="21801" end="21815" title="Jeremy Isaacs" label="Isaacs, Jeremy"/>
<link wikidata="Q719046" start="21872" end="21888" title="Norman Lebrecht" label="Lebrecht, Norman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277886" wikidata="Q4889212" url="?curid=277886" title="Benjamin Schumacher">
<text>Benjamin &quot;Ben&quot; Schumacher is an American theoretical physicist, working mostly in the field of quantum information theory.

He discovered a way of interpreting quantum states as information. He came up with a way of compressing the information in a state, and storing the information in a smaller number of states. This is now known as Schumacher compression. This was the quantum analog of Shannon&#x27;s noiseless coding theorem, and it helped to start the field known as quantum information theory.

Schumacher is also credited with inventing the term qubit along with William Wootters of Williams College, which is to quantum computation as a bit is to traditional computation.

He is the author of &quot;Physics in Spacetime&quot;, a textbook on Special Relativity, and &quot;Quantum Processes, Systems, and Information&quot; (with Michael Westmoreland), a textbook on Quantum Mechanics. Schumacher is a professor of physics at Kenyon College, a liberal arts college in rural Ohio. He is the lecturer in four courses produced by the Teaching Company: &quot;Black Holes, Tides, and Curved Spacetime: Understanding Gravity; Quantum Mechanics: The Physics of the Microscopic World; Impossible: Physics Beyond the Edge;&quot; and &quot;The Science of Information: From Language to Black Holes&quot;.

Schumacher earned his bachelor&#x27;s degree at Hendrix College, where he met his wife, mathematician Carol Schumacher. His Ph.D. is from the University of Texas at Austin, where his advisers were Richard Matzner and John Archibald Wheeler.

==Influential research papers==

==See also==
*Classical capacity

==References==
==External links==
*Zeroth Order Approximation - Blog by Benjamin Schumacher
*Benjamin Schumacher Homepage
*Quantum Mechanics: The Physics of the Microscopic World
*The Physics of Impossible Things, Speaker: Ben Schumacher, 03/12/2008, PIRSA - Perimeter Institute Recorded Seminar Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4889212" start="0" end="8" title="Benjamin Schumacher" label="Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889212" start="15" end="18" title="Benjamin Schumacher" label="Ben"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889212" start="25" end="35" title="Benjamin Schumacher" label="Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="51" end="72" title="theoretical physicist" label="theoretical physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122243" start="105" end="131" title="quantum information theory" label="quantum information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q46344" start="170" end="177" title="quantum" label="quantum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131222" start="188" end="199" title="information theory" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="346" end="368" title="Schumacher compression" label="Schumacher compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="401" end="408" title="Claude E. Shannon" label="Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122243" start="484" end="510" title="quantum information theory" label="quantum information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q378201" start="565" end="570" title="qubit" label="qubit"/>
<link wikidata="Q512756" start="582" end="598" title="William Wootters" label="William Wootters"/>
<link wikidata="Q49166" start="602" end="618" title="Williams College" label="Williams College"/>
<link wikidata="Q17995793" start="632" end="651" title="quantum computation" label="quantum computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="657" end="660" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="761" end="779" title="Special Relativity" label="Special Relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="884" end="901" title="Quantum mechanics" label="Quantum Mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797768" start="943" end="957" title="Kenyon College" label="Kenyon College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602038" start="1048" end="1064" title="The Great Courses" label="Teaching Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605137" start="1360" end="1375" title="Hendrix College" label="Hendrix College"/>
<link wikidata="Q102182877" start="1414" end="1430" title="Carol Schumacher" label="Carol Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="1454" end="1483" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q91106184" start="1509" end="1524" title="Richard Matzner" label="Richard Matzner"/>
<link wikidata="Q202631" start="1529" end="1551" title="John Archibald Wheeler" label="John Archibald Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128319" start="1601" end="1619" title="Classical capacity" label="Classical capacity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277888" wikidata="Q364245" url="?curid=277888" title="Gundobad">
<text>Gundobad (; ; 452 – 516 AD) was King of the Burgundians (473–516), succeeding his father Gundioc of Burgundy. Previous to this, he had been a patrician of the moribund Western Roman Empire in 472–473, three years before its collapse, succeeding his uncle Ricimer. He is perhaps best known today as the probable issuer of the &quot;Lex Burgundionum&quot; legal codes, which synthesized Roman law with ancient Germanic customs. He was the husband of Caretene.

== Early life ==
Gundobad seized the title of Patrician when his uncle Ricimer, who had been the power behind the throne for the Western Empire, died on 18 August 472. According to John of Antioch, Gundobad had previously executed the deposed emperor Anthemius on his uncle&#x27;s orders.

Once in power, Gundobad elevated the current Count of the Domestics, Glycerius, to the position of Western Roman Emperor. However, not long after this Gundobad left for Burgundy where his father, Gundioc, had died; the exact date is unclear, with authorities stating it was in either 473 or 474. Once in Burgundy, his three brothers presumably challenged his rule: Godegisel, Chilperic II and Gundomar. Ian Wood speculates that Gundobad&#x27;s departure may have been connected with the arrival of a new emperor, Julius Nepos, who had the support of the Roman Emperor in Constantinople. Once Julius Nepos landed in Portus (June 474), he deposed Glycerius, whom he made Bishop of Salona.

== Reign ==
The events of the first decades of Gundobad&#x27;s reign are not well known. The only available source that covers this part of his reign is Gregory of Tours, who wrote almost a century later. According to Gregory, Gundobad set about ridding himself of his brothers. First slain was Gundomar, though little is known of this encounter.

Next killed was Chilperic. According to Gregory, Gundobad had his wife drowned by tying a stone round her neck and Chilperic&#x27;s two daughters driven into exile. The older daughter, Chroma, became a nun. The other, Clotilde, had been seen by envoys of Clovis I, King of the Franks, who told their master of her beauty and intelligence. Clovis then asked Gundobad for Clotilde&#x27;s hand in marriage. Gundobad was said to have been afraid to deny him.

However, a letter written by Avitus, bishop of Vienne, consoling Gundobad on the death of a daughter whose name is not mentioned, gives details that suggest there was more to the story. According to the explication of Danuta Shanzer and Ian Wood of Avitus&#x27; notoriously difficult Latin, the bishop writes, &quot;In the past, with ineffable tender-heartedness, you mourned the deaths of your brothers.&quot; Further, Avitus alludes to Gundobad&#x27;s intent to marry his deceased daughter to a foreign ruler, who, they suggest, was Clovis: &quot;Indeed,&quot; they write, &quot;Clovis is really the only likely candidate as a prospective son-in-law for Gundobad shortly after 501.&quot; If their reading is correct, then it is likely that Clotilde was offered to Clovis as an act of diplomacy, not subservience.

At this point occurs the earliest firm date in Gundobad&#x27;s reign: in the early months of 490, while Odoacer and Theodoric the Great were locked in battle over control of Pavia, the Burgundians seized the opportunity to invade northwestern Italy. They devastated Liguria, and carried away an unknown number of victims into captivity, if not slavery. Once Theodoric had killed Odoacer and was securely in control of Italy, he sent bishop Epiphanius of Pavia on a mission to ransom as many of these captives as possible. Accompanied by Bishop Victor of Turin, they crossed the Alps in March. Shanzer and Wood believe Epiphanius was possibly also entrusted with a mission in connection with the marriage of Gundobad&#x27;s son Sigismund to Theodoric&#x27;s daughter Ostrogotho. In his account of this visit, Magnus Felix Ennodius, who accompanied Epiphanius on this journey, describes Godegisel as &quot;germanus regis&quot;, the &quot;king&#x27;s brother&quot;, and not king—again contradicting Gregory of Tours&#x27; later account. Ennodius notes that &quot;more than six thousand souls&quot; were so ransomed; from Lyons alone 400 men were thus freed.

Gregory of Tours states the battle with Gundobad&#x27;s third brother, Godegisel, raged long. Unaware of the other&#x27;s actions, each called upon Clovis trying to persuade him to join forces against the other. Clovis sided with Godegisel, who had offered him his pleasure of tribute; Wood observes that Clovis&#x27; wife, Clotilde, whose father had been killed by Gundobad, &quot;was not likely to encourage good relations between the Franks and the Burgundians.&quot; Together they crushed Gundobad&#x27;s force. Gundobad fled but King Clovis pursued him to Avignon. Gundobad feared the worst with Clovis&#x27;s army at the gates. But Aridius went from Gundobad to Clovis and convinced him to spare Gundobad in return for a yearly tribute. The chronicler Marius of Avenches dates this conflict to 500.

Gundobad later broke his promise of tribute as he regained his power and besieged Godegisel, trapped in the city of Vienne. As famine devoured Vienne, Godegisel expelled the common people from the city for fear of his own survival. An outraged expelled artisan seeking vengeance on Godegisel went to Gundobad, and with his help he navigated the aqueduct and broke into the city. Gundobad murdered Godegisel in 501 in an Arian church along with the bishop.

The next event about which information has survived is Gundobad&#x27;s role concerning the Battle of Vouillé. He was one of several rulers to whom king Theoderic sent letters urging peace, and asking for mediation between Alaric II and Clovis. Despite Theoderic&#x27;s best efforts, the two kings met at Vouillé, and Alaric was slain; according to Isidore of Seville, Gundobad supported Clovis in this battle. Isidore also provides a hint that Gundobad exploited the Visigothic defeat by plundering Narbonne. Delayed by the threat of the Byzantine navy, which had been hovering off the Italian shore around the time of the battle, the Ostrogothic army arrived to relieve the Burgundian siege of Arles. According to Herwig Wolfram, the Burgundians were &quot;the real victims of the Ostrogothic counteroffensive&quot; following the defeat of their cousins at Vouillé. &quot;Not only had they lost all their conquered territories and hope of acquiring Arles and Avignon but all their territory as far as Orange had been devastated.&quot;

Following the death of King Clovis of the Franks in 511, the Burgundians became the most prestigious people in Gaul. Gundobad was favored by the court of Constantinople, which awarded him the title of &quot;magister militum&quot;.

Gundobad died peacefully, succeeded by his son Sigismund in 516. He also had another son, Godomar, who would succeed his brother after his execution in 524.

== Learning ==
In some of the manuscripts of the &quot;Lex Burgundionum&quot;, Gundobad is stated to have published this code of law on 29 March of the second year of his reign (474 or 475). However, there are a number of inconsistencies in this ascription, and L. R. deSalis proposed a restored version of this passage which does not include a date—which would better fit the reign of his son, Sigismund. Although she accepts the strong likelihood that the &quot;Lex Burgundionum&quot; as we have it was the product of Sigismund&#x27;s reign, Katherine Fisher Drew still argues that a core of this law code is the product of Gundobad or his chancellery.

The letters of bishop Avitus and Cassiodorus provide glimpses of Gundobad&#x27;s intellectual side. Avitus, a Nicene bishop, answers questions posed by an Arian Christian about religion in several letters, showing a great religious tolerance, and this may be the reason Gregory of Tours later thought he had secretly converted to Nicene Christianity. Cassiodorus&#x27; &quot;Variae&quot; includes a group of letters which discuss obtaining and sending a time piece to Gundobad as a diplomatic present.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q364245" start="0" end="8" title="Gundobad" label="Gundobad"/>
<link wikidata="Q889901" start="32" end="36" title="King of Burgundy" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q150412" start="44" end="55" title="Burgundians" label="Burgundians"/>
<link wikidata="Q437712" start="89" end="96" title="Gundioc" label="Gundioc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="100" end="108" title="Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="142" end="151" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="168" end="188" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q309845" start="255" end="262" title="Ricimer" label="Ricimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188350" start="331" end="347" title="Lex Burgundionum" label="Lex Burgundionum"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="385" end="394" title="Roman law" label="Roman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q23059615" start="448" end="456" title="Caretene" label="Caretene"/>
<link wikidata="Q309845" start="530" end="537" title="Ricimer" label="Ricimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698725" start="640" end="655" title="John of Antioch (historian)" label="John of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q211772" start="710" end="719" title="Anthemius" label="Anthemius"/>
<link wikidata="Q202543" start="818" end="827" title="Glycerius" label="Glycerius"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="848" end="869" title="Western Roman Emperor" label="Western Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q918807" start="1114" end="1123" title="Godegisel" label="Godegisel"/>
<link wikidata="Q454358" start="1125" end="1137" title="Chilperic II of Burgundy" label="Chilperic II"/>
<link wikidata="Q103860" start="1262" end="1274" title="Julius Nepos" label="Julius Nepos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037271" start="1364" end="1370" title="Portus" label="Portus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365624" start="1418" end="1434" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Split-Makarska" label="Bishop of Salona"/>
<link wikidata="Q67841" start="1590" end="1606" title="Gregory of Tours" label="Gregory of Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q232365" start="2003" end="2011" title="Clotilde" label="Clotilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q82339" start="2040" end="2048" title="Clovis I" label="Clovis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="2062" end="2068" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q225201" start="2270" end="2276" title="Avitus of Vienne" label="Avitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26849" start="2288" end="2294" title="Vienne, Isère" label="Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q103333" start="3161" end="3168" title="Odoacer" label="Odoacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="3173" end="3192" title="Theodoric the Great" label="Theodoric the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="3231" end="3236" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="3323" end="3330" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q655381" start="3497" end="3516" title="Epiphanius of Pavia" label="Epiphanius of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q318347" start="3784" end="3793" title="Sigismund of Burgundy" label="Sigismund"/>
<link wikidata="Q12289430" start="3823" end="3833" title="Ostrogotho" label="Ostrogotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q465322" start="3865" end="3886" title="Magnus Felix Ennodius" label="Magnus Felix Ennodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="4175" end="4179" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="4774" end="4781" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q689903" start="4971" end="4989" title="Marius of Avenches" label="Marius of Avenches"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="5439" end="5444" title="Arianism" label="Arian"/>
<link wikidata="Q851504" start="5567" end="5584" title="Battle of Vouillé" label="Battle of Vouillé"/>
<link wikidata="Q110884" start="5698" end="5707" title="Alaric II" label="Alaric II"/>
<link wikidata="Q166876" start="5824" end="5842" title="Isidore of Seville" label="Isidore of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555" start="5975" end="5983" title="Narbonne" label="Narbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018759" start="6014" end="6028" title="Byzantine navy" label="Byzantine navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48292" start="6171" end="6176" title="Arles" label="Arles"/>
<link wikidata="Q187796" start="6478" end="6484" title="Orange, Vaucluse" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q209122" start="6720" end="6736" title="magister militum" label="magister militum"/>
<link wikidata="Q318347" start="6792" end="6801" title="Sigismund of Burgundy" label="Sigismund"/>
<link wikidata="Q886997" start="6835" end="6842" title="Godomar" label="Godomar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188350" start="6958" end="6974" title="Lex Burgundionum" label="Lex Burgundionum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="7574" end="7580" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q192365" start="7592" end="7603" title="Cassiodorus" label="Cassiodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="7714" end="7729" title="Arianism" label="Arian Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086472" start="7781" end="7800" title="religious toleration" label="religious tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965829" start="7889" end="7908" title="Nicene Christianity" label="Nicene Christianity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277892" wikidata="Q182760" url="?curid=277892" title="Feta">
<text>Feta (, ) is a Greek brined white cheese made from sheep milk or from a mixture of sheep and goat milk. It is soft, with small or no holes, and no skin. Crumbly with a slightly grainy texture, it is formed into large blocks and aged in brine. Its flavor is tangy and salty, ranging from mild to sharp. Feta is used in salads, such as Greek salad, and in pastries, notably the phyllo-based Greek dishes &quot;spanakopita&quot; &quot;spinach pie&quot; and &quot;tyropita&quot; &quot;cheese pie&quot;. It is often served with olive oil or olives, and sprinkled with aromatic herbs such as oregano. It can also be served cooked (often grilled), as part of a sandwich, in omelettes, and many other dishes.

Since 2002, feta has been a protected designation of origin in the European Union (EU). EU legislation and similar legislation in 25 other countries limits the name &quot;feta&quot; to cheeses produced in the traditional way in mainland Greece and Lesbos Prefecture, which are made from sheep milk, or from a mixture of sheep milk and up to 30% of goat milk from the same area.

Similar white brined cheeses are made traditionally in the Balkans, around the Black Sea, in West Asia, and more recently elsewhere. Outside the EU, the name &quot;feta&quot; is often used generically for these cheeses.

==Generic term and production outside Greece==
For many consumers, the word &quot;feta&quot; is a generic term for a white, crumbly cheese aged in brine. Production of the cheese first began in the Eastern Mediterranean and around the Black Sea. Over time, production expanded to countries including Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, the United Kingdom and the United States, often partly or wholly of cow milk, and is (or was) sometimes also called &quot;feta&quot;. In the United States, most cheese sold under the name &quot;feta&quot; is American and made from cow milk.

==Geographical Indication==
Since 2002, feta has been a Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) product within the European Union. According to the relevant EU legislation (applicable within the EU and Northern Ireland), as well as similar UK legislation only those cheeses produced in a traditional way in particular areas of Greece, which are made from sheep milk, or from a mixture of sheep milk and up to 30% of goat milk from the same area, can be called feta. Also in several other countries the term feta has since been protected. An overview is shown in the table below.

==Description==
The EU PDO for feta requires a maximum moisture of 56%, a minimum fat content in dry matter of 43%, and a pH that usually ranges from 4.4 to 4.6. Production of the EU PDO feta is traditionally categorized into firm and soft varieties. The firm variety is tangier and considered higher in quality. The soft variety is almost soft enough to be spreadable, mostly used in pies and sold at a cheaper price. Slicing feta produces some amount of &quot;trímma&quot;, &quot;crumble&quot;, which is also used for pies (not being sellable, &quot;trímma&quot; is usually given away for free upon request).

High-quality feta should have a creamy texture when sampled, and aromas of ewe&#x27;s milk, butter, and yoghurt. In the mouth it is tangy, slightly salty, and mildly sour, with a spicy finish that recalls pepper and ginger, as well as a hint of sweetness. According to the specification of the Geographical Indication, the biodiversity of the land coupled with the special breeds of sheep and goats used for milk is what gives feta cheese a specific aroma and flavor. 

==Production==
Traditionally (and legally within the EU and other territories where it is protected), feta is produced using only whole sheep milk, or a blend of sheep and goat milk (with a maximum of 30% goat milk). The milk may be pasteurized or not, but most producers now use pasteurized milk. If pasteurized milk is used, a starter culture of micro-organisms is added to replace those naturally present in raw milk that are killed in pasteurization. These organisms are required for acidity and flavour development. 

When the pasteurized milk has cooled to approximately , rennet is added and the casein is left to coagulate. The compacted curds are then chopped up and placed in a special mould or a cloth bag that allows the whey to drain. After several hours, the curd is firm enough to cut up and salt; salinity will eventually reach approximately 3%, when the salted curds are placed (depending on the producer and the area of Greece) in metal vessels or wooden barrels and allowed to infuse for several days. 

After the dry-salting of the cheese is complete, aging or maturation in brine (a 7% salt in water solution) takes several weeks at room temperature and a further minimum of 2 months in a refrigerated high-humidity environment—as before, either in wooden barrels or metal vessels, depending on the producer (the more traditional barrel aging is said to impart a unique flavour). The containers are then shipped to supermarkets where the cheese is cut and sold directly from the container; alternatively blocks of standardized weight are packaged in sealed plastic cups with some brine. 

Feta dries relatively quickly even when refrigerated. If stored for longer than a week, it should be kept in brine or lightly salted milk.

==History==
Cheese made from sheep and goat milk has been common in the Eastern Mediterranean since ancient times. In Bronze Age Canaan, cheese was perhaps among the salted foods shipped by sea in ceramic jars and so rennet-coagulated white cheeses similar to feta may have been shipped in brine, but there is no direct evidence for this. In Greece, the earliest documented reference to cheese production dates back to the 8th century BC and the technology used to make cheese from sheep-goat milk is similar to the technology used by Greek shepherds today to produce feta. In the &quot;Odyssey&quot;, Homer describes how Polyphemus makes cheese and dry-stores it in wicker racks, though he says nothing about brining—resulting perhaps, according to Paul S. Kindstedt, in a rinded cheese similar to modern pecorino and caprino rather than feta. On the other hand, E. M. Antifantakis and G. Moatsou state that Polyphemus&#x27; cheese was &quot;undoubtedly the ancestor of modern Feta&quot;. Origins aside, cheese produced from sheep-goat milk was a common food in ancient Greece and an integral component of later Greek gastronomy.

The first unambiguous documentation of preserving cheese in brine appears in Cato the Elder&#x27;s &quot;De Agri Cultura&quot; (2nd century BC), though the practice was surely much older. It is also described in the 10th-century &quot;Geoponica&quot;. Feta cheese, specifically, is recorded by Psellos in the 11th century under the name &quot;prósphatos&quot; (Greek πρόσφατος &#x27;recent, fresh&#x27;), and was produced by Cretans. In the late 15th century, an Italian visitor to Candia, Pietro Casola, describes the marketing of feta, as well as its storage in brine. Feta cheese, along with milk and sheep meat, is the principal source of income for shepherds in northwestern Greece.

The Greek word () comes from the Italian , which in turn is derived from the Latin . The word &quot;feta&quot; became widespread as a name for the cheese only in the 19th century; probably referring to the cheese being cut to pack it in barrels. The same cheese can be referred to differently within Greece itself. In Thessaloniki, for example, it is referred to as (), which is the general word for in the south of the country.

==Effect of certification as a geographical indication==
Prior to Greece&#x27;s pursuit of a PDO for its feta, there was long-standing production out of Greece in three member states: Germany, Denmark and France, and in certain countries (e.g., Denmark) feta was perceived as a generic term, while it was perceived as a designation of origin in others (e.g., Greece), with the centre of production and consumption taking place in Greece. Greece first requested the registration of feta as a designation of origin in the EU in 1994, which was approved in 1996 by commission regulation (EC) No 1107/96 The decision was appealed to the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) by Denmark, France and Germany, which annulled the decision as the Commission did not evaluate sufficiently whether or not Feta had become a generic term. 

After that decision, the European Commission reevaluated registering feta as a PDO, taking into account production in other EU countries and re-registered feta as a PDO in Commission Regulation (EC) No 1829/2002. This decision was appealed again at CJEU by Denmark and Germany. In 2005, the CJEU upheld the Commission Regulation. It indicated that indeed the term was generic in some EU countries and that production also took place outside Greece, but that on the other hand the geographical region in Greece was well defined and that even non-Greek producers often appealed to the status of Feta as a Greek product through the choice of packaging. 

Although the island of Cephalonia also traditionally produces feta, the island was left out of the definition of the protected designation of origin. While this does not play a role for consumers in Greece, dairies lose out in sales abroad because they do not produce real &quot;feta&quot; and have to accept price reductions.

The European Commission gave other nations five years to find a new name for their feta cheese or stop production. Because of the decision by the European Union, Danish dairy company Arla Foods changed the name of its white cheese products to &quot;Apetina&quot;, which is also the name of an Arla food brand established in 1991. The British cheese Yorkshire Feta was renamed to Fine Fettle Yorkshire. When needed to describe an imitation feta, names such as &quot;salad cheese&quot; and &quot;Greek-style cheese&quot; are used. 

The EU included feta in several Associations Agreements, Free Trade Agreements and agreements on the recognition of Geographical Indications, which led to the expansion of protection of the term &quot;feta&quot;. Exporters from the EU to foreign markets outside the territories covered by these agreements are not subject to the European Commission rules. As such, the non-Greek EU cheese sold abroad is often labeled as feta.

In 2013, an agreement was reached with Canada (CETA) in which Canadian feta manufacturers retained their rights to continue producing feta while new entrants to the market would label the product &quot;feta-style/type cheese&quot;. In other markets such as the United States, Australia, New Zealand and elsewhere, full generic usage of the term &quot;feta&quot; continues, and was one of several original name issues preventing the signing of an Australia–EU free trade deal.

==Nutrition==
Feta has significant amounts of calcium and phosphorus; however, feta is higher in water and thus lower in fat and calories than aged cheeses like parmigiano-reggiano or cheddar. The cheese may contain beneficial probiotics.

Feta, as a sheep dairy product, contains up to 1.9% conjugated linoleic acid (CLA), which is about 0.8% of its fat content.

Feta cheese is very high in salt, at over 400 mg sodium per 100 calories.

==Similar cheeses==
Similar cheeses can be found in other countries, such as:

* Albania (Urdha or &quot;djathë i bardhë&quot;, )
* Armenia (&quot;Չանախ&quot; chanakh - cheese made in a &quot;chan&quot;, a type of crock)
* Azerbaijan (&quot;ağ pendir&quot;, )
* Bosnia (Travnički/Vlašićki sir, lit. &quot;cheese from Vlašić/Travnik&quot;) 
* Bulgaria (бяло сирене, , lit. &quot;white cheese&quot;)
* Canada (&quot;feta style cheese&quot;, or simply &quot;feta&quot; for those companies producing the cheese prior to October 2013)
* Cyprus (&quot;χαλίτζια&quot;, halitzia)
* Czech Republic (&quot;balkánský sýr&quot;, lit. &quot;Balkan cheese&quot;)
* Egypt (&quot;domiati&quot;)
* Finland (salaattijuusto, &quot;salad cheese&quot;)
* Georgia (ყველი, &quot;kveli&quot;, lit. &quot;cheese&quot;)
* Germany (&quot;Schafskäse&quot;, &quot;sheep cheese&quot;)
* Hungary (&quot;juhturo&quot;)
* Iran (Lighvan cheese; &quot;panīr-e līghvān&quot;)
* Israel (&quot;gvinat rosh hanikra&quot;, lit. &quot;Rosh Hanikra cheese&quot;, sometimes called abroad &#x27;Israeli feta&#x27;.)
* Italy (&quot;casu &#x27;e fitta&quot; Sardinia)
* Lebanon (, lit. &quot;Bulgarian cheese&quot;)
* North Macedonia (сирење, &quot;sirenje&quot;)
* Palestine and Jordan (Nabulsi cheese; , and &quot;Akkawi&quot;; )
* Romania (&quot;brânză telemea&quot;)
* Russia (брынза, &quot;brynza&quot;)
* Serbia (сир, &quot;sir&quot; as a common name; сирење, &quot;sirenje&quot; in South, including Kosovo Serb; and &quot;brinza&quot; in north and east Serbia within Slovak and Aromanian populations)
* Slovakia (&quot;bryndza&quot; and &quot;Balkánsky syr&quot;, lit. &quot;Balkan cheese&quot;)
* Spain (&quot;Queso de Burgos&quot;, lit. &quot;Burgos cheese&quot;)
* Sudan (&quot;gibna beyda&quot;, lit. &quot;white cheese&quot;)
* Tajikistan (, &quot;panir&quot;, lit. &quot;cheese&quot;)
* Turkey (&quot;beyaz peynir&quot;, lit. &quot;white cheese&quot;)
* Ukraine (бринза, &quot;brynza&quot;)
* United Kingdom (&quot;salad cheese&quot;)

==See also==
* 

== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==

==External links==

* International Feta Day</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q182760" start="0" end="4" title="Feta" label="Feta"/>
<link wikidata="Q744027" start="15" end="20" title="Greek cuisine" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620025" start="21" end="27" title="brine cheese" label="brined"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="34" end="40" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="51" end="61" title="sheep&amp;#x27;s milk" label="sheep milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418287" start="93" end="102" title="goat&amp;#x27;s milk" label="goat milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826073" start="228" end="232" title="Cheese ripening" label="aged"/>
<link wikidata="Q240801" start="334" end="345" title="Greek salad" label="Greek salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866347" start="376" end="382" title="phyllo" label="phyllo"/>
<link wikidata="Q744027" start="389" end="401" title="Greek cuisine" label="Greek dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q124389227" start="408" end="419" title="spanakopita" label="spanakopita"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088941" start="460" end="468" title="tyropita" label="tyropita"/>
<link wikidata="Q134283" start="586" end="593" title="oregano" label="oregano"/>
<link wikidata="Q264619" start="631" end="638" title="Grilling" label="grilled"/>
<link wikidata="Q28803" start="654" end="662" title="sandwich" label="sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q20129" start="667" end="675" title="omelette" label="omelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q13439060" start="730" end="761" title="protected designation of origin" label="protected designation of origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="769" end="783" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q208202" start="790" end="804" title="European law" label="EU legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214219" start="950" end="967" title="Lesbos Prefecture" label="Lesbos Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="1140" end="1147" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="1160" end="1169" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="1174" end="1183" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="1602" end="1609" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1611" end="1617" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1619" end="1626" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1628" end="1633" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1639" end="1653" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1662" end="1675" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="3272" end="3278" title="Black pepper" label="pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="3283" end="3289" title="ginger" label="ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q326900" start="4116" end="4122" title="rennet" label="rennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q193970" start="4140" end="4146" title="casein" label="casein"/>
<link wikidata="Q214403" start="4632" end="4637" title="brine" label="brine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301962" start="5359" end="5380" title="Eastern Mediterranean" label="Eastern Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="5405" end="5415" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="5416" end="5422" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="5874" end="5881" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="5889" end="5894" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193567" start="5909" end="5919" title="Polyphemus" label="Polyphemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q677640" start="6093" end="6101" title="pecorino" label="pecorino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183966" start="6106" end="6113" title="caprino cheese" label="caprino"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="6350" end="6364" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q744027" start="6400" end="6416" title="Greek cuisine" label="Greek gastronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180081" start="6496" end="6510" title="Cato the Elder" label="Cato the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180565" start="6524" end="6539" title="De Agri Cultura" label="De Agri Cultura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235421" start="6654" end="6663" title="Geoponica" label="Geoponica"/>
<link wikidata="Q294109" start="6713" end="6720" title="Michael Psellos" label="Psellos"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="6844" end="6851" title="Crete" label="Cretans"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="6882" end="6889" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q160544" start="6901" end="6907" title="Heraklion" label="Candia"/>
<link wikidata="Q123122627" start="7023" end="7033" title="Lamb and mutton" label="sheep meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="7426" end="7438" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="8171" end="8209" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q178488" start="9049" end="9059" title="Cephalonia" label="Cephalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q674575" start="9537" end="9547" title="Arla Foods" label="Arla Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450076" start="9733" end="9754" title="Fine Fettle Yorkshire" label="Fine Fettle Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4426710" start="9917" end="9940" title="Associations Agreements" label="Associations Agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335686" start="9942" end="9963" title="Free Trade Agreements" label="Free Trade Agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121969" start="10360" end="10364" title="CETA" label="CETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="10589" end="10598" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="10600" end="10611" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="10836" end="10843" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="10848" end="10858" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826073" start="10933" end="10945" title="aged cheeses" label="aged cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q155922" start="10951" end="10970" title="Parmigiano-Reggiano" label="parmigiano-reggiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q217525" start="10974" end="10981" title="Cheddar cheese" label="cheddar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816730" start="11017" end="11027" title="probiotics" label="probiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q56696202" start="11082" end="11112" title="Conjugated linoleic acid" label="conjugated linoleic acid (CLA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="11204" end="11210" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="11311" end="11318" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q655654" start="11320" end="11325" title="Urdă" label="Urdha"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="11362" end="11369" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399907" start="11444" end="11449" title="Crock (dishware)" label="crock"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="11453" end="11463" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="11492" end="11498" title="Bosnia" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11510" end="11522" title="Vlašićki sir" label="Vlašićki sir"/>
<link wikidata="Q425929" start="11547" end="11553" title="Vlašić (Bosnian mountain)" label="Vlašić"/>
<link wikidata="Q159818" start="11554" end="11561" title="Travnik" label="Travnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="11572" end="11580" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="11630" end="11636" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="11762" end="11768" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="11804" end="11818" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="11881" end="11886" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290273" start="11894" end="11901" title="domiati" label="domiati"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="11911" end="11918" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="11964" end="11971" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="12026" end="12033" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="12087" end="12094" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="12119" end="12123" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546642" start="12125" end="12139" title="Lighvan cheese" label="Lighvan cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="12172" end="12178" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661718" start="12224" end="12243" title="Israeli feta" label="Rosh Hanikra cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="12304" end="12309" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="12342" end="12350" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="12354" end="12361" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="12402" end="12417" title="Republic of North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13557581" start="12433" end="12440" title="sirenje" label="sirenje"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="12450" end="12459" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="12464" end="12470" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q927451" start="12472" end="12486" title="Nabulsi cheese" label="Nabulsi cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095467" start="12500" end="12506" title="Akkawi" label="Akkawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="12518" end="12525" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790730" start="12533" end="12547" title="brânză telemea" label="brânză telemea"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="12557" end="12563" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q698632" start="12579" end="12585" title="bryndza" label="brynza"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="12595" end="12601" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13557581" start="12614" end="12617" title="sirenje" label="sir"/>
<link wikidata="Q13557581" start="12656" end="12663" title="sirenje" label="sirenje"/>
<link wikidata="Q201111" start="12769" end="12778" title="Aromanians" label="Aromanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="12794" end="12802" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q698632" start="12810" end="12817" title="bryndza" label="bryndza"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="12889" end="12894" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="12959" end="12964" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290273" start="12972" end="12983" title="gibna beyda" label="gibna beyda"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="13024" end="13034" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="13084" end="13090" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897605" start="13098" end="13110" title="beyaz peynir" label="beyaz peynir"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="13151" end="13158" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q698632" start="13174" end="13180" title="bryndza" label="brynza"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="13190" end="13204" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277894" wikidata="Q5111038" url="?curid=277894" title="Christine Hamilton">
<text>Mary Christine Hamilton (&quot;née&quot; Holman; born 10 November 1949) is an English media personality and author. She is married to Neil Hamilton, the former Conservative Member of Parliament (MP) for Tatton.

Hamilton and her husband have become prominent supporters of the UK Independence Party (UKIP), with Neil standing for a local council seat in the 2014 local elections. Neil Hamilton&#x27;s application to become a European Parliamentary candidate for UKIP was rejected in 2013, though he had been elected to UKIP&#x27;s National Executive Committee in 2011.

==Early life==
Hamilton&#x27;s father was a GP in Ringwood, Hampshire, and she grew up in the New Forest area. She attended Wentworth College, an independent boarding school for girls in Bournemouth and a co-educational Grammar School in Christchurch, Hampshire. She then studied sociology at the University of York and first met Neil Hamilton when they both attended a student political conference. In 2006, they released a song coinciding with the World Cup, &quot;England Are Jolly Dee&quot;.

==Career==
===MP&#x27;s secretary===
Hamilton spent many years working as secretary to various Conservative MPs, first Wilfred Proudfoot MP for Brighouse and Spenborough, then Gerald Nabarro, MP for South Worcestershire. She stood behind Nabarro as he spoke on the steps of Winchester Court after being cleared on appeal of a motoring offence. Hamilton worked as her husband&#x27;s secretary following their 1983 marriage. Neil Hamilton eventually reached the post of Minister for Corporate Affairs between 1992 and 1994 in Prime Minister John Major&#x27;s government. Neil Hamilton became embroiled in the Cash-for-questions affair, and the former BBC broadcaster Martin Bell stood against him for the Tatton seat at the 1997 general election. Bell campaigned as an ‘anti-sleaze’ candidate, and Christine Hamilton confronted him during a televised press conference on Knutsford Heath, which brought her to public prominence. Hamilton later described the confrontation with Bell as &quot;...the making of me.&quot; The journalist John Sweeney later published &quot;Purple Homicide&quot;, an account of the campaign for the Tatton seat. Neil Hamilton&#x27;s later failure in a libel case against the Egyptian businessman, Mohamed Al-Fayed, would lead to her husband&#x27;s bankruptcy. Their home in Nether Alderley, Cheshire was sold to the market for £1.25 million.

===Entertainment personality===
After Hamilton&#x27;s electoral defeat, Christine and her husband appeared together on the satirical BBC quiz show &quot;Have I Got News for You&quot;, on 9 May 1997, an appearance that established her as a chat-show personality and she subsequently appeared on programmes including her own &quot;Christine Hamilton Show&quot; on BBC Choice where she interviewed celebrities who suffered some form of adversity, including Jonathan Aitken, James Hewitt, Bernard Manning, Ivana Trump, Paul Merson and John Fashanu. The Hamiltons were the subjects of an episode of Louis Theroux&#x27;s 2001 documentary series &quot;When Louis Met...&quot;.

Hamilton has described herself as a &quot;media butterfly&quot; and has appeared on a variety of television shows since her husband&#x27;s electoral defeat. Hamilton came third in the first series of the reality television programme, &quot;I&#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!&quot; in 2002, and reached the final of &quot;Celebrity Masterchef&quot; in 2010. Hamilton appeared on &quot;Have I Got News for You&quot; in 2002 and taunted presenter Angus Deayton over recent tabloid revelations about his personal life.

In the theatre, Hamilton has appeared in pantomime in &quot;Jack and the Beanstalk&quot; at the Yvonne Arnaud Theatre, Guildford in 2002, as the Fairy Godmother in &quot;Cinderella&quot; at the Kettering Lighthouse Theatre in 2011 and has taken the role of the narrator for &quot;The Rocky Horror Show&quot; musical. Hamilton toured her one-woman show, &quot;Share an Evening with Christine Hamilton&quot;, in 2003, and has appeared several times in Eve Ensler&#x27;s play &quot;The Vagina Monologues&quot;, including its 2005 West End run at Wyndhams Theatre, where she appeared alongside Jenny Eclair and Heather Small. The Hamiltons appeared at the Edinburgh Festival in 2006 with their show, &quot;Lunch with the Hamiltons&quot;, at the Pleasance Dome in 2006.

Hamilton was the face of &#x27;British Sausage Week&#x27; in 2005 and the judge of &#x27;Mr Gay Torbay&#x27; in 2009. Hamilton legally changed her name by deed poll to &#x27;Mrs British Battleaxe&#x27; in February 2009 as a promotion for an online deed service company. She later regretted the decision.

===Media commentator, presenter and writer===
Hamilton has appeared on numerous topical television programmes including &quot;GMTV&quot;, &quot;Loose Women&quot;, &quot;This Week&quot;, &quot;The Alan Titchmarsh Show&quot;, &quot;This Morning&quot; and &quot;The Wright Stuff&quot;. Hamilton has also been a dictionary corner guest on &quot;Countdown&quot;.

Hamilton also interviewed successful women in business for the digital channel &quot;Simply Money&quot;, has presented programmes on Sky Digital&#x27;s &quot;Destination Lunch&quot;, and stood in for Gloria Hunniford and Fern Britton on &quot;Open House&quot; and &quot;This Morning&quot;.

As a writer Hamilton published &quot;The Book of British Battleaxes&quot; in 1999, and an autobiography, &quot;For Better For Worse: Her Own Story&quot;, in 2005. Hamilton has also written columns for &quot;Western Daily Press&quot; and the gay magazine &quot;Refresh&quot;.

=== False allegation ===
Along with her husband, she was arrested in May 2001 by police investigating an alleged rape that was found to be false. Their accuser, Nadine Milroy-Sloan, was charged with attempting to pervert the course of justice, and in 2002 sentenced to 3 years imprisonment for making the false accusations. 

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5111038" start="0" end="23" title="Christine Hamilton" label="Mary Christine Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111038" start="41" end="47" title="Christine Hamilton" label="Holman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337819" start="134" end="147" title="Neil Hamilton (politician)" label="Neil Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="160" end="172" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="173" end="193" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q988027" start="203" end="209" title="Tatton (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Tatton"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="277" end="298" title="UK Independence Party" label="UK Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888176" start="358" end="378" title="2014 United Kingdom local elections" label="2014 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="425" end="444" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500773" start="614" end="616" title="General practitioner" label="GP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248943" start="620" end="628" title="Ringwood, Hampshire" label="Ringwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q277755" start="664" end="674" title="New Forest" label="New Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950271" start="694" end="711" title="Bournemouth Collegiate School" label="Wentworth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q170478" start="757" end="768" title="Bournemouth" label="Bournemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q925424" start="808" end="831" title="Christchurch, Hampshire" label="Christchurch, Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q967165" start="867" end="885" title="University of York" label="University of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001677" start="1186" end="1203" title="Wilfred Proudfoot" label="Wilfred Proudfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846570" start="1211" end="1236" title="Brighouse and Spenborough (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Brighouse and Spenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549434" start="1243" end="1257" title="Gerald Nabarro" label="Gerald Nabarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568970" start="1266" end="1286" title="South Worcestershire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="South Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="1606" end="1616" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q27957665" start="1624" end="1634" title="Second Major ministry" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048623" start="1674" end="1699" title="Cash-for-questions affair" label="Cash-for-questions affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q333499" start="1732" end="1743" title="Martin Bell" label="Martin Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q988027" start="1770" end="1776" title="Tatton (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Tatton"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="1789" end="1810" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259788" start="2097" end="2109" title="John Sweeney (journalist)" label="John Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q365913" start="2288" end="2304" title="Mohamed Al-Fayed" label="Mohamed Al-Fayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815157" start="2365" end="2380" title="Nether Alderley" label="Nether Alderley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768525" start="2587" end="2610" title="Have I Got News for You" label="Have I Got News for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810437" start="2796" end="2806" title="BBC Choice" label="BBC Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q332881" start="2888" end="2903" title="Jonathan Aitken" label="Jonathan Aitken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680558" start="2905" end="2917" title="James Hewitt" label="James Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q640816" start="2919" end="2934" title="Bernard Manning" label="Bernard Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q242351" start="2936" end="2947" title="Ivana Trump" label="Ivana Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q430740" start="2949" end="2960" title="Paul Merson" label="Paul Merson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351907" start="2965" end="2977" title="John Fashanu" label="John Fashanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q979131" start="3028" end="3041" title="Louis Theroux" label="Louis Theroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q12132412" start="3079" end="3096" title="When Louis Met..." label="When Louis Met..."/>
<link wikidata="Q16846303" start="3289" end="3301" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! (British series 1)" label="first series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235466" start="3345" end="3387" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! (British TV series)" label="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!"/>
<link wikidata="Q45726" start="3434" end="3454" title="Celebrity Masterchef" label="Celebrity Masterchef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768525" start="3497" end="3520" title="Have I Got News for You" label="Have I Got News for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131672" start="3557" end="3570" title="Angus Deayton" label="Angus Deayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="3670" end="3679" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455839" start="3689" end="3711" title="Jack and the Beanstalk" label="Jack and the Beanstalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062416" start="3725" end="3746" title="Yvonne Arnaud Theatre" label="Yvonne Arnaud Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q213465" start="3748" end="3757" title="Guildford" label="Guildford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077746" start="3774" end="3789" title="Fairy Godmother" label="Fairy Godmother"/>
<link wikidata="Q11841" start="3799" end="3809" title="Cinderella" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q984613" start="3823" end="3832" title="Kettering" label="Kettering"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616857" start="3833" end="3851" title="Lighthouse Theatre (Kettering)" label="Lighthouse Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q583612" start="3909" end="3930" title="The Rocky Horror Show" label="The Rocky Horror Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086841" start="4079" end="4089" title="Eve Ensler" label="Eve Ensler"/>
<link wikidata="Q127546" start="4108" end="4129" title="The Vagina Monologues" label="The Vagina Monologues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="4156" end="4164" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q931899" start="4172" end="4188" title="Wyndhams Theatre" label="Wyndhams Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179248" start="4219" end="4231" title="Jenny Eclair" label="Jenny Eclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q469195" start="4236" end="4249" title="Heather Small" label="Heather Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q829363" start="4281" end="4299" title="Edinburgh Festival" label="Edinburgh Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q16898562" start="4370" end="4384" title="The Pleasance" label="Pleasance Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182303" start="4550" end="4559" title="deed poll" label="deed poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734852" start="4826" end="4830" title="GMTV" label="GMTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451933" start="4844" end="4855" title="Loose Women" label="Loose Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786366" start="4869" end="4878" title="This Week (2003 TV programme)" label="This Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712982" start="4892" end="4916" title="The Alan Titchmarsh Show" label="The Alan Titchmarsh Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786162" start="4930" end="4942" title="This Morning (TV programme)" label="This Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776313" start="4959" end="4975" title="The Wright Stuff" label="The Wright Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6657456" start="5041" end="5050" title="Countdown (game show)" label="Countdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096096" start="5302" end="5312" title="Open House with Gloria Hunniford" label="Open House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786162" start="5329" end="5341" title="This Morning (TV programme)" label="This Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353662" start="5557" end="5576" title="Western Daily Press" label="Western Daily Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q10728581" start="5839" end="5868" title="perverting the course of justice" label="pervert the course of justice"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277895" wikidata="Q1455981" url="?curid=277895" title="List of cheeses">
<text>This is a list of cheeses by place of origin. Cheese is a milk-based food that is produced in wide-ranging flavors, textures, and forms. Hundreds of types of cheese from various countries are produced. Their styles, textures and flavors depend on the origin of the milk (including the animal&#x27;s diet), whether they have been pasteurized, the butterfat content, the bacteria and mold, the processing, and aging.
Herbs, spices, or wood smoke may be used as flavoring agents. The yellow to red color of many cheeses, such as Red Leicester, is normally formed from adding annatto. While most current varieties of cheese may be traced to a particular locale, or culture, within a single country, some have a more diffuse origin, and cannot be considered to have originated in a particular place, but are associated with a whole region, such as queso blanco in Latin America.
Cheese is an ancient food whose origins predate recorded history. There is no conclusive evidence indicating where cheesemaking originated, either in Europe, Central Asia or the Middle East, but the practice had spread within Europe prior to Roman times and, according to Pliny the Elder, had become a sophisticated enterprise by the time the Roman Empire came into existence.
In this list, types of cheeses are included; brand names are only included if they apply to a distinct variety of cheese.

Cheese production involves several steps, including curdling, coagulation, separation, shaping, and aging. The type of milk used, as well as factors like temperature, humidity, and bacterial cultures, can greatly impact the final product&#x27;s flavor, texture, and appearance. Artisanal cheesemakers often employ traditional techniques and recipes passed down through generations, while larger commercial operations may utilize more modern and mechanized processes to produce cheese on a larger scale.

==Africa==
===Algeria===

===Benin===

===Ethiopia===

===Mauritania===

===South Africa===

==Asia==
===Armenia===

===Azerbaijan===
===Bangladesh===

===China===

The dominant Han Chinese culture is not dairy-centric, in part due to low rates of lactase persistence. However, some indigenous sociolinguistic groups in regions of the country, such as Inner Mongolia, Tibet and Yunnan, have strong cheese traditions.
===Georgia===

===India===
===Indonesia===

===Japan===

===Korea===

===Malaysia===

===Mongolia===

There are two types of Mongolian cheese (бяслаг). They are similar in taste and are like a cross between mozzarella and an unsalted feta cheese.
* түүхий сүүний – this is a creamy version of Mongolian cheese made by boiling the milk and keeping the cream top.
* болсон сүүний – this is similar but is made without the cream.
===Nepal===


===Philippines===

==Europe==
=== Albania ===


===Austria===

===Belgium===

===Bosnia and Herzegovina===

===Bulgaria===

===Croatia===

===Cyprus===

===Czech Republic===

===Denmark===

===Estonia===

===Finland===

===France===

===Germany===
Germany&#x27;s cheese production accounts for approximately one-third of all European-produced cheeses.

===Greece===


===Hungary===

===Iceland===

===Ireland===

===Italy===

===Jews of Eastern Europe===

===Kosovo===

===Latvia===

===Lithuania===

* Džiugas

===Malta===

===Moldova===

===Montenegro===
===Netherlands===
The Netherlands is one of the major cheese producing countries of Europe, with a tradition of cheesemaking as shown by the Dutch cheese markets.

===North Macedonia===
===Norway===


===Poland===
The history of cheesemaking in Poland goes back to 5500 BC, when cheese similar to mozzarella was produced in Neolithic times in Kujawy (north-central Poland).

Poland is the 7th largest cheese producer in the world and has the 18th highest cheese consumption.

Marek Kosmulski described over 600 types of Polish cheeses manufactured between 1948 and 2019.


===Portugal===

===Romania===

===Russia===

* Altaysky a fairly dry hard cheese, similar to Swiss cheese, originating in the Altai region
* Chyorny Altai a hard cheese similar to cheddar
* Danilovsky
* Dorogobuzhsky a soft cheese from western Russia
* Dorozhny
* Golandsky
* Gornoaltaysky a hard, crumbly cheese
* Moale
* Moskovsky a hard cow&#x27;s milk cheese, also similar to Swiss
* Medynsky
* a slightly sweet, soft processed cheese made of cow&#x27;s milk
* Pikantny
* a hard cow&#x27;s milk cheese
* Russian cheese (Rossiysky) similar to German Tilsiter
* Uglichsky a hard cheese made of cow&#x27;s milk
* Yaroslavsky a hard cow&#x27;s milk cheese, usually produced in rounds; with a slightly sour taste
* Zakusochny a soft blue cow&#x27;s milk cheese
===Serbia===

* Sremski
* Zlatarski PDO
* Sjenički
* Krivovirski Kačkavalj
* Homoljski ovčiji (Homolje sheep cheese)
* Homoljski kozji (Homolje goat cheese)
* Homoljski kravlji (Homolje cow cheese)
* Pirotski Kačkavalj
* Lužnička Vurda
* Užički Kajmak
* Čačanski Kajmak
* Čačanski Sir
===Slovakia===

===Slovenia===
* Bohinc Jože
* Nanoški
* Planinski

===Spain===

===Sweden===

===Switzerland===
Switzerland is home to over 450 varieties of cheese. Cows milk is used in about 99 percent of the cheeses produced. The remaining share is made up of sheep milk and goat milk.

===Ukraine===

===United Kingdom===


The British Cheese Board states that there are over 700 named British cheeses produced in the UK.

==Middle East==
===Egypt===


===Iran===

===Israel===


===Levant===

The Levant is a geographical region east of the Mediterranean Sea which includes the countries of Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Jordan, Palestine and sometimes it includes Cyprus and the Turkish province of Hatay

===Turkey===

==North and Central America==
===Canada===

===Costa Rica===

===El Salvador===

===Honduras===

===Mexico===


===Nicaragua===

===United States===

==Oceania==

===Australia===

===New Zealand===


==South America==
===Argentina===

===Bolivia===

===Brazil===

===Chile===

===Colombia===

=== Paraguay ===
=== Peru ===

=== Uruguay ===

===Venezuela===

==Other==
Some types of cheese were either developed in various locales independently (usually as un-aged products from the beginning stages of dairy processing and cheesemaking), or are not actually cheese products. Examples include:
==Unsorted==
* Tresse cheese
* Big woods blue
* Morcella

==See also==
* Category: Cheeses by country
* Butter cheese
* List of blue cheeses
* List of cheese dishes
* List of cheesemakers
* List of dairy products
* List of goat milk cheeses
* List of smoked foods
* List of stretch-curd cheeses
** List of sheep milk cheeses
* List of water buffalo cheeses
===Articles by country===
* List of American cheeses
* List of British cheeses
* List of Cornish cheeses
* List of Dutch cheeses
* List of English cheeses
* List of French cheeses
* List of German cheeses
* List of Irish cheeses
* List of Italian cheeses
* List of Polish cheeses
* List of Spanish cheeses
* List of Swiss cheeses
===Protected cheeses===

* List of European cheeses with protected geographical status
* List of French Protected Designations of Origin cheeses
* List of Greek Protected Designations of Origin cheeses
* List of Italian DOP cheeses
* List of Portuguese cheeses with protected status
==References==
===Works cited===
* 
* 


==External links==

* Alphabetical list of cheeses. Cheese.com.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1455981" start="10" end="25" title="List of cheeses" label="list of cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="46" end="52" title="Cheese" label="Cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="58" end="62" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q58148" start="329" end="340" title="Pasteurization" label="pasteurized"/>
<link wikidata="Q909729" start="346" end="355" title="butterfat" label="butterfat"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="415" end="419" title="Herb" label="Herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q42527" start="422" end="427" title="spice" label="spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q193713" start="433" end="443" title="smoking (cooking)" label="wood smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892828" start="526" end="539" title="Red Leicester" label="Red Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q425902" start="572" end="579" title="annatto" label="annatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q123160832" start="843" end="855" title="queso blanco" label="queso blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="859" end="872" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="922" end="938" title="prehistory" label="recorded history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281188" start="989" end="1001" title="Cheesemaker" label="cheesemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1024" end="1030" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="1032" end="1044" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="1048" end="1063" title="the Middle East" label="the Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1116" end="1121" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="1146" end="1161" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1217" end="1229" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="1296" end="1306" title="brand name" label="brand name"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2126" end="2145" title="Lactase persistence#Global distribution of the phenotype" label="lactase persistence"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="2230" end="2244" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="2246" end="2251" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="2256" end="2262" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q123566135" start="3239" end="3246" title="Džiugas" label="Džiugas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066998" start="3434" end="3454" title="Dutch cheese markets" label="Dutch cheese markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281188" start="3522" end="3534" title="Cheesemaker" label="cheesemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q14088" start="3590" end="3600" title="mozzarella" label="mozzarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="3617" end="3626" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q836693" start="3636" end="3642" title="Kujawy" label="Kujawy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3913" end="3921" title="Altaysky (cheese)" label="Altaysky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5942" start="3992" end="3997" title="Altai Krai" label="Altai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4007" end="4020" title="Chyorny Altai" label="Chyorny Altai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4056" end="4066" title="Danilovsky (cheese)" label="Danilovsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4069" end="4082" title="Dorogobuzhsky (cheese)" label="Dorogobuzhsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4119" end="4127" title="Dorozhny (cheese)" label="Dorozhny"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4130" end="4139" title="Golandsky" label="Golandsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4142" end="4155" title="Gornoaltaysky" label="Gornoaltaysky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4181" end="4186" title="Moale" label="Moale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4189" end="4198" title="Moskovsky (cheese)" label="Moskovsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4254" end="4262" title="Medynsky (cheese)" label="Medynsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4331" end="4339" title="Pikantny" label="Pikantny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398130" start="4374" end="4388" title="Russian cheese" label="Russian cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433798" start="4419" end="4427" title="Tilsit cheese" label="Tilsiter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4430" end="4439" title="Uglichsky (cheese)" label="Uglichsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4480" end="4491" title="Yaroslavsky (cheese)" label="Yaroslavsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4580" end="4590" title="Zakusochny" label="Zakusochny"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4642" end="4649" title="Sremski Sir" label="Sremski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4652" end="4661" title="Zlatarski Sir" label="Zlatarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q13439060" start="4662" end="4665" title="Protected designation of origin" label="PDO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4668" end="4676" title="Sjenički Sir" label="Sjenički"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4679" end="4700" title="Krivovirski Kačkavalj" label="Krivovirski Kačkavalj"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4703" end="4719" title="Homoljski ovčiji sir" label="Homoljski ovčiji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4745" end="4760" title="Homoljski kozji sir" label="Homoljski kozji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4785" end="4802" title="Homoljski kravlji sir" label="Homoljski kravlji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4826" end="4844" title="Pirotski Kačkavalj" label="Pirotski Kačkavalj"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4847" end="4861" title="Lužnička Vurda" label="Lužnička Vurda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4864" end="4877" title="Užički Kajmak" label="Užički Kajmak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4880" end="4895" title="Čačanski Kajmak" label="Čačanski Kajmak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4898" end="4910" title="Čačanski Sir" label="Čačanski Sir"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="5024" end="5035" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="5077" end="5080" title="Cow" label="Cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="5082" end="5086" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="5174" end="5184" title="sheep milk" label="sheep milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="5189" end="5193" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="5457" end="5474" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="5507" end="5512" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="5514" end="5521" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="5523" end="5529" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="5531" end="5537" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="5539" end="5548" title="Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="5575" end="5581" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83274" start="5610" end="5615" title="Hatay" label="Hatay"/>
<link wikidata="Q48999210" start="6239" end="6252" title="Tresse cheese" label="Tresse cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q124047868" start="6255" end="6269" title="Big Woods Blue" label="Big woods blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q124096637" start="6272" end="6280" title="Morcella" label="Morcella"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6297" end="6325" title=":Category:Cheeses by country" label="Category: Cheeses by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018113" start="6328" end="6341" title="Butter cheese" label="Butter cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q27661314" start="6344" end="6364" title="List of blue cheeses" label="List of blue cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086766" start="6367" end="6388" title="List of cheese dishes" label="List of cheese dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28871791" start="6391" end="6411" title="List of cheesemakers" label="List of cheesemakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17024701" start="6414" end="6436" title="List of dairy products" label="List of dairy products"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803462" start="6439" end="6464" title="List of goat milk cheeses" label="List of goat milk cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067517" start="6467" end="6487" title="List of smoked foods" label="List of smoked foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q39088793" start="6490" end="6518" title="List of stretch-curd cheeses" label="List of stretch-curd cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349453" start="6522" end="6548" title="List of sheep milk cheeses" label="List of sheep milk cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020491" start="6551" end="6580" title="List of water buffalo cheeses" label="List of water buffalo cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q659319" start="6609" end="6633" title="List of American cheeses" label="List of American cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q736930" start="6636" end="6659" title="List of British cheeses" label="List of British cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967200" start="6662" end="6685" title="List of Cornish cheeses" label="List of Cornish cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898110" start="6688" end="6709" title="List of Dutch cheeses" label="List of Dutch cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993923" start="6712" end="6735" title="List of English cheeses" label="List of English cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q285484" start="6738" end="6760" title="List of French cheeses" label="List of French cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088353" start="6763" end="6785" title="List of German cheeses" label="List of German cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088363" start="6788" end="6809" title="List of Irish cheeses" label="List of Irish cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230305" start="6812" end="6835" title="List of Italian cheeses" label="List of Italian cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088369" start="6838" end="6860" title="List of Polish cheeses" label="List of Polish cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235670" start="6863" end="6886" title="List of Spanish cheeses" label="List of Spanish cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q285758" start="6889" end="6910" title="List of Swiss cheeses" label="List of Swiss cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072188" start="6938" end="6997" title="List of European cheeses with protected geographical status" label="List of European cheeses with protected geographical status"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7000" end="7055" title="List of French cheeses#Protected designation of origin" label="List of French Protected Designations of Origin cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572423" start="7058" end="7112" title="List of Greek Protected Designations of Origin cheeses" label="List of Greek Protected Designations of Origin cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777623" start="7115" end="7142" title="List of Italian DOP cheeses" label="List of Italian DOP cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7145" end="7193" title="List of Portugal food and drink products with protected status#Cheese" label="List of Portuguese cheeses with protected status"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277897" wikidata="Q296263" url="?curid=277897" title="Brooksville">
<text>Brooksville is the name of several places in the United States:
* Brooksville, Blount County, Alabama
* Brooksville, Morgan County, Alabama
* Brooksville, Florida
**Brooksville Army Airfield, named after the Florida town
* Brooksville, Georgia
* Brooksville, Kentucky
**Brooksville Independent-Graded School District, named after the Kentucky town
* Brooksville, Maine
* Brooksville, Mississippi
* Brooksville, Oklahoma
* Brooksville, West Virginia, an unincorporated community also known as Bigbend, West Virginia

==See also==
* Brookville (disambiguation)
* Brooksville Advent Church, named after the village of Brooksville in New Haven, Vermont</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q296263" start="0" end="11" title="Brooksville" label="Brooksville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975133" start="66" end="101" title="Brooksville, Blount County, Alabama" label="Brooksville, Blount County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975135" start="104" end="139" title="Brooksville, Morgan County, Alabama" label="Brooksville, Morgan County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q587435" start="142" end="162" title="Brooksville, Florida" label="Brooksville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="165" end="190" title="Brooksville Army Airfield" label="Brooksville Army Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q54888633" start="223" end="243" title="Brooksville, Georgia" label="Brooksville, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112519" start="246" end="267" title="Brooksville, Kentucky" label="Brooksville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975138" start="270" end="316" title="Brooksville Independent-Graded School District" label="Brooksville Independent-Graded School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q978911" start="350" end="368" title="Brooksville, Maine" label="Brooksville, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q892252" start="371" end="395" title="Brooksville, Mississippi" label="Brooksville, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169299" start="398" end="419" title="Brooksville, Oklahoma" label="Brooksville, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905090" start="492" end="514" title="Bigbend, West Virginia" label="Bigbend, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q357628" start="531" end="558" title="Brookville (disambiguation)" label="Brookville (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975136" start="561" end="586" title="Brooksville Advent Church" label="Brooksville Advent Church"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277898" wikidata="Q3055482" url="?curid=277898" title="Environment of China">
<text>The [[environment (biophysical)|environment]] of [[China]] () comprises diverse biotas, climates, and geologies. Rapid industrialization, population growth, and lax environmental oversight have caused many environmental issues and large-scale pollution.

== Geology ==
== Biota ==

=== Wildlife ===
=== Flora ===
== Climate ==
===Climate change===
== Protected areas of China ==
==Environmental issues==


Rapid industrialization, population growth, and lax environmental oversight have caused many environmental issues, such as large-scale pollution in China. As of 2013, Beijing, which lies in a topographic bowl, has significant industry, and heats with coal, is subject to air inversions resulting in extremely high levels of pollution in winter months.

In January 2013, fine airborne particulates that pose the largest health risks, rose as high as 993 micrograms per cubic meter in Beijing, compared with World Health Organization guidelines of no more than 25. The World Bank estimates that 16 of the world&#x27;s most-polluted cities are located in China.

According to Jared Diamond, the six main categories of environmental problems of China are: air pollution, water problems, soil problems, habitat destruction, biodiversity loss and mega projects. Diamond also states that, &quot;China is noted for the frequency, number, extent, and damage of its natural disasters&quot;.

Many of the Chinese citizens started to wonder if air pollution is the cause of the increase of lung cancer. This question began to rise because the citizens in China must constantly wear face masks to avoid breathing in the hazardous particles from their polluted skies. Some experts agree that it is the reason, but others say there isn&#x27;t enough evidence. Wang Ning, deputy director of the Beijing Office for Prevention and Control, says he has seen a rise in a certain cancer called adenicarcinoma, which is a mucus that is seen as a side effect from pollution. China&#x27;s lung cancer rate is 32% of the entire world&#x27;s lung cancer patients. Meanwhile, as lung cancer increases, gastric, esophageal, and cervical cancer have all decreased in China.

==See also==
*Environmental policy in China
*Environmentalism in China
*Geographic Information Systems in China
*Hot summer cold winter zone
*Land use in China

==References==

==Further reading==
* Elvin, Mark. &quot;The retreat of the elephants: an environmental history of China&quot; (Yale University Press, 2004). excerpt
* Heijdra, Martin. &quot;Texts, Space and Time: New Insights into Chinese Environmental History.&quot; &quot;Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient&quot; 42.4 (1999): 549-565.
* Maohong, Bao. &quot;Environmental history in China.&quot; &quot;Environment and History&quot; (2004): 475-499. online

* Marks, Robert B. &quot;China: An environmental history&quot; (Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2017). excerpt</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3055482" start="4" end="45" title="Environment of China" label="[[environment (biophysical)|environment]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055482" start="49" end="58" title="Environment of China" label="[[China]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="119" end="136" title="industrialisation" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755206" start="541" end="559" title="pollution in China" label="pollution in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="677" end="690" title="inversion (meteorology)" label="air inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q205772" start="1079" end="1092" title="Jared Diamond" label="Jared Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="1204" end="1223" title="habitat destruction" label="habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q18466271" start="1225" end="1242" title="biodiversity loss" label="biodiversity loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q16916964" start="2166" end="2195" title="Environmental policy in China" label="Environmental policy in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q112274547" start="2197" end="2222" title="Environmentalism in China" label="Environmentalism in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535058" start="2224" end="2263" title="Geographic Information Systems in China" label="Geographic Information Systems in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5910849" start="2265" end="2292" title="Hot summer cold winter zone" label="Hot summer cold winter zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007431" start="2294" end="2311" title="Land use in China" label="Land use in China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277902" wikidata="Q227266" url="?curid=277902" title="Benson">
<text>Benson may refer to:

* Benson, a character in the TV series &quot;Regular Show&quot;

==Places==
===Geography===
====Canada====
*Rural Municipality of Benson No. 35, Saskatchewan; rural municipality
*Benson, Saskatchewan; hamlet

====United Kingdom====
*Benson, Oxfordshire

====United States====
*Benson, Arizona
**Benson (Amtrak station) in Benson, Arizona
*Benson, Illinois
*Benson, Louisiana
*Benson, Harford County, Maryland
*Benson, Howard County, Maryland
*Benson, Michigan
*Benson, Minnesota
*Benson, Nebraska, a neighborhood in Omaha, Nebraska
*Benson, New York
*Benson, North Carolina
*Benson, Pennsylvania
*Benson, Utah
*Benson, Vermont, a New England town
**Benson (CDP), Vermont, the main village in the town
*Benson, Wisconsin
*Benson County, North Dakota
*Benson Lake (California)
*Benson State Recreation Area, a state park in Oregon
*Benson Township, Minnesota

===Education===
*Benson High School (disambiguation)
*Benson Idahosa University, a private Christian university in Benin City, Nigeria
*Benson Polytechnic High School, a public high school in Portland, Oregon
*Florence C. Benson Elementary School, a historic school building for African-American students, Columbia, South Carolina
*J.E. Benson Public School, a former elementary school in Windsor, Ontario, Canada
*James Benson Dudley High School, Greensboro, North Carolina
*Mount Benson Elementary School (Nanaimo), a public elementary school in Nanaimo, British Columbia
*Roanoke-Benson High School, a comprehensive high school located at 208 West High Street, in Roanoke, Illinois
*Omaha Benson High School Magnet, Benson, Nebraska

===Structures===
*Benson (Amtrak station), in Benson, Arizona
*Benson Block, listed on the National Register of Historic Places in Wapello County, Iowa
*Benson Building (Ottumwa, Iowa), listed on the National Register of Historic Places in Wapello County, Iowa
*Benson Hotel, in Portland, Oregon
*Benson House (disambiguation)
*Benson Tower (disambiguation)
*Benson Water Tower, water tower located on Clayton Street in Benson, Illinois

==Media and entertainment==
*&quot;Benson&quot; (TV series), an American sitcom (1979–1986)
*&quot;Benson, Arizona&quot;, the opening and closing theme song for the John Carpenter film &quot;Dark Star&quot;

==Litigation==
*&quot;Baker v. Nelson&quot;, a 1971 Minnesota Supreme Court ruling that a state law limiting marriage to persons of the opposite sex did not violate the U.S. Constitution
*&quot;Benson v SA Mutual Life&quot;, a 1985 case in South African contract law, particularly in the area of claims for specific performance
*&quot;Crowell v. Benson&quot;, a 1932 United States Supreme Court case that approved the adjudication of private rights by an administrative agency, not an Article III court
*&quot;Gottschalk v. Benson&quot;, a 1972 United States Supreme Court case on the patentability of computer software or algorithms
*&quot;Pharaoh v. Benson&quot; (Montauk Point land claim), three lawsuits brought by Chief Wyandank Pharaoh, nephew of the Stephen Talkhouse

==Military==
*&quot;Benson&quot;-class destroyer, World War II-era U.S. Navy ship class
*RAF Benson, Royal Air Force station near Benson, Oxfordshire, England

==People==
*Benson (given name)
*Benson (surname)

==Products, companies, and brands==
*Benson &amp; Hedges, British brand of cigarettes
*Benson International, American custom trailer and body business belonging to International Industries
*Benson Records, American record label (1902–2001)
*Kleinwort Benson, former merchant bank based in London, sometimes known as &quot;Bensons&quot;

==Others==
*Benson (fish), the largest common carp caught in Britain
*Benson Medal, awarded by the Royal Society of Literature
*Benson Syndicate, an American 19th-century organized crime group
*Benson&#x27;s syndrome, a disease also known as posterior cortical atrophy

==See also==
*Mount Benson (disambiguation)
*Justice Benson (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q227266" start="0" end="6" title="Benson" label="Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q82617" start="67" end="79" title="Regular Show" label="Regular Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890273" start="130" end="165" title="Rural Municipality of Benson No. 35" label="Rural Municipality of Benson No. 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890232" start="201" end="221" title="Benson, Saskatchewan" label="Benson, Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351343" start="255" end="274" title="Benson, Oxfordshire" label="Benson, Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q79672" start="299" end="314" title="Benson, Arizona" label="Benson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890241" start="317" end="340" title="Benson (Amtrak station)" label="Benson (Amtrak station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115789" start="361" end="377" title="Benson, Illinois" label="Benson, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q85746620" start="379" end="396" title="Benson, Louisiana" label="Benson, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691878" start="398" end="430" title="Benson, Harford County, Maryland" label="Benson, Harford County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890230" start="432" end="463" title="Benson, Howard County, Maryland" label="Benson, Howard County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092364" start="465" end="481" title="Benson, Michigan" label="Benson, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913224" start="483" end="500" title="Benson, Minnesota" label="Benson, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890293" start="502" end="518" title="Benson, Nebraska" label="Benson, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501740" start="555" end="571" title="Benson, New York" label="Benson, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q818186" start="573" end="595" title="Benson, North Carolina" label="Benson, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130569" start="597" end="617" title="Benson, Pennsylvania" label="Benson, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251957" start="619" end="631" title="Benson, Utah" label="Benson, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972244" start="633" end="648" title="Benson, Vermont" label="Benson, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726224" start="671" end="692" title="Benson (CDP), Vermont" label="Benson (CDP), Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890233" start="724" end="741" title="Benson, Wisconsin" label="Benson, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28292" start="743" end="770" title="Benson County, North Dakota" label="Benson County, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q25238200" start="772" end="796" title="Benson Lake (California)" label="Benson Lake (California)"/>
<link wikidata="Q818188" start="798" end="826" title="Benson State Recreation Area" label="Benson State Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897043" start="852" end="878" title="Benson Township, Minnesota" label="Benson Township, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890258" start="897" end="932" title="Benson High School (disambiguation)" label="Benson High School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q181419" start="934" end="959" title="Benson Idahosa University" label="Benson Idahosa University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890275" start="1016" end="1046" title="Benson Polytechnic High School" label="Benson Polytechnic High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510712" start="1090" end="1126" title="Florence C. Benson Elementary School" label="Florence C. Benson Elementary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104066" start="1212" end="1237" title="J.E. Benson Public School" label="J.E. Benson Public School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129090" start="1295" end="1326" title="James Benson Dudley High School" label="James Benson Dudley High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919686" start="1356" end="1396" title="Mount Benson Elementary School (Nanaimo)" label="Mount Benson Elementary School (Nanaimo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339761" start="1455" end="1481" title="Roanoke-Benson High School" label="Roanoke-Benson High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089403" start="1566" end="1597" title="Omaha Benson High School Magnet" label="Omaha Benson High School Magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890241" start="1635" end="1658" title="Benson (Amtrak station)" label="Benson (Amtrak station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890242" start="1680" end="1692" title="Benson Block" label="Benson Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890246" start="1770" end="1801" title="Benson Building (Ottumwa, Iowa)" label="Benson Building (Ottumwa, Iowa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890264" start="1879" end="1891" title="Benson Hotel" label="Benson Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156064" start="1914" end="1943" title="Benson House (disambiguation)" label="Benson House (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890283" start="1945" end="1974" title="Benson Tower (disambiguation)" label="Benson Tower (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890288" start="1976" end="1994" title="Benson Water Tower" label="Benson Water Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q818181" start="2084" end="2114" title="Benson (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Benson&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q506580" start="2246" end="2255" title="Dark Star (film)" label="Dark Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849241" start="2285" end="2300" title="Baker v. Nelson" label="Baker v. Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890295" start="2457" end="2480" title="Benson v SA Mutual Life" label="Benson v SA Mutual Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189229" start="2598" end="2615" title="Crowell v. Benson" label="Crowell v. Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588088" start="2773" end="2793" title="Gottschalk v. Benson" label="Gottschalk v. Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904490" start="2904" end="2921" title="Pharaoh v. Benson" label="Pharaoh v. Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q818175" start="3053" end="3087" title="Benson-class destroyer" label="&amp;quot;Benson&amp;quot;-class destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123959" start="3128" end="3138" title="RAF Benson" label="RAF Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16275024" start="3211" end="3230" title="Benson (given name)" label="Benson (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660575" start="3232" end="3248" title="Benson (surname)" label="Benson (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q793081" start="3287" end="3306" title="Benson &amp;amp; Hedges" label="Benson &amp;amp; Hedges"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452756" start="3414" end="3438" title="International Industries" label="International Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890279" start="3440" end="3454" title="Benson Records" label="Benson Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6420368" start="3491" end="3507" title="Kleinwort Benson" label="Kleinwort Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q818174" start="3599" end="3612" title="Benson (fish)" label="Benson (fish)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638315" start="3657" end="3669" title="Benson Medal" label="Benson Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890281" start="3715" end="3731" title="Benson Syndicate" label="Benson Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869816" start="3829" end="3855" title="posterior cortical atrophy" label="posterior cortical atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919687" start="3871" end="3900" title="Mount Benson (disambiguation)" label="Mount Benson (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27862438" start="3902" end="3933" title="Justice Benson (disambiguation)" label="Justice Benson (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277905" wikidata="Q1521725" url="?curid=277905" title="Louisiana State University">
<text>Louisiana State University (officially Louisiana State University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, commonly referred to as LSU) is an American public land-grant research university in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, United States. The university was founded in 1860 near Pineville, Louisiana, under the name Louisiana State Seminary of Learning &amp; Military Academy. The current LSU main campus was dedicated in 1926 and consists of more than 250 buildings constructed in the style of Italian Renaissance architect Andrea Palladio, occupying a plateau on the banks of the Mississippi River.

LSU is the flagship university of the state of Louisiana, as well as the flagship institution of the Louisiana State University System. In 2021, the university enrolled over 28,000 undergraduate and more than 4,500 graduate students in 14 schools and colleges. It is classified among &quot;R1: Doctoral Universities – Very high research activity&quot;. LSU operates some 800 sponsored research projects funded by agencies such as the National Institutes of Health, the National Science Foundation, the National Endowment for the Humanities, and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. LSU is one of eight universities in the United States with dental, law, veterinary, medical, and Master of Business Administration programs.

LSU&#x27;s athletics department fields teams in 21 varsity sports (nine men&#x27;s, 12 women&#x27;s), and is a member of the NCAA (National Collegiate Athletic Association) and the SEC (Southeastern Conference). The university is represented by its mascot, Mike the Tiger.

==History==
===19th century===
Louisiana State University Agricultural and Mechanical College had its origin in several land grants made by the United States government in 1806, 1811, and 1827 for use as a seminary of learning. It was founded as a military academy and is still today steeped in military tradition, giving rise to the school&#x27;s nickname &quot;The Ole War Skule&quot;. In 1853, the Louisiana General Assembly established the Seminary of Learning of the State of Louisiana near Pineville in Rapides Parish in Central Louisiana. Modeled initially after Virginia Military Institute, the institution opened with five professors and nineteen cadets on January 2, 1860, with Major, later Colonel, William Tecumseh Sherman as superintendent.

The Old LSU Site, the school&#x27;s original location, is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

On January 26, 1861, when Louisiana became the fifth state to secede from the Union, Sherman resigned his position after only a year as Superintendent to return north and eventually resume his service in the Union Army. The school closed on June 30, 1861, after the start of the American Civil War.
During the war, the university reopened briefly in April 1863 but was closed once again during the Union Army&#x27;s Red River Campaign. The losses sustained by the institution during the Union occupation were heavy, and after 1863 the seminary remained closed for the remainder of the Civil War. Following the surrender of the Confederates at Appomattox Court House on April 9, 1865, General Sherman donated two cannons to the institution. These cannons had been captured from Confederate forces after the close of the war and had been used during the initial firing upon Fort Sumter in April 1861. The cannons are still displayed in front of LSU&#x27;s Military Science/Aerospace Studies Building.

The seminary officially reopened its doors on October 2, 1865, only to be burned October 15, 1869. On November 1, 1869, the institution resumed its exercises in Baton Rouge, where it has since remained. In 1870, the name of the institution was officially changed to Louisiana State University.

Louisiana State University Agricultural and Mechanical College was established by an act of the legislature, approved April 7, 1874, to carry out the United States Morrill Act of 1862, granting lands for this purpose. It temporarily opened in New Orleans, June 1, 1874, where it remained until it merged with Louisiana State University in 1877. This prompted the final name change for the university to the Louisiana State University and Agricultural and Mechanical College.

===20th century===

In 1905, LSU admitted its first female student, R. O. Davis. She was admitted into a program to pursue a master&#x27;s degree. The following year, 1906, LSU admitted sixteen female students to its freshman class as part of an experimental program. Before this, LSU&#x27;s student body was all-male. In 1907, LSU&#x27;s first female graduate, Martha McC. Read, was awarded a Bachelor of Arts degree. After this two year experimental program, the university fully opened its doors to female applicants in 1908, and thus coeducation was born at LSU.

On April 30, 1926, the present LSU campus was formally dedicated, following the school&#x27;s history at the federal garrison grounds (now the site of the state capitol) where it had been since 1886. Before this, LSU used the quarters of the Institute for the Deaf, Mute, and Blind. Land for the present campus was purchased in 1918, construction started in 1922, and the move began in 1925; however, the move was not completed until 1932. The campus was originally designed for 3000 students but was cut back due to budget problems. After years of enrollment fluctuation, student numbers began a steady increase, new programs were added, curricula and faculty expanded, and a true state university emerged.

LSU was hit by scandal in 1939 when James Monroe Smith, appointed by Huey Long as president of LSU, was charged with embezzling a half-million dollars. In the ensuing investigation, at least twenty state officials were indicted. Two committed suicide as the scandal enveloped Governor Richard W. Leche, who received a 10-year federal prison sentence as a result of a kickback scheme. Paul M. Hebert, Dean of LSU&#x27;s law school at the time, then assumed interim presidency in Smith&#x27;s place.

During World War II, LSU was one of 131 colleges and universities nationally that took part in the V-12 Navy College Training Program which offered students a path to a Navy commission.

In 1969, mandatory ROTC for freshmen and sophomores was abolished; however, LSU continues to maintain Air Force and Army ROTC.
In 1978, LSU was named a sea-grant college, the 13th university in the nation to be so designated. In 1992, the LSU Board of Supervisors approved the creation of the LSU Honors College.

===21st century===
After Hurricane Katrina, LSU accepted 2,300 displaced students from schools in the greater New Orleans area such as Tulane University, Loyola University New Orleans, Xavier University of Louisiana, and the University of New Orleans. The Pete Maravich Assembly Center was converted into a fully functional field hospital, with approximately 3,000 student volunteers.

In 2012, LSU was censured by the American Association of University Professors for firing Professor Ivor van Heerden after he made comments critical of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for their design and construction of the levees that broke following Hurricane Katrina. 

In 2013, F. King Alexander was named President of Louisiana State University.

In fall 2020, LSU broke its record for the most diverse and largest freshman class in history. Of the record 6,690 freshmen, more than 30% identified as students of color, African-Americans made up the most at 16.8%. Additionally, LSU reached its all-time highest enrollment at 34,290 undergraduate and graduate students.

William F. Tate IV was named the new president of the university on May 6, 2021, effective in July. He is the first African-American president in LSU&#x27;s history and the first African-American president in the SEC.

====Sexual misconduct controversies====
A November 2020 investigative report in &quot;USA Today&quot; accused LSU of mishandling sexual misconduct claims against LSU football players. LSU hired Husch Blackwell LLP to review policies in response to the report. Husch Blackwell released a 262-page report in March 2021 confirming the &quot;USA Today&quot; story, adding that the problems within LSU went far beyond the allegations detailed in the investigation, with many of the problems being widespread across the university. In the fallout of the report, former LSU Tigers football coach Les Miles and former LSU president F. King Alexander were forced to resign from their jobs at the University of Kansas and Oregon State University, respectively.

In February 2021, the US Department of Education announced a formal, federal investigation will be conducted on the university&#x27;s reported mishandling of sexual misconduct cases; specifically on possible violations of the Clery Act. In April 2021, the Department of Education announced the opening of a second federal investigation where LSU&#x27;s handling of student complaints of sexual assault and harassment from the 2018–2019 academic year to the present will be analyzed.

Two months later, seven women filed a federal class-action lawsuit against LSU and its leadership based on their inability to report their incidents to the university&#x27;s Title IX office. The seven women were six former students (three of whom were part of the women&#x27;s tennis team at LSU and two of whom were student employees in the football recruiting office) and one current student. In June 2021, football coach Ed Orgeron was added as a defendant to the Title IX lawsuit, alleging that Orgeron was aware of and failed to report the rape allegation of former running back Derrius Guice.

LSU&#x27;s Assistant Athletic Director of Football Recruiting and Alumni Relations, Sharon Lewis, also filed a $50 million federal lawsuit against the university for years of harassment for her attempts to report sexual misconduct allegations against players, coaches, and athletic officials. In January 2022, Lewis&#x27; legal team alleged that the university had violated Louisiana&#x27;s whistleblower law, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission guidelines, and Title IX as Lewis was fired in retaliation for her lawsuit. In July 2022, the trial date for Lewis&#x27; lawsuit was scheduled for May 22, 2023, while the joint lawsuit filed by the LSU students was scheduled for June 26, 2023. In December 2023, a federal jury dismissed all the claims in Lewis&#x27; lawsuit.

In October 2023, as a result of federal lawsuit linked to LSU&#x27;s tennis program, a judge sanctioned the university due to the data of university-issued phones that once belonged to former tennis coaches, Julia and Michael Sell, being deleted after they left the school. Both coaches were accused of failing to act on reports of sexual assaults they received from students which were communicated electronically.

====Corporate influence on research controversy====
An April 2024 investigative report co-published in &quot;The Guardian&quot; and &quot;The Lens&quot;, a non-profit newsroom in New Orleans, found that LSU gave corporations robust powers to review and influence academic research and coursework at the university in exchange for donations. 

Records show that the university granted Shell a seat on the board of the LSU Institute for Energy Innovation, including the right to vote on the Institute&#x27;s research activities and to review study output, following a donation by Shell of $25 million in 2022, and that LSU&#x27;s fundraising arm, the LSU Foundation, circulated a boilerplate document offering similar privileges to other companies in exchange for a $5 million investment in the Institute. 

The university also offered &quot;strategic partner&quot;-level privileges, which included voting rights on research activities at the Institute, in exchange for at least a $1.25 million investment, with ExxonMobil becoming the Institute&#x27;s first &quot;strategic partner&quot;-level donor and at least eight other companies having discussed similar deals with LSU, according to a &quot;Partnership Update&quot; that LSU sent to ExxonMobil in August 2023.

Records also show that a representative from Shell helped to shape the curriculum of the six courses under the Institute&#x27;s Carbon Capture, Use, and Storage concentration, as well as representatives from BP, Chevron, ConocoPhillips, and ExxonMobil.

Former LSU journalism professor Robert Mann labeled the ability of oil companies to vote on research agendas &quot;an egregious violation of academic freedom,&quot; and Jane Patton, an LSU alumna and US Fossil Economy Campaign Manager at the Center for International Environmental Law, referred to the practice as &quot;a gross misuse of the public trust.”

In response, Brad Ives, the director of LSU Institute for Energy Innovation, defended the partnerships, characterizing the claim that &quot;having corporate funding for research damages the integrity of that research&quot; as being &quot;a little far-fetched,&quot; and arguing that what the Institute is doing is no different from similar institutes across the US.

==Campus==

The LSU campus sits on 1,000 acres (8.1 km2) just south of downtown Baton Rouge. Most of the university&#x27;s 250 buildings, most of which were built between 1925 and 1940, occupy a 650-acre (2.6 km2) plateau on the banks of the Mississippi River.

Link collaborated with Wilbur Trueblood on the project but remained faithful to the campus the Olmsted firm had designed. Unfortunately, Link died in 1923 before the plan was completed. New Orleans architects Wogan and Bernard completed Link&#x27;s work and the campus was dedicated on April 30, 1926.

Under Huey Long, the governor from 1928 to 1932, LSU &quot;more than doubled its enrollment despite the Great Depression; its standing had risen to Grade A; dormitories and buildings for departments of music, dramatic arts, and physical education had been completed; other buildings were soon to start, and costs of attendance had been lowered within the reach of many.&quot;

Nine LSU buildings, including the library and the academic buildings for dairying and physics, were constructed by George A. Caldwell, a native of Abbeville. Caldwell designed twenty-six public buildings in Louisiana.

The campus is known for the 1,200 live oak trees that shade the ground of the university.

===Historic district===
Fifty-seven resources on the LSU campus were listed in the Louisiana State University Historic District on the National Register of Historic Places on September 15, 1988. Forty-six of the enlisted resources were considered contributing buildings and structures. The campus is protected by the State Capital Historic District Legislation.

The LSU Campus Mounds, which are part of a larger mound group spread throughout the state, are near the northwestern corner of the campus and were built an estimated 5,000 years ago. They were individually enlisted in the National Register of Historic Places on March 1, 1999.

===Campus housing===
On-campus housing options include on-campus apartments (East Campus Apartments, West Campus Apartments, and Nicholson Gateway Apartments), Annie Boyd Hall, Evangeline Hall, the Agricultural Residence College, the Engineering Residential College, the Business Residential College, Broussard, Acadian, Beauregard, Blake, Cypress, Herget, Highland, Jackson, LeJeune, McVoy, Miller, Taylor, East Laville, and West Laville.

===Museums===
The LSU Museum of Art shares the Shaw Center for the Arts with many cultural partners including the LSU School of Art Gallery, LSU&#x27;s Laboratory for Creative Arts and Technology, the Manship Theatre, and the Community School for the Arts of the Arts Council of Greater Baton Rouge. There is also the LSU Museum of Natural Science, LSU Rural Life Museum, and Louisiana Museum of Natural History on campus.

===Other campuses===
Other Louisiana State University campuses include the LSU Agricultural Center, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, LSU of Alexandria, LSU Shreveport, LSU Eunice, LSU Health Sciences Center New Orleans and LSU Health Sciences Center Shreveport.

The University of New Orleans was a member of Louisiana State University from 1958 until 1963 as LSUNO and under its own name from 1974 until 2011, when it was transferred to the University of Louisiana System by the Louisiana Legislature.

LSU owns and operates the J. Bennett Johnston Sr. Center for Advanced Microstructures and Devices (CAMD), which is a 1.3 GeV synchrotron radiation facility.

==Academics==

===Undergraduate admissions===
The 2022 annual ranking of &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; categorizes LSU-Baton Rouge as &quot;more selective&quot;. For the Class of 2025 (enrolled fall 2021), LSU received 36,561 applications and accepted 25,907 (70.9%). Of those accepted, 7,045 enrolled, a yield rate (the percentage of accepted students who choose to attend the university) of 27.2%. LSU&#x27;s freshman retention rate is 82.9%, with 69% going on to graduate within six years.

The enrolled first-year class of 2025 had the following standardized test scores: the middle 50% range (25th percentile-75th percentile) of SAT scores was 1130–1300, while the middle 50% range of ACT scores was 23–29.

===Colleges and schools===


===Laboratory school===
The university operates the Louisiana State University Laboratory School, a kindergarten through 12 public school.

===Farm===
Hill Farm established in 1927 by the Louisiana Agricultural Experiment Station in order to carry out research horticultural crops as part of Louisiana State University&#x27;s mission as a land-grant university.

During the 1960s a large part of the Farm&#x27;s land was reallocated for the construction of sorority houses, as a result, many of the fruit breeding programs had to be moved to other parts of the state. In the 1990s a new student recreation center and playing fields were created on the site of most of the remaining land, the remaining research programs were moved to the Burden Research Plantation. Today five acres of the original Hill Farm remain and used primarily as an agriculture teaching facility and community garden. Individual garden plots are nine by five feet (9&#x27; × 5&#x27;) and may be rented by students, faculty, and the community at large. The price per lot has been deliberately kept low to support the Farm&#x27;s mission to &quot;provide access to gardening space, education, and resources necessary for the community to grow food in environmentally sustainable ways as a means of creating a food system where locally produced, affordable and nutritious food is available to all, and where the community can come together to share, play, and inspire one another.&quot; Although the gardeners are not required to plant certified organic seeds and plants, the Farm requires gardeners to use organic farming methods.

===Reputation and rankings===


Louisiana State University is ranked 185th in the &quot;national universities&quot; category and 101st among public universities by the 2023 &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranking of U.S. colleges. LSU is also ranked as the 192nd best overall university in the nation by &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine in 2019. In 2009, &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranked LSU as the 16th most popular university in the nation among high school students.

===Libraries===
LSU&#x27;s main library collection, numbering almost three million volumes, is housed in the Library on the main quadrangle of the university. It is both a general use library and a U.S. Regional Federal Depository Library, housing publications from the federal government, United Nations, and United States Patent and Trademark Office. The LSU Libraries belong to the Association of Research Libraries, which includes the top 127 academic libraries in the U.S. and Canada; the Association of Southeastern Research Libraries (ASERL); Lyrasis; and the Louisiana Academic Library Information Network Consortium (LALINC). LSU was among the founding members of , which provides access to most academic library catalogs in the state.

Its collections of rare books, dating back to the fifteenth century, number more than 80,000 volumes and include the E. A. McIlhenny Natural History Collection, which contains many important works in the history of ornithological and botanical illustration, including John James Audubon&#x27;s &quot;Birds of America&quot;, Margaret Stones&#x27;s&quot; Flora of Louisiana, &quot;and books by Edward Lear, John Gould, Mark Catesby, and Sir Joseph Banks.

Ella V. Aldrich Schwing was librarian at LSU, a member of the faculty of the LSU Library School, and a member of the LSU Board of Supervisors. She donated funds for an annual lecture titled the LSU Libraries Schwing Lecture Series, which began in 1965. Lecturers included Martha Boaz, Ching-chih Chen, John Y. Cole, Richard M. Dougherty, Edward G. Holley, Judith Krug, Clifford Lynch, James G. Neal, Carl Howard Pforzheimer Jr, Benjamin E. Powell and Robert Wedgeworth.

In June 2020, the LSU Board of Supervisors adopted a resolution to remove Troy H. Middleton&#x27;s name from the university&#x27;s main library. The decision came amid student protests concerning the racist past of former LSU President Troy H. Middleton, after whom the Library was named. Louisiana Governor John Bel Edwards supported the decision, stating that &quot;[Black] LSU students shouldn&#x27;t be asked to study in a library bearing the name of someone who didn&#x27;t want them to be LSU students.&quot;

The unnamed LSU Main Library is prominently in disrepair and is under consideration to be demolished. The library&#x27;s upper floors collections are covered with a plastic tarp to prevent ceiling leaks from damaging books and the basement is prone to flooding.

===Publications===
* LSU Press is a nonprofit book publisher dedicated to the publication of scholarly, general interest, and regional books. It publishes approximately 80 titles per year and continues to garner national and international accolades, including four Pulitzer Prizes. John Kennedy Toole&#x27;s &quot;A Confederacy of Dunces&quot; is among its best-known publications.
* &quot;Southern Review&quot; is a literary journal published by LSU. It was co-founded in 1935 by three-time Pulitzer Prize-winning writer Robert Penn Warren, who served as U.S. Poet Laureate and wrote the classic novel &quot;All the King&#x27;s Men&quot;, and renowned literary critic of the New Criticism school, Cleanth Brooks. It publishes fiction, poetry, and essays, with an emphasis on southern culture and history.
* &quot;Legacy&quot; is a student-run magazine that publishes a variety of feature-length stories. In both 2001 and 2005, it was named the best student magazine in the nation by the Society of Professional Journalists.
* &quot;LSU RESEARCH&quot; magazine informs readers about university research programs.
* &quot;Apollo&#x27;s Lyre&quot; is a poetry and fiction magazine published each semester by the Honors College.
* &quot;LSU Alumni Magazine&quot; is a quarterly which focuses on Alumni success and current university news sent out to alumni everywhere.
* &quot;Gumbo&quot; is the university&#x27;s yearbook, which may be purchased.
* &quot;LSU Today&quot; magazine keeps faculty and staff updated with university news.
* &quot;New Delta Review&quot; is a literary quarterly funded by LSU that publishes a wide range of fiction, poetry, and interviews from new, up-and-coming, and established writers.

==Student life==
===Organizations===
There are over 350 student organizations currently active at LSU, including a student government and a total of 36 fraternities and sororities. The LSU Corps of Cadets is one of the oldest student organizations on campus. LSU also has an active Society of American Archivists student chapter.

Much like the United States Government, the LSU Student Government is divided into three major branches; Executive, Legislative, and Judicial. LSU SG is headed by the student body president and the student body vice president, elected to office during the spring semester of each academic year. A College Council system is also established to designate members of SG to the duties of representing specific academic colleges. Additionally, a Student Union Board representative is elected each spring to represent student interests and oversee programs, events, and regulations of the LSU Student Union.

===Media===
&quot;The Reveille&quot;, the university&#x27;s student newspaper, has operated since 1887. &quot;Princeton Review&quot; named the &quot;Daily Reveille&quot; as the 12th best college newspaper in the nation in its 2008 edition of The Best 361 Colleges. The Daily Reveille won the Editor &amp; Publisher award, or EPpy, in 2008 for best college newspaper Web site. The Society of Professional Journalists named the &quot;Reveille&quot; &quot;Best All-Around Daily Student Newspaper&quot; in its 2012 Mark of Excellence awards.

KLSU is an FCC-licensed non-commercial educational (NCE) college radio station run by LSU students.

Broadcasting on campus cable channel 75, Tiger TV is a student-run television show, sharing its production equipment and facilities with the Manship School of Mass Communication.

===Greek life===
In 2019, 16% of undergraduate men and 27% of undergraduate women were active in LSU&#x27;s Greek system.

==Athletics==
LSU fields teams in 21 varsity sports (9 men&#x27;s, 12 women&#x27;s), and is a member of the NCAA (National Collegiate Athletic Association) and the Southeastern Conference.

The nine men&#x27;s teams compete in baseball, basketball, cross country, football, golf, swimming and diving, tennis, indoor track and field, and outdoor track and field. The 12 women&#x27;s teams compete in basketball, beach volleyball, cross country, golf, gymnastics, soccer, softball, swimming and diving, tennis, indoor track and field, outdoor track and field, and volleyball.

The athletics department official nickname is Fighting Tigers, Tigers, or Lady Tigers.

===National championships===
LSU has won 52 team national championships (most in the SEC), 47 of which were bestowed by the NCAA, tying for ninth all-time in total NCAA team national championships. The four football titles were not conferred by the NCAA, as it does not award college football national championships at the Division I-FBS level.

* Baseball (7): 1991, 1993, 1996, 1997, 2000, 2009, 2023
* Women&#x27;s basketball (1): 2023
* Men&#x27;s basketball (1): 1935 (pre-NCAA; defeated Pittsburgh in an arranged game)
* Boxing (1): 1949
* Football (4): 1958, 2003, 2007, 2019
* Men&#x27;s golf (5): 1940, 1942, 1947, 1955, 2015
* Men&#x27;s indoor track and field (2): 2001, 2004
* Women&#x27;s indoor track and field (11): 1987, 1989, 1991, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 2002, 2003, 2004
* Men&#x27;s outdoor track and field (5): 1933, 1989, 1990, 2002, 2021
* Women&#x27;s outdoor track and field (14): 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 2000, 2003, 2008, 2012 (vacated)
* Women&#x27;s gymnastics (1): 2024

===Facilities===
LSU&#x27;s stadiums, arenas and courses include Tiger Stadium (&quot;Death Valley&quot;) (football), Alex Box Stadium, Skip Bertman Field (baseball), Bernie Moore Track Stadium (outdoor track), Carl Maddox Field House (indoor track), Highland Road Park (cross country), LSU Natatorium (swimming and diving), LSU Soccer Stadium (soccer), LSU Tennis Complex (tennis), Pete Maravich Assembly Center (PMAC) (basketball, gymnastics, volleyball), Tiger Park (softball) and University Club of Baton Rouge (golf).

LSU&#x27;s academic center and practice facilities include the LSU Academic Center for Student-Athletes, Charles McClendon Practice Facility (football), LSU Football Operations Center (football), LSU Indoor Practice Facility (football), LSU Basketball Practice Facility (basketball) and LSU Gymnastics Training Facility
(gymnastics).

Tiger Stadium

Although originally nicknamed &quot;Deaf Valley&quot; for its excruciating levels of sound, the nickname &quot;Death Valley&quot; caught on instead. It is legendary for the crowd noise generated by fans. It is the sixth-largest college football stadium in the nation and third-largest stadium in the SEC, holding 102,321 fans after its latest expansion in 2014. The Tiger Stadium atmosphere is generally considered one of the loudest and most electrifying college football experiences in the country. During a nationally televised game against Auburn in 2003, ESPN recorded a noise level of 117 decibels at certain points in the game. In 2007 when the No. 1 ranked Tigers played the No. 9 ranked Florida Gators, the noise level registered at 122 decibels when the Tigers made a come-from-behind win in the final minutes of the game.

A similar sound level resulted in the legendary &quot;Earthquake Game&quot; against Auburn in 1988. LSU won 7–6 when quarterback Tommy Hodson completed a game-winning touchdown pass to running back Eddie Fuller in the waning seconds of the game. The crowd&#x27;s roar registered on a seismograph, shaking the ground as much as a small earthquake.

===Rivals===
Rivals include the traditional intra-SEC West rivals the Alabama Crimson Tide, Arkansas Razorbacks, Auburn Tigers, Mississippi State Bulldogs, Ole Miss Rebels,and the SEC East rival Florida Gators (designated under the SEC&#x27;s inter-division &quot;designated rival&quot; format). LSU and Arkansas play annually in football, alternating sites between Baton Rouge and Fayetteville (Little Rock from 1994 through 2010). The winner of the game is awarded the &quot;Golden Boot&quot;, a gold-plated trophy formed in the shape of the two states. The game was played the Friday after Thanksgiving in 1992, and every year between 1996 and 2013, except 2009, but starting in 2014, the SEC separated LSU and Arkansas on the final weekend of the regular season. The Tigers now play Texas A&amp;M on the final weekend of the regular season, while Arkansas plays Missouri.

LSU and in-state rival Tulane Green Wave battle for the &quot;Tiger Rag&quot;, a flag divided evenly between the colors of the two schools. This rivalry was recently suspended after a payout from LSU.

The LSU-Ole Miss game, known as the Magnolia Bowl (a name selected by the student bodies of both schools) has become more formalized over the years, with a large trophy and a large traveling fanbase for both teams present each year. The LSU-Florida rivalry also has major importance as the two schools won three football national championships between 2006 and 2008 (Florida in 2006 and 2008; LSU in 2007). The LSU-Alabama rivalry has become very important in recent years due to the Nick Saban becoming the Coach of Alabama and the two teams&#x27; dominance of the SEC&#x27;s West Division and their matchup in the 2012 BCS National Championship Game (the only time the standalone game featured two teams from the same conference).

==Traditions==
===Mascot===

LSU Athletics is represented by its mascot, a live Bengal tiger named &quot;Mike the Tiger&quot;. LSU is only one of two institutions of higher education in the United States to have a live tiger as their mascot; the other is the University of Memphis. The tiger was named after Mike Chambers, LSU&#x27;s athletic trainer in 1936, and was bought for $750 from the Little Rock Arkansas Zoo. Mike V reigned from 1990 to 2007 and remained housed in his on-campus habitat until his death due to kidney failure on May 18, 2007, at age 17. Mike VI was an 11-year-old, tiger acquired from an Indiana big cat sanctuary. Previously known as Roscoe, &quot;Mike VI&quot; is a Bengal-Siberian mix and was officially named Mike on September 8, 2007. He was introduced to fans at the home game against Florida on October 6, 2007. In 2017, LSU officially introduced Mike VII, formerly named &quot;Harvey&quot;.

In 2005, a new $3 million Mike the Tiger Habitat was created for Mike between Tiger Stadium and the Pete Maravich Assembly Center. Its amenities include lush plantings, a waterfall, a flowing stream that empties into a wading pond, and rocky plateaus. The habitat has, as a backdrop, an Italianate tower – a campanile – that creates a visual link to the Italianate architectural vernacular of LSU&#x27;s campus.

===Alma mater===

The &quot;LSU Alma Mater&quot; was written in 1929 by Lloyd Funchess and Harris Downey, two students who developed the original song and music because LSU&#x27;s first alma mater was sung to the tune of &quot;Far Above Cayuga&#x27;s Waters&quot; and was used by Cornell University. The band plays the &quot;Alma Mater&quot; during pregame and at the end of each home football game.

===Fight song===

&quot;Fight for LSU&quot; is LSU&#x27;s official fight song. During LSU football games, it is played when the team runs onto the field, after the field goal or extra point is attempted/scored and at the end of each half (though at the end of the first half a recording is played since the band is already on the sidelines and unable to perform it live). Contrary to popular belief, the song &quot;Hey Fightin&#x27; Tigers&quot; is not LSU&#x27;s fight song, however, it is a staple at pep rallies and is often sung by fans before games and after wins.

==Notable alumni==

LSU athletes have gone on to achieve prominence in their respective sports. &quot;Pistol&quot; Pete Maravich played basketball for LSU and was a three-time consensus first-team All-American and 1970 National &#x27;Player of the Year&#x27;. Shaquille O&#x27;Neal (&quot;Shaq&quot;) also played basketball for LSU and received many honors, including being named twice as a first-team Men&#x27;s Basketball All-American and twice as the SEC Player of the Year. Billy Cannon played Halfback for LSU and was the first LSU player to win the Heisman Trophy (in 1959), the second being Joe Burrow (in 2019). Cannon was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 2009. JaMarcus Russell, Oakland Raiders quarterback number 1 draft pick of 2007. Professional golfer Johnny Pott, five-time winner on the PGA Tour, was a member of the 1955 NCAA winning golf team. Teammates Alex Bregman and Aaron Nola were both 2018 Major League Baseball All-Stars.

LSU alumni have also been active on both the national and international stage in the fields of politics, academia, and the arts. Such notables include Mike Johnson, who has served as Speaker of the United States House of Representatives since October 2023. James Carville, who was the senior political adviser to Bill Clinton, and Donna Brazile, the campaign manager of the 2000 presidential campaign of Vice President Al Gore, both earned bachelor&#x27;s degrees. Hubert Humphrey, the 38th vice president of the United States, earned a master&#x27;s degree in political science before becoming the junior United States senator from Minnesota. Linda Thomas-Greenfield, a United States ambassador to the United Nations appointed by President Joe Biden in 2021, earned a BA in 1974. Randy Moffett, president of the University of Louisiana System and former president of Southeastern Louisiana University, received his Ed.D. from LSU in 1980. Academy Award-winning actress Joanne Woodward majored in drama during her enrollment at LSU. Author and screenwriter Nic Pizzolatto, creator of &quot;True Detective&quot;, graduated from LSU with a BA English &amp; Philosophy. Singer-songwriter, Addison Rae, known for her single Diet Pepsi and collaborations with Charli XCX, also attended the University before moving to Los Angeles after her sophomore year. Queer romance author Casey McQuiston, best known for their best selling novel &quot;Red, White &amp; Royal Blue&quot;, graduated from LSU with a degree in journalism. Another writer who graduated from LSU was Marcelo Ramos Motta, a noted author on the subject of Thelema. The rock band Better Than Ezra also are LSU graduates.

America&#x27;s early space program benefited from the services of two LSU graduates. Maxime Faget was a Naval reserve officer and the NASA engineer responsible for the design of the Mercury Capsule, Apollo Command Module, Capsule Escape Tower System, Mach Meter, and STS Space Shuttle Orbiter Vehicle and System. NASA pioneer/founder Walter C. Williams established what is now known as NASA&#x27;s Dryden Flight Research Center, previously known as Muroc Army Station. Williams was directly involved with the Bell X-1 program, &quot;Glamorous Glennis&quot;, research flights that led to the first crewed flight exceeding the speed of sound in level flight. Williams was on the Aeronautical Board of NACA and was responsible for hiring many of the pioneers of what is now NASA. Michael I. Jordan, Professor of Computer Science at UC Berkeley, is also an LSU alumnus.

==See also==
* American Student Dental Association
* Highland Road Park Observatory
* Hill Farm Community Garden
* List of forestry universities and colleges
* Louisiana Business Technology Center
* LSU Hilltop Arboretum
* LSU Tiger Trails
* Stephenson Disaster Management Institute
* National Register of Historic Places listings in East Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

Informational notes
Citations
Further reading

==External links==
* LSU Athletics website
* 
* Louisiana’s flagship university lets oil firms influence research – for a price</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1521725" start="0" end="26" title="Louisiana State University" label="Louisiana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521725" start="39" end="105" title="Louisiana State University" label="Louisiana State University and Agricultural and Mechanical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521725" start="131" end="134" title="Louisiana State University" label="LSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="151" end="157" title="Public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="158" end="168" title="Land-grant university" label="land-grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="169" end="188" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="192" end="214" title="Baton Rouge, Louisiana" label="Baton Rouge, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287287" start="271" end="291" title="Pineville, Louisiana" label="Pineville, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263883" start="308" end="367" title="Louisiana State Seminary of Learning &amp;amp; Military Academy" label="Louisiana State Seminary of Learning &amp;amp; Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="487" end="506" title="Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q177692" start="517" end="532" title="Andrea Palladio" label="Andrea Palladio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="574" end="591" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q212357" start="605" end="613" title="Flagship campus" label="flagship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="641" end="650" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872233" start="695" end="728" title="Louisiana State University System" label="Louisiana State University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223026" start="861" end="871" title="Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education" label="classified"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="1028" end="1057" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="1063" end="1090" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q478050" start="1096" end="1133" title="National Endowment for the Humanities" label="National Endowment for the Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="1143" end="1188" title="National Aeronautics and Space Administration" label="National Aeronautics and Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325166" start="1332" end="1363" title="LSU Tigers and Lady Tigers" label="LSU&amp;#x27;s athletics department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433767" start="1383" end="1397" title="varsity sports" label="varsity sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="1457" end="1461" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q963227" start="1513" end="1516" title="Southeastern Conference" label="SEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849386" start="1589" end="1603" title="Mike the Tiger" label="Mike the Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263883" start="2050" end="2096" title="Louisiana State Seminary of Learning &amp;amp; Military Academy" label="Seminary of Learning of the State of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287287" start="2102" end="2111" title="Pineville, Louisiana" label="Pineville"/>
<link wikidata="Q503870" start="2115" end="2129" title="Rapides Parish, Louisiana" label="Rapides Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061379" start="2133" end="2150" title="Central Louisiana" label="Central Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q785357" start="2176" end="2203" title="Virginia Military Institute" label="Virginia Military Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="2316" end="2340" title="William Tecumseh Sherman" label="William Tecumseh Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084336" start="2365" end="2377" title="Old LSU Site" label="Old LSU Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="2680" end="2690" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="2751" end="2769" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502519" start="2888" end="2906" title="Red River Campaign" label="Red River Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="3057" end="3066" title="Civil war" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355391" start="3115" end="3137" title="Battle of Appomattox Courthouse" label="Appomattox Court House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3180" end="3191" title="Louisiana State University traditions#Student life" label="two cannons"/>
<link wikidata="Q737517" start="3344" end="3355" title="Fort Sumter" label="Fort Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066087" start="3931" end="3950" title="Morrill Act of 1862" label="Morrill Act of 1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139922" start="5556" end="5574" title="James Monroe Smith (academic administrator)" label="James Monroe Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q314384" start="5589" end="5598" title="Huey Long" label="Huey Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q888346" start="5805" end="5821" title="Richard W. Leche" label="Richard W. Leche"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152116" start="5904" end="5918" title="Paul M. Hebert" label="Paul M. Hebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152118" start="5939" end="5949" title="Paul M. Hebert Law Center" label="law school"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6026" end="6038" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905616" start="6118" end="6152" title="V-12 Navy College Training Program" label="V-12 Navy College Training Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="6225" end="6229" title="ROTC" label="ROTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460013" start="6499" end="6517" title="LSU Honors College" label="LSU Honors College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="6545" end="6562" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="6630" end="6641" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193547" start="6655" end="6672" title="Tulane University" label="Tulane University"/>
<link wikidata="Q172430" start="6674" end="6703" title="Loyola University New Orleans" label="Loyola University New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q390087" start="6705" end="6735" title="Xavier University of Louisiana" label="Xavier University of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474157" start="6745" end="6770" title="University of New Orleans" label="University of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738031" start="6776" end="6805" title="Pete Maravich Assembly Center" label="Pete Maravich Assembly Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743104" start="6939" end="6984" title="American Association of University Professors" label="American Association of University Professors"/>
<link wikidata="Q15715682" start="7006" end="7022" title="Ivor van Heerden" label="Ivor van Heerden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="7062" end="7090" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="7160" end="7177" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423945" start="7190" end="7207" title="F. King Alexander" label="F. King Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="7413" end="7430" title="students of color" label="students of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q100281875" start="7583" end="7601" title="William F. Tate IV" label="William F. Tate IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="7699" end="7715" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="7888" end="7897" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529728" start="8391" end="8400" title="Les Miles" label="Les Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423945" start="8426" end="8443" title="F. King Alexander" label="F. King Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q52413" start="8489" end="8509" title="University of Kansas" label="University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q861888" start="8514" end="8537" title="Oregon State University" label="Oregon State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="8576" end="8602" title="United States Department of Education" label="US Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131951" start="8780" end="8789" title="Clery Act" label="Clery Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133007" start="9212" end="9220" title="Title IX" label="Title IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335247" start="9462" end="9472" title="Ed Orgeron" label="Ed Orgeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q26924449" start="9622" end="9635" title="Derrius Guice" label="Derrius Guice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673184" start="10048" end="10087" title="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission" label="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q32098" start="10508" end="10518" title="Sanctions (law)" label="sanctioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="10941" end="10953" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240764" start="11216" end="11221" title="Shell USA" label="Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="11842" end="11852" title="ExxonMobil" label="ExxonMobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="12306" end="12308" title="BP" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q319642" start="12310" end="12317" title="Chevron Corporation" label="Chevron"/>
<link wikidata="Q214763" start="12319" end="12333" title="ConocoPhillips" label="ConocoPhillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059709" start="12594" end="12636" title="Center for International Environmental Law" label="Center for International Environmental Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="13319" end="13336" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q107564215" start="13362" end="13378" title="Wilbur Trueblood" label="Wilbur Trueblood"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="13746" end="13762" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537619" start="14134" end="14152" title="George Caldwell (Louisiana official)" label="George A. Caldwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q306328" start="14166" end="14175" title="Abbeville, Louisiana" label="Abbeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q52387698" start="14272" end="14280" title="live oak" label="live oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="14464" end="14500" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460005" start="14696" end="14713" title="LSU Campus Mounds" label="LSU Campus Mounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="14914" end="14950" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491151" start="15458" end="15482" title="Shaw Center for the Arts" label="Shaw Center for the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689301" start="15910" end="15933" title="Louisiana State University Agricultural Center" label="LSU Agricultural Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163465" start="15935" end="15972" title="Pennington Biomedical Research Center" label="Pennington Biomedical Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q13634567" start="15974" end="15991" title="Louisiana State University of Alexandria" label="LSU of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689312" start="15993" end="16007" title="Louisiana State University Shreveport" label="LSU Shreveport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689310" start="16009" end="16019" title="Louisiana State University at Eunice" label="LSU Eunice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460011" start="16021" end="16059" title="LSU Health Sciences Center New Orleans" label="LSU Health Sciences Center New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689304" start="16064" end="16101" title="LSU Health Sciences Center Shreveport" label="LSU Health Sciences Center Shreveport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474157" start="16108" end="16133" title="University of New Orleans" label="University of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495858" start="16283" end="16313" title="University of Louisiana System" label="University of Louisiana System"/>
<link wikidata="Q689863" start="16470" end="16481" title="synchrotron" label="synchrotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="16582" end="16610" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053540" start="16819" end="16829" title="Yield (college admissions)" label="yield rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896798" start="16934" end="16948" title="University student retention" label="retention rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="17148" end="17151" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="17204" end="17207" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689305" start="17308" end="17352" title="Louisiana State University Laboratory School" label="Louisiana State University Laboratory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q126807" start="17356" end="17368" title="kindergarten" label="kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="17595" end="17616" title="land-grant university" label="land-grant university"/>
<link wikidata="Q251958" start="18131" end="18147" title="community garden" label="community garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465532" start="18538" end="18549" title="food system" label="food system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680670" start="18764" end="18781" title="Organic certification" label="certified organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165647" start="18835" end="18850" title="organic farming" label="organic farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="19040" end="19068" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="19180" end="19186" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440185" start="19563" end="19589" title="Federal Depository Library Program" label="Federal Depository Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="19641" end="19655" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="19661" end="19702" title="United States Patent and Trademark Office" label="United States Patent and Trademark Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810036" start="19736" end="19769" title="Association of Research Libraries" label="Association of Research Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709869" start="19901" end="19908" title="Lyrasis" label="Lyrasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341654" start="20214" end="20229" title="E. A. McIlhenny" label="E. A. McIlhenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q182882" start="20365" end="20383" title="John James Audubon" label="John James Audubon"/>
<link wikidata="Q377817" start="20397" end="20413" title="Birds of America (book)" label="Birds of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q922770" start="20421" end="20436" title="Margaret Stones" label="Margaret Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q309759" start="20489" end="20500" title="Edward Lear" label="Edward Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q313787" start="20502" end="20512" title="John Gould" label="John Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q334914" start="20514" end="20526" title="Mark Catesby" label="Mark Catesby"/>
<link wikidata="Q153408" start="20532" end="20548" title="Sir Joseph Banks" label="Sir Joseph Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q97065579" start="20551" end="20574" title="Ella V. Aldrich Schwing" label="Ella V. Aldrich Schwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q21604112" start="20823" end="20834" title="Martha Boaz" label="Martha Boaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100978" start="20836" end="20851" title="Ching-chih Chen" label="Ching-chih Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60048580" start="20853" end="20865" title="John Y. Cole" label="John Y. Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q60194810" start="20867" end="20887" title="Richard M. Dougherty" label="Richard M. Dougherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q23038083" start="20889" end="20905" title="Edward G. Holley" label="Edward G. Holley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303513" start="20907" end="20918" title="Judith Krug" label="Judith Krug"/>
<link wikidata="Q13515697" start="20920" end="20934" title="Clifford Lynch" label="Clifford Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203772" start="20936" end="20949" title="James G. Neal" label="James G. Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403607" start="20951" end="20977" title="Carl Howard Pforzheimer Jr" label="Carl Howard Pforzheimer Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q23620302" start="20979" end="20997" title="Benjamin E. Powell" label="Benjamin E. Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350927" start="21002" end="21019" title="Robert Wedgeworth" label="Robert Wedgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q665616" start="21096" end="21113" title="Troy H. Middleton" label="Troy H. Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975504" start="21822" end="21831" title="LSU Press" label="LSU Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="22066" end="22080" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q313739" start="22083" end="22101" title="John Kennedy Toole" label="John Kennedy Toole"/>
<link wikidata="Q627749" start="22115" end="22138" title="A Confederacy of Dunces" label="A Confederacy of Dunces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522794" start="22191" end="22206" title="Southern Review" label="Southern Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368848" start="22218" end="22234" title="literary journal" label="literary journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="22293" end="22307" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q312720" start="22323" end="22341" title="Robert Penn Warren" label="Robert Penn Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237928" start="22362" end="22375" title="Poet Laureate" label="Poet Laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978467" start="22410" end="22433" title="All the King&amp;#x27;s Men" label="All the King&amp;#x27;s Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="22454" end="22469" title="literary critic" label="literary critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q742302" start="22477" end="22490" title="New Criticism" label="New Criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915226" start="22499" end="22513" title="Cleanth Brooks" label="Cleanth Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552604" start="22789" end="22824" title="Society of Professional Journalists" label="Society of Professional Journalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006856" start="23341" end="23357" title="New Delta Review" label="New Delta Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368848" start="23369" end="23387" title="literary magazine" label="literary quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="23668" end="23695" title="fraternities and sororities" label="fraternities and sororities"/>
<link wikidata="Q126193092" start="23701" end="23720" title="Louisiana State University Corps of Cadets" label="LSU Corps of Cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728702" start="24468" end="24480" title="The Daily Reveille" label="The Reveille"/>
<link wikidata="Q851717" start="24560" end="24576" title="Princeton Review" label="Princeton Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338723" start="24742" end="24764" title="Editor &amp;amp; Publisher" label="Editor &amp;amp; Publisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691718" start="24989" end="24993" title="KLSU" label="KLSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145784" start="25013" end="25039" title="non-commercial educational" label="non-commercial educational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436229" start="25046" end="25059" title="college radio" label="college radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="25501" end="25505" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q963227" start="25557" end="25580" title="Southeastern Conference" label="Southeastern Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197506" start="25620" end="25628" title="LSU Tigers baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460027" start="25630" end="25640" title="LSU Tigers basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q20708446" start="25642" end="25655" title="LSU Tigers cross country" label="cross country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460028" start="25657" end="25665" title="LSU Tigers Football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973814" start="25673" end="25692" title="LSU Tigers swimming and diving" label="swimming and diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460033" start="25702" end="25724" title="LSU Tigers track and field" label="indoor track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460033" start="25730" end="25753" title="LSU Tigers track and field" label="outdoor track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460014" start="25792" end="25802" title="LSU Lady Tigers basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q29098047" start="25804" end="25820" title="LSU Tigers women&amp;#x27;s beach volleyball" label="beach volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q20708444" start="25822" end="25835" title="LSU Lady Tigers cross country" label="cross country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460015" start="25843" end="25853" title="LSU Lady Tigers gymnastics" label="gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844077" start="25855" end="25861" title="LSU Lady Tigers soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460017" start="25863" end="25871" title="LSU Lady Tigers softball" label="softball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973808" start="25873" end="25892" title="LSU Lady Tigers swimming and diving" label="swimming and diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460018" start="25902" end="25924" title="LSU Lady Tigers track and field" label="indoor track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460018" start="25926" end="25949" title="LSU Lady Tigers track and field" label="outdoor track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969847" start="25955" end="25965" title="LSU Lady Tigers volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="26379" end="26393" title="Division I-FBS" label="Division I-FBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594708" start="27169" end="27182" title="Tiger Stadium (Baton Rouge)" label="Tiger Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691559" start="27222" end="27258" title="Alex Box Stadium, Skip Bertman Field" label="Alex Box Stadium, Skip Bertman Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894454" start="27271" end="27297" title="Bernie Moore Track Stadium" label="Bernie Moore Track Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040513" start="27315" end="27338" title="Carl Maddox Field House" label="Carl Maddox Field House"/>
<link wikidata="Q44076731" start="27355" end="27373" title="Highland Road Park" label="Highland Road Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16632518" start="27391" end="27405" title="LSU Natatorium" label="LSU Natatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16632520" start="27429" end="27447" title="LSU Soccer Stadium" label="LSU Soccer Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q22023143" start="27458" end="27476" title="LSU Tennis Complex" label="LSU Tennis Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738031" start="27487" end="27516" title="Pete Maravich Assembly Center" label="Pete Maravich Assembly Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801450" start="27562" end="27572" title="Tiger Park" label="Tiger Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771605" start="27588" end="27618" title="University Club of Baton Rouge" label="University Club of Baton Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691781" start="27691" end="27731" title="LSU Cox Communications Academic Center for Student-Athletes" label="LSU Academic Center for Student-Athletes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257719" start="27733" end="27768" title="Charles McClendon Practice Facility" label="Charles McClendon Practice Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q16632640" start="27781" end="27811" title="LSU Football Operations Center" label="LSU Football Operations Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16632642" start="27824" end="27852" title="LSU Indoor Practice Facility" label="LSU Indoor Practice Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973805" start="27865" end="27897" title="LSU Basketball Practice Facility" label="LSU Basketball Practice Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q44076735" start="27915" end="27947" title="LSU Gymnastics Training Facility" label="LSU Gymnastics Training Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594708" start="28344" end="28357" title="Tiger Stadium (LSU)" label="Tiger Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="28538" end="28542" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327256" start="28866" end="28881" title="Earthquake Game" label="Earthquake Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q971195" start="29230" end="29250" title="Alabama Crimson Tide" label="Alabama Crimson Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098181" start="29252" end="29271" title="Arkansas Razorbacks" label="Arkansas Razorbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528311" start="29273" end="29286" title="Auburn Tigers" label="Auburn Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927993" start="29288" end="29314" title="Mississippi State Bulldogs" label="Mississippi State Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243927" start="29316" end="29331" title="Ole Miss Rebels" label="Ole Miss Rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099292" start="29355" end="29369" title="Florida Gators" label="Florida Gators"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791926" start="29637" end="29648" title="Golden Boot (LSU-Arkansas)" label="Golden Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q264545" start="30026" end="30034" title="Missouri Tigers" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q576483" start="30060" end="30077" title="Tulane Green Wave" label="Tulane Green Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870190" start="30099" end="30108" title="Battle for the Rag" label="Tiger Rag"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731867" start="30275" end="30288" title="Magnolia Bowl" label="Magnolia Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q70894" start="30723" end="30733" title="Nick Saban" label="Nick Saban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094177" start="31232" end="31253" title="University of Memphis" label="University of Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="31587" end="31594" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974145" start="31925" end="31947" title="Mike the Tiger Habitat" label="Mike the Tiger Habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594708" start="31977" end="31990" title="Tiger Stadium (LSU)" label="Tiger Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738031" start="31999" end="32028" title="Pete Maravich Assembly Center" label="Pete Maravich Assembly Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="32057" end="32066" title="plants" label="plantings"/>
<link wikidata="Q34038" start="32070" end="32079" title="waterfall" label="waterfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q47521" start="32091" end="32097" title="stream" label="stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q12719646" start="32125" end="32129" title="pond" label="pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q200334" start="32207" end="32216" title="campanile" label="campanile"/>
<link wikidata="Q174376" start="32344" end="32354" title="Alma Mater" label="Alma Mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="32592" end="32610" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q316183" start="33399" end="33412" title="Pete Maravich" label="Pete Maravich"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="33481" end="33492" title="All-America" label="All-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q169452" start="33544" end="33565" title="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="33708" end="33719" title="All-America" label="All-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q963227" start="33738" end="33741" title="Southeastern Conference" label="SEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203278" start="33742" end="33760" title="Player of the year award" label="Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912321" start="33762" end="33774" title="Billy Cannon" label="Billy Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035067" start="33839" end="33853" title="Heisman Trophy" label="Heisman Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q56860229" start="33882" end="33892" title="Joe Burrow" label="Joe Burrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676743" start="33972" end="33988" title="JaMarcus Russell" label="JaMarcus Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267489" start="34067" end="34078" title="Johnny Pott" label="Johnny Pott"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="34104" end="34112" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330908" start="34139" end="34161" title="NCAA Division I Men&amp;#x27;s Golf Championships" label="NCAA winning golf team"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206952" start="34173" end="34185" title="Alex Bregman" label="Alex Bregman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16235688" start="34190" end="34200" title="Aaron Nola" label="Aaron Nola"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880665" start="34401" end="34413" title="Mike Johnson" label="Mike Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="34433" end="34486" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281204" start="34507" end="34521" title="James Carville" label="James Carville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="34563" end="34575" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269048" start="34581" end="34594" title="Donna Brazile" label="Donna Brazile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027838" start="34600" end="34616" title="campaign manager" label="campaign manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="34624" end="34650" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="34669" end="34676" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="34715" end="34730" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="34883" end="34892" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q19920980" start="34894" end="34917" title="Linda Thomas-Greenfield" label="Linda Thomas-Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q112177529" start="34921" end="34967" title="United States Ambassador to the United Nations" label="United States ambassador to the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="34991" end="35000" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292330" start="35031" end="35044" title="Randy Moffett" label="Randy Moffett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495858" start="35063" end="35093" title="University of Louisiana System" label="University of Louisiana System"/>
<link wikidata="Q615998" start="35118" end="35151" title="Southeastern Louisiana University" label="Southeastern Louisiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q837184" start="35166" end="35171" title="Ed.D." label="Ed.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="35190" end="35203" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111542" start="35220" end="35235" title="Joanne Woodward" label="Joanne Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024302" start="35307" end="35321" title="Nic Pizzolatto" label="Nic Pizzolatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847400" start="35340" end="35354" title="True Detective" label="True Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q83739405" start="35436" end="35447" title="Addison Rae" label="Addison Rae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275050" start="35470" end="35480" title="Diet Pepsi" label="Diet Pepsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084390" start="35505" end="35515" title="Charli XCX" label="Charli XCX"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="35563" end="35574" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q64148410" start="35622" end="35637" title="Casey McQuiston" label="Casey McQuiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q104876272" start="35685" end="35712" title="Red, White &amp;amp; Royal Blue" label="Red, White &amp;amp; Royal Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756615" start="35810" end="35829" title="Marcelo Ramos Motta" label="Marcelo Ramos Motta"/>
<link wikidata="Q745955" start="35864" end="35871" title="Thelema" label="Thelema"/>
<link wikidata="Q832446" start="35887" end="35903" title="Better Than Ezra" label="Better Than Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q923972" start="36014" end="36026" title="Maxime Faget" label="Maxime Faget"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="36063" end="36067" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="36200" end="36213" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715142" start="36263" end="36281" title="Walter C. Williams" label="Walter C. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q305443" start="36327" end="36356" title="Dryden Flight Research Center" label="Dryden Flight Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q223365" start="36462" end="36479" title="Glamorous Glennis" label="Glamorous Glennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q618604" start="36628" end="36632" title="NACA" label="NACA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308285" start="36706" end="36723" title="Michael I. Jordan" label="Michael I. Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745194" start="36811" end="36846" title="American Student Dental Association" label="American Student Dental Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759101" start="36849" end="36879" title="Highland Road Park Observatory" label="Highland Road Park Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521725" start="36882" end="36908" title="Hill Farm Community Garden" label="Hill Farm Community Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621074" start="36911" end="36953" title="List of forestry universities and colleges" label="List of forestry universities and colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689081" start="36956" end="36992" title="Louisiana Business Technology Center" label="Louisiana Business Technology Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460012" start="36995" end="37016" title="LSU Hilltop Arboretum" label="LSU Hilltop Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460022" start="37019" end="37035" title="LSU Tiger Trails" label="LSU Tiger Trails"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610985" start="37038" end="37078" title="Stephenson Disaster Management Institute" label="Stephenson Disaster Management Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q12062686" start="37081" end="37164" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in East Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in East Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277907" wikidata="Q1025407" url="?curid=277907" title="Caerphilly cheese">
<text>Caerphilly is a hard, crumbly white cheese that originated in the area around the town of Caerphilly, Wales. It is thought to have been created to provide food for the local coal miners. The Caerphilly of that period had a greater moisture content, and was made in local farms. At the start of the 20th century, competition for milk in the local area saw production decline, and Caerphilly production was gradually relocated to England.

During the Second World War, production was stopped and diverted to Cheddar in English factories. After the war, those factories began to produce Caerphilly as it was quicker to make than Cheddar, and therefore more profitable. The majority of Caerphilly is now produced in Somerset and Wiltshire. Artisan cheesemakers still make Caerphilly in the pre-war style, and these have been successful at the British Cheese Awards.

==History==

Caerphilly cheese was originally a moist curd, made in local farms. It has since been replaced with a much drier version produced on an industrial scale. However, there still remain some cheesemakers producing Caerphilly in the old style on an artisan basis. The cheese was originally made to feed the coal miners of the area. It has subsequently been suggested that the salt content of the cheese was required by manual workers, and it can be cut into wedges and does not dry out in the conditions underground. Caerphilly became a centre for cheese production, but over time competing demands for the milk required resulted in production of the cheese moving to England at the start of the 20th century.

Farmhouse Caerphilly production died out during World War II as it did not keep as well as Cheddar from English factories for the war effort. After the war those factories started making their own versions of Caerphilly, which matured very quickly and thus required less financing. Over time, the public forgot the difference between the old and new Caerphilly cheeses.

The majority of mass-produced Caerphilly cheese is now produced in the English counties of Somerset and Wiltshire. There was a resurgence in farmhouse-produced Caerphilly during the 1980s in Wales, as a result of the work of Cenarth Cheese. This originated because milk quotas imposed at the time meant that milk was being thrown away and so Thelma Adams decided to make a business out of producing cheese from the excess milk.

By the late 1990s, there were no cheesemakers in Caerphilly making the cheese for which the town is known. Realising this, Castle Dairies began making the cheese shortly after they opened in the town. Rather than using factory methods, they use the pre-war production techniques by hand. They won a gold and a bronze award at the British Cheese Awards in 2000. Caerphilly cheese was one of nine Welsh products considered by the British Government in July 2015 as candidates for name protection under the Geographical indications and traditional specialities in the European Union rules. It was the only cheese considered as a candidate on the list.

==Description==
Caerphilly is a light-coloured (almost white) crumbly cheese made from cow&#x27;s milk, and generally has a fat content of between 45% and 55%. It has a mild taste, with a tang of lemon. A traditional Caerphilly must be made with milk produced by Welsh farms. It can be either pasteurised or unpasteurised, and comes in both organic and non-organic varieties.

It is created by adding rennet to buttermilk, resulting in curd production. This is then formed and cut, before being pressed lightly into a cylindrical mould. These rounds are then submerged in a bath of brine for 24 hours to cause the production of a rind. Rice flour is used to dust the outside of the cheese, resulting in a white colour for the rind. The cheese ripens quickly, in as little as two weeks. The acid production of the cheese is initially slow, but builds up. This and the low temperature used during production mean that the acid naturally dries out the curd, causing the crumbly texture. The cheese is nicknamed &quot;The Crumblies&quot;.

==Protected status==
Traditional Welsh Caerphilly and Traditional Welsh Caerffili are both protected by European Protected Geographical Indication (PGI) status.

==Reception and legacy==

An article in the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; in 1987 extolled the virtues of Caerphilly cheese. It described it as having a &quot;mild, salty, buttermilk&quot; flavour and being halfway between ricotta and cheddar.

Bee Wilson, writing for &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; on 9 October 2011, praised the old style of Caerphilly now made by small-scale producers such as Gorwydd Farm. She compared it with French cheeses, calling it &quot;buttery&quot; in comparison to the post-war mass manufactured type which she called &quot;young and flavourless, with the texture of chalk&quot;.

The town of Caerphilly holds an annual three-day festival to celebrate the cheese, entitled &quot;The Big Cheese&quot; (). Also in Caerphilly is a sculpture of a cheese. A best Caerphilly cheese category forms part of the annual British Cheese Awards. In 2004, Gorwydd Caerphilly won both the Caerphilly prize and the overall award for best Traditional British cheese. It was made by brothers Todd and Maugan Trethowan at their family farm in Tregaron, Ceredigion. However, they failed to win the Best Welsh Cheese category.

Caerphilly is the third of 43 cheeses mentioned in the Monty Python Cheese Shop Sketch.

== See also ==
* List of cheeses
* List of British cheeses
* Yarg a similar style of cheese from Cornwall

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1025407" start="0" end="10" title="Caerphilly cheese" label="Caerphilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="36" end="42" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q909119" start="90" end="100" title="Caerphilly" label="Caerphilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="102" end="107" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="174" end="185" title="Coal mining" label="coal miners"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="449" end="465" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q217525" start="506" end="513" title="Cheddar (cheese)" label="Cheddar"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="712" end="720" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q23183" start="725" end="734" title="Wiltshire" label="Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801204" start="736" end="756" title="artisan cheese" label="Artisan cheesemakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801204" start="1120" end="1127" title="Artisan cheese" label="artisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="1178" end="1189" title="Coal mining" label="coal miners"/>
<link wikidata="Q217525" start="1673" end="1680" title="Cheddar (cheese)" label="Cheddar"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="2044" end="2052" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q23183" start="2057" end="2066" title="Wiltshire" label="Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q627396" start="2218" end="2228" title="milk quota" label="milk quota"/>
<link wikidata="Q363268" start="2886" end="2961" title="Geographical indications and traditional specialities in the European Union" label="Geographical indications and traditional specialities in the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="3119" end="3134" title="cow&amp;#x27;s milk" label="cow&amp;#x27;s milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q58148" start="3325" end="3336" title="Pasteurization" label="pasteurised"/>
<link wikidata="Q326900" start="3433" end="3439" title="rennet" label="rennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q106612" start="3443" end="3453" title="buttermilk" label="buttermilk"/>
<link wikidata="Q214403" start="3614" end="3619" title="brine" label="brine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269205" start="3668" end="3678" title="Rice flour" label="Rice flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q363268" start="4172" end="4214" title="Geographical indications and traditional specialities in the European Union" label="European Protected Geographical Indication"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="4280" end="4297" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q216781" start="4453" end="4460" title="ricotta" label="ricotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="4505" end="4524" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q285484" start="4663" end="4676" title="French cheese" label="French cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487253" start="5286" end="5294" title="Tregaron" label="Tregaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q217829" start="5296" end="5306" title="Ceredigion" label="Ceredigion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="5424" end="5436" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362592" start="5437" end="5455" title="Cheese Shop Sketch" label="Cheese Shop Sketch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455981" start="5475" end="5490" title="List of cheeses" label="List of cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q736930" start="5493" end="5516" title="List of British cheeses" label="List of British cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q377020" start="5519" end="5523" title="Yarg" label="Yarg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="5555" end="5563" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277913" wikidata="Q624780" url="?curid=277913" title="Gōjū-ryū">
<text>, Japanese for &quot;hard-soft style&quot;, is one of the main traditional Okinawan styles of karate, featuring a combination of hard and soft techniques.

Gō, which means hard, refers to closed hand techniques or straight linear attacks; jū, which means soft, refers to open hand techniques and circular movements. Gōjū-ryū incorporates both circular and linear movements into its curriculum, combining hard striking attacks such as kicks and close hand punches with softer open hand circular techniques for attacking, blocking, and controlling the opponent, including joint locks, grappling, takedowns, and throws.

Major emphasis is given to breathing correctly in all of the kata but particularly in the two core kata of the style, Sanchin and Tensho. Gōjū-ryū practices methods that include body strengthening and conditioning, its basic approach to fighting (distance, stickiness, power generation, etc.), and partner drills.

== History ==
The development of Gōjū-ryū goes back to Higaonna Kanryō, (1853–1916), a native of Naha, Okinawa. Higaonna began studying Shuri-te as a child. He was first exposed to martial arts in 1867 when he began training in Luohan or &quot;Arhat boxing&quot; under Arakaki Seishō, a fluent Chinese speaker and translator for the court of the Ryukyu Kingdom.

In 1870, Arakaki went to Beijing to translate for Ryukyuan officials. It was then that he recommended Higaonna to Kojo Taitei, under whom Higaonna began training.

With the help of Taitei and a family friend, Yoshimura Chomei (who was an Udun or Prince) Higaonna eventually managed to set up safe passage to China, lodging, and martial arts instruction. In 1873 he left for Fuzhou in Fujian, China, where he began studying Chinese martial arts under various teachers.
In 1877 he began to study under Ryū Ryū Ko. Tokashiki Iken has identified him as Xie Zhongxiang, founder of Whooping Crane Kung Fu. Zhongxiang taught several Okinawan students who went on to become karate legends. However, since Ryu Ryu Ko had died by 1915 when Chojun Miyagi went to Fuzhou in search of him, and Xie Zhong Xiang died in 1926, the two may not be the same person.

Higaonna returned to Okinawa in 1882 and continued in the family business of selling firewood, while teaching a new school of martial arts, distinguished by its integration of &quot;gō-no&quot; (hard) and &quot;jū-no&quot; (soft) kenpō into one system. Higaonna&#x27;s style was known as a type of Naha-te. Naha-te included other earlier teachers such as Arakaki Seisho and the Kojo family style. However, after Japan annexed Okinawa and defeated China in the Sino-Japanese War, the Patron of Naha-te, Yoshimura Udun, and his pro-China faction lost power in Okinawan politics, they migrated to Fuzhou, Taiwan or Hawaii and the older schools of Naha-te were largely lost. Through this period until 1905 when karate was openly taught in Okinawan schools, Kanryo Higaonna kept Naha-te alive by giving students private lessons at his home.

Gōjū-kai history considers &quot;Chinese Nanpa Shorin-ken&quot; to be the strain of kung fu that influenced this style.

Higaonna Morio (no relation with Kanryo&#x27;s family) noted that in 1905, Higaonna Kanryō taught martial arts in two different ways, according to the type of student: At home, he taught Naha-te as a martial art whose ultimate goal was to be able to kill the opponent; however, at Naha Commercial High School, he taught karate as a form of physical, intellectual and moral education.

Higaonna Kanryo&#x27;s most prominent student was Chōjun Miyagi (1888–1953), the son of a wealthy shop owner in Naha, who began training under Higaonna at the age of 14. Miyagi had begun his martial arts training under Ryuko Arakaki at age 11, and it was through Ryuko Arakaki that he was introduced to Higaonna. Miyagi trained under Higaonna for 15 years until Higaonna&#x27;s death in 1916.

In 1915 Miyagi and a friend, Gokenki, went to Fuzhou in search of Higaonna&#x27;s teacher. They stayed for a year and studied under several masters but the old school was gone due to the Boxer Rebellion. Shortly after their return, Higaonna died. In 1917 Chojun Miyagi once again went to Fuzhou for a short visit to explore local martial arts schools. After he returned, many of Higaonna&#x27;s students continued to train with Miyagi and he introduced a kata called Tensho around 1918, which he had adapted from Rokkishu of Fujian White Crane.

In 1929 delegates from around Japan were meeting in Kyoto for the All Japan Martial Arts Demonstration. Miyagi was unable to attend, and so he in turn asked his top student Jin&#x27;an Shinzato to go. While Shinzato was there, one of the other demonstrators asked him the name of the martial art he practiced. At this time, Miyagi had not yet named his style. Not wanting to be embarrassed, Shinzato improvised the name &quot;hanko-ryu&quot; (&quot;half-hard style&quot;). On his return to Okinawa Prefecture, he reported this incident to Chōjun Miyagi, who decided on the name &quot;Gōjū-ryū&quot; (&quot;hard soft style&quot;) as a name for his style. Chojun Miyagi took the name from a line of the poem &quot;Hakku Kenpo&quot;, which roughly means: &quot;The eight laws of the fist,&quot; and describes the eight precepts of the martial arts. This poem was part of the &quot;Bubishi&quot; and reads, &quot;Ho wa Gōjū wa Donto su&quot; &quot;the way of inhaling and exhaling is hardness and softness,&quot; or &quot;everything in the universe inhales soft and exhales hard.&quot;

In March 1934, Miyagi wrote &quot;Karate-do Gaisetsu&quot; (&quot;Outline of &quot;Karate-do&quot; (Chinese Hand Way)&quot;), to introduce karate-do and to provide a general explanation of its history, philosophy, and application. This handwritten monograph is one of the few written works composed by Miyagi himself.

Miyagi&#x27;s house was destroyed during World War II. In 1950, several of his students began working to build a house and dojo for him in Naha, which they completed in 1951. In 1952, they came up with the idea of creating an organization to promote the growth of Gōjū-ryū. This organization was called &quot;Gōjū-ryū Shinkokai&quot; (&quot;Association to Promote Gōjū-ryū&quot;). The founding members were Seko Higa, Keiyo Matanbashi, Jinsei Kamiya, and Genkai Nakaima.

In 1940 Chojun Miyagi created the kata Geki-Sai-dai-Ichi and Geki-Sai-dai-ni. Geki-sai-dai-Ichi was also incorporated into the Okinawan Karate tradition as Fukyugata-Dai-Ni. Fukyugata-Dai-Ni is practiced by other schools such as Kobayashi Shorin-Ryu and Matsubayashi Shorin-Ryu.

There are two years that define the way Gōjū-ryū has been considered by the Japanese establishment: the first, 1933, is the year Gōjū-ryū was officially recognized as a budō in Japan by the DNBK Dai Nippon Butoku Kai, in other words, it was recognized as a modern martial art, or gendai budō by the Japanese Government. The second year, 1998, is the year the semi-governmental Nippon Kobudo Kyokai (Japan Traditional Martial Arts Association), under the Cultural Ministry of Japan, recognized Gōjū-ryū Karate-do as an ancient form of traditional martial art (&quot;koryū&quot;) and as a bujutsu. This recognition as a &quot;koryū bujutsu&quot; shows a change in how Japanese society sees the relationships between Japan, Okinawa and China.

After Miyagi&#x27;s death (1953), for some sources, the family communicated that the founder of the style wanted Eiichi Miyazato to succeed him. The Gōjū-ryū committee, formed by major students of Miyagi (which included among others Nakaima, Madanbashi, Meitoku Yagi, Iha Koshin) at a meeting in February 1954 voted almost unanimously Eiichi Miyzato as the official successor to Chojun Miyagi. However, for other sources, including Eiichi Miyazato&#x27;s students and heirs, no official successor to Chojun Miyagi was ever designated.

Until 1998, the only karate styles recognized as Koryu Bujutsu were newer styles founded in mainland Japan such as Wado Ryu and Itosu Ryu. Gōjū-ryū was the first style recognized by the NKK(Nippon Kobudo Kyokai), and Gōjū-ryū&#x27;s official representative with the NKK was Morio Higaonna, and the organization he founded, the IOGKF was Gōjū-ryū&#x27;s representative organization in the NKK.

==Philosophy==
Miyagi believed that &quot;the ultimate aim of karate-do was to build character, conquer human misery, and find spiritual freedom&quot;.

He stated that it was important to balance training for self-defense with &quot;training the mind, or cultivating the precept &quot;karate-do ni sente nashi&quot; (&#x27;there is no first strike in karate&#x27;)&quot;; he also emphasized the importance of &quot;cultivating intellect before strength&quot;.

Miyagi chose the name Gōjū-ryū, with meaning &quot;hard&quot; and meaning &quot;soft&quot;, to emphasize that his style integrated both &quot;hard&quot; and &quot;soft&quot; styles. &quot;Gōjū&quot; applies not just to karate, but to life in general; only hardness or only softness will not enable one &quot;to deal effectively with the fluctuations of life&quot;. When blocking, &quot;the body is soft and inhaling&quot;; when striking, the body is &quot;hard and exhaling&quot;.

== Kata ==
Gōjū-ryū has 12 core kata in its standard curriculum. In some schools, practitioners are required to know all of these kata before reaching &quot;sandan&quot; (3rd degree black belt) or, more commonly, for &quot;godan&quot; (5th degree black belt).

Morio Higaonna writes that &quot;Karate begins and ends with &quot;kata&quot;. &quot;Kata&quot; is the essence and foundation of karate and it represents the accumulation of more than 1000 years of knowledge. Formed by numerous masters throughout the ages through dedicated training and research, the &quot;kata&quot; are like a map to guide us, and as such should never be changed or tampered with.&quot;

Almost all of the &quot;kata&quot; have a corresponding &quot;bunkai oyo&quot;, a prearranged two-person fighting drill. These drills help the student to understand the applications of the &quot;kata&quot;, establish proper rhythm/flow, to practice constant attack/defense, and to safely practice dangerous moves on a partner.

=== Kihongata ===
Kihongata (基本型) means a &quot;kata of basics.&quot; In Gōjū-ryū, Sanchin kata is the foundation to all other Gōjū kata because it teaches basic movements, basic techniques, power generation and breathing techniques from qigong.. It is also the foundation of body conditioning. The more the karateka practices this kata, the more his Heishugata will change. First variation of Sanchin-kata (sanchin kata dai-ichi) serves as Kihongata. 

====Gekisai====
&quot;Gekisai&quot; (kanji: 撃砕; katakana: ゲキサイ) means &quot;attack and smash&quot;. These kata were created around 1940 by Chojun Miyagi and Nagamine Shoshin as beginners&#x27; kata, to introduce the basic forms of karate (&quot;kihon&quot;) to middle school students in Okinawa, to help bring about the standardization of karate, and to teach a basic set of techniques for self-defense. &quot;Gekisai&quot; kata were strongly influenced by the Shuri-te techniques that Miyagi learned from Anko Itosu.

Students first learn &quot;gekisai dai ichi&quot; and then &quot;gekisai dai ni&quot;. The main difference between &quot;dai ichi&quot; and &quot;dai ni&quot; is that &quot;dai ni&quot; introduces open handed techniques and new stances. It is in &quot;gekesai dai ni&quot; that students are introduced to the &quot;neko ashi dachi&quot; stance, and to the wheel block (&quot;mawashi uke&quot;).

====Saifa====
&quot;Saifa&quot; (Kanji: 砕破; Katakana: サイファ) means &quot;rip and tear&quot; or &quot;rip and destroy&quot;. &quot;Saifa&quot; has its origins in China, and was brought to Okinawa by Higashionna. It contains quick whipping motions, hammerfists, and back fist strikes; it particularly emphasizes moving off-line from an opponent&#x27;s main force, while simultaneously closing distance and exploding through them. This is usually the first advanced Gōjū-ryū kata the students learn in most Gōjū-ryū dojos after gekisai dai ichi and gekisai dai ni are mastered. Kata Saifa is usually taught once students reach their purple belt. 

====Sanchin====
&quot;Sanchin&quot; (Kanji: 三戦; Katakana: サンチン) means &quot;three battles&quot;. This &quot;kata&quot; is a sort of moving meditation, whose purpose is to unify the mind, body and spirit. The techniques are performed very slowly so that the student masters precise movements, breathing, stance/posture, internal strength, and stability of both mind and body.

&quot;Sanchin&quot; is the foundation for all other &quot;kata&quot;, and is generally considered to be the most important &quot;kata&quot; to master. When new students came to Miyagi, he would often train them for three to five years before introducing them to &quot;sanchin&quot;. He would make them train very hard, and many of them quit before learning &quot;sanchin&quot;. Those that remained would focus almost exclusively on &quot;sanchin&quot; for two to three years. Miyagi&#x27;s &quot;sanchin&quot; training was very harsh, and students would often leave practice with bruises from him checking their stance.

====Tensho====
 means &quot;revolving hands&quot;. Like &quot;sanchin&quot;, &quot;tensho&quot; is a form of moving meditation; &quot;tensho&quot; combines hard dynamic tension with soft flowing hand movements, and concentrates strength in the &quot;tanden&quot;. &quot;Tensho&quot; can be considered the &quot;ju&quot; (soft) counterpart of the &quot;sanchin&quot;&#x27;s &quot;go&quot; (hard) style.

=== Kaishukata ===
Kaishukata means a &quot;kata with open hands&quot;. This is more advanced than Heishugata. Kaishukata serves as a &quot;combat application reference&quot; kata and is open to vast interpretation (Bunkai) of its movements&#x27; purpose (hence, &quot;open hands&quot;).

* (attack, conquer, suppress; also referred to as &quot;to control and pull into battle&quot;) demonstrates the use of techniques to unbalance, throw and grapple, contains close-quartered striking, sweeps, take-downs and throws.
* (&quot;to destroy in four directions&quot; or &quot;fight in four directions&quot;) integrates powerful linear attacks (shotei zuki) and circular movements and blocks. It was the favorite kata of the late Miyagi.
* (36 hands) teaches how to move around the opponent in close quarters fights, and emphasizes the destruction of the opponent&#x27;s mobility by means of kansetsu geri.
* (18 hands) incorporates both the four directional movements and 45° angular attacks and implements techniques for both long distance and close quarter combat. This was a Seikichi Toguchi&#x27;s specialty kata.
* (holding on long and striking suddenly) is based on the Chinese praying mantis style. It was Ei&#x27;ichi Miyazato&#x27;s specialty kata.
* (13 Hands) is thought to be one of the oldest kata that is widely practiced among other Naha-te schools. Other ryuha also practice this kata or other versions of it.
* (108 Hands), also known as &quot;Pechurin&quot;, is the most advanced Gōjū-ryū kata. Initially it had three levels to master (go, chu, and jo). Later, Miyagi left only one, the highest, &quot;jo&quot; level. This was a Meitoku Yagi&#x27;s, Masanobu Shinjo, and Morio Higaonna&#x27;s specialty kata.

===Fukyugata===
In 1940, General Hajime Hayakawa (早川 元), the installed governor of Okinawa, assembled the Karate-Do Special Committee, composed by Ishihara Shochoku (chairman), Miyagi Chojun, Kamiya Jinsei, Shinzato Jinan, Miyasato Koji, Tokuda Anbun, Kinjo Kensei, Kyan Shinei, and Nagamine Shoshin. The goal was to create a series of Okinawan kata to teach physical education and very basic Okinawan &#x27;independent style&#x27; martial arts to school children. Their goal was not to create a standardized karate as the Japanese had been doing with kendo and judo for the sake of popularization.

These kata are not traditional Gōjū-ryū kata; instead, they are &quot;promotional kata&quot;, simple enough to be taught as part of physical education programs at schools and part of a standardized karate syllabus for schools, independent of the sensei&#x27;s style.

Shoshin Nagamine (Matsubayashi Shorin-Ryū) and Miyagi Chojun developed &quot;fukyugata dai ichi&quot;, which is part of the current Matsubayashi Shorin Ryu syllabus and further developed &quot;fukyugata dai ni&quot;, which is part of the current Gōjū-ryū syllabus under the name &quot;gekisai dai ichi&quot;. Some Gōjū-ryū dojos still practice fukyugata dai ichi. Miyagi also created &quot;gekisai dai ni&quot;, but it is practiced by Gōjū-ryū and some offshoots only.

== Notable practitioners ==

* Chōjun Miyagi (founder)
* Eiichi Miyazato
* Seiko Higa
* Meitoku Yagi 
* Gōgen Yamaguchi
* Morio Higaonna
* Seigo Tada
* Kenji Kurosaki
* Tadashi Sawamura
* Sonny Chiba
* Masashi Ishibashi (actor)
* Peter Urban (karate)
* Gunnar Nelson (fighter)
* Jeff Speakman
* Michael Jai White
* Robert Whittaker (fighter)
* Ayumi Uekusa
* Atsuko Wakai
* Katja Kankaanpää
* Paul Starling
* Tino Ceberano
* Giga Chikadze
* Morihiro Yamauchi
* Teruo Chinen

== See also ==

*Karate kata

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
*Bishop, Mark (1989) &quot;Okinawan Karate&quot;
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="2" end="10" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="75" end="83" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="94" end="100" title="karate" label="karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655496" start="129" end="142" title="hard and soft (martial arts)" label="hard and soft"/>
<link wikidata="Q624780" start="156" end="158" title="Gōjū-ryū" label="Gō"/>
<link wikidata="Q624780" start="239" end="241" title="Gōjū-ryū" label="jū"/>
<link wikidata="Q40795" start="717" end="721" title="kata" label="kata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671125" start="736" end="743" title="Sanchin" label="Sanchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q335884" start="748" end="754" title="Tensho (kata)" label="Tensho"/>
<link wikidata="Q699236" start="988" end="1003" title="Higaonna Kanryō" label="Higaonna Kanryō"/>
<link wikidata="Q181966" start="1030" end="1043" title="Naha, Okinawa" label="Naha, Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052901" start="1069" end="1077" title="Shuri-te" label="Shuri-te"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023502" start="1161" end="1167" title="Luohan (martial arts)" label="Luohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q584466" start="1202" end="1216" title="Arakaki Seishō" label="Arakaki Seishō"/>
<link wikidata="Q28025" start="1279" end="1293" title="Ryukyu Kingdom" label="Ryukyu Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="1321" end="1328" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q68481" start="1670" end="1676" title="Fuzhou" label="Fuzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="1680" end="1686" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1688" end="1693" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q954330" start="1796" end="1806" title="Ryū Ryū Ko" label="Ryū Ryū Ko"/>
<link wikidata="Q501672" start="2374" end="2379" title="kenpō" label="kenpō"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="2604" end="2621" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="3065" end="3072" title="kung fu" label="kung fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="3422" end="3428" title="karate" label="karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q221121" start="3537" end="3550" title="Chōjun Miyagi" label="Chōjun Miyagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="4068" end="4083" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="Boxer Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q803758" start="4406" end="4424" title="Fujian White Crane" label="Fujian White Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="4917" end="4935" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5870" end="5882" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q752021" start="6750" end="6754" title="budō" label="budō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157631" start="6776" end="6797" title="Dai Nippon Butoku Kai" label="Dai Nippon Butoku Kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q930504" start="6861" end="6872" title="gendai budō" label="gendai budō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511809" start="7146" end="7151" title="koryū" label="koryū"/>
<link wikidata="Q752021" start="7168" end="7175" title="bujutsu" label="bujutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q831454" start="7247" end="7263" title="culture of Japan" label="Japanese society"/>
<link wikidata="Q75779" start="7269" end="7319" title="Sino-Japanese relations" label="the relationships between Japan, Okinawa and China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349190" start="7435" end="7450" title="Eiichi Miyazato" label="Eiichi Miyazato"/>
<link wikidata="Q723334" start="8185" end="8190" title="IOGKF" label="IOGKF"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108818" start="9227" end="9231" title="karate kata" label="kata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599967" start="9456" end="9470" title="Morio Higaonna" label="Morio Higaonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q40795" start="10239" end="10243" title="kata" label="kata"/>
<link wikidata="Q204368" start="10429" end="10435" title="qigong" label="qigong"/>
<link wikidata="Q219067" start="10467" end="10484" title="body conditioning" label="body conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671125" start="10585" end="10592" title="Sanchin" label="Sanchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320265" start="10667" end="10674" title="Gekisai" label="Gekisai"/>
<link wikidata="Q527422" start="11151" end="11161" title="Anko Itosu" label="Anko Itosu"/>
<link wikidata="Q108458" start="12343" end="12353" title="meditation" label="meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954660" start="14678" end="14694" title="Seikichi Toguchi" label="Seikichi Toguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349190" start="14813" end="14834" title="Ei&amp;#x27;ichi Miyazato" label="Ei&amp;#x27;ichi Miyazato"/>
<link wikidata="Q16016038" start="15247" end="15259" title="Meitoku Yagi" label="Meitoku Yagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599967" start="15289" end="15303" title="Morio Higaonna" label="Morio Higaonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="15837" end="15843" title="karate" label="karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170931" start="15880" end="15885" title="kendo" label="kendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="15890" end="15894" title="judo" label="judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963468" start="16196" end="16212" title="Shoshin Nagamine" label="Shoshin Nagamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q221121" start="16697" end="16710" title="Chōjun Miyagi" label="Chōjun Miyagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349190" start="16723" end="16738" title="Eiichi Miyazato" label="Eiichi Miyazato"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447367" start="16741" end="16751" title="Seiko Higa" label="Seiko Higa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16016038" start="16754" end="16766" title="Meitoku Yagi" label="Meitoku Yagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q268880" start="16770" end="16785" title="Gōgen Yamaguchi" label="Gōgen Yamaguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599967" start="16788" end="16802" title="Morio Higaonna" label="Morio Higaonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446692" start="16805" end="16815" title="Seigo Tada" label="Seigo Tada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738762" start="16818" end="16832" title="Kenji Kurosaki" label="Kenji Kurosaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674378" start="16835" end="16851" title="Tadashi Sawamura" label="Tadashi Sawamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q351732" start="16854" end="16865" title="Sonny Chiba" label="Sonny Chiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q11586713" start="16868" end="16893" title="Masashi Ishibashi (actor)" label="Masashi Ishibashi (actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900953" start="16896" end="16916" title="Peter Urban (karate)" label="Peter Urban (karate)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480456" start="16919" end="16942" title="Gunnar Nelson (fighter)" label="Gunnar Nelson (fighter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052982" start="16945" end="16958" title="Jeff Speakman" label="Jeff Speakman"/>
<link wikidata="Q248915" start="16961" end="16978" title="Michael Jai White" label="Michael Jai White"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845777" start="16981" end="17007" title="Robert Whittaker (fighter)" label="Robert Whittaker (fighter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24476023" start="17010" end="17022" title="Ayumi Uekusa" label="Ayumi Uekusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869852" start="17025" end="17037" title="Atsuko Wakai" label="Atsuko Wakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q18001394" start="17040" end="17056" title="Katja Kankaanpää" label="Katja Kankaanpää"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898157" start="17059" end="17072" title="Paul Starling" label="Paul Starling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808402" start="17075" end="17088" title="Tino Ceberano" label="Tino Ceberano"/>
<link wikidata="Q95453345" start="17091" end="17104" title="Giga Chikadze" label="Giga Chikadze"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17107" end="17124" title="Morihiro Yamauchi" label="Morihiro Yamauchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984846" start="17127" end="17139" title="Teruo Chinen" label="Teruo Chinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108818" start="17158" end="17169" title="Karate kata" label="Karate kata"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277914" wikidata="Q93913" url="?curid=277914" title="Science and technology in China">
<text>Science and technology in the People&#x27;s Republic of China have developed rapidly since the 1980s to the 2020s, with major scientific and technological progress over the last four decades. From the 1980s to the 1990s, the government of the People&#x27;s Republic of China successively launched the 863 Program and the &quot;Strategy for Rejuvenating the Country through Science and Education&quot;, which greatly promoted the development of China&#x27;s science and technological institutions. Governmental focus on prioritizing the advancement of science and technology in China is evident in its allocation of funds, investment in research, reform measures, and enhanced societal recognition of these fields. These actions undertaken by the Chinese government are seen as crucial foundations for bolstering the nation&#x27;s socioeconomic competitiveness and development, projecting its geopolitical influence, and elevating its national prestige and international reputation.

As per the Global Innovation Index in 2022, China was considered one of the most competitive in the world, ranking eleventh in the world, third in the Asia &amp; Oceania region, and second for countries with a population of over 100 million. In 2024, China is still ranked 11th. 

==History==


China was a global scientific and technological leader up until the early years of the Ming dynasty. Ancient and medieval Chinese discoveries and Chinese innovations such as papermaking, printing, the compass, and gunpowder (the Four Great Inventions) contributed to the economic development of ancient and medieval East Asia, the Middle East and Europe. Chinese scientific activity began to neuter and wane around the fourteenth century. Unlike in Europe and other parts of the Western World, Western engineers and scientists did not attempt to reduce observations of nature to mathematical laws and nor did they not form a scholarly community with criticisms and progressive research. In the Chinese Confucian cultural ethos dating back to the Han dynasty, Confucian philosophers held a strong focus by placing an overemphasis on literature, the arts, and public administration, while scientific and technological pursuits were looked down upon in terms of prestige and respectability and regarded to be unworthy endeavors that were fell far beneath their social pay grade as such domains of inquiry were seen as trivial or restricted to limited practical applications. One contributing factor is believed to be the imperial examination system, which deprived the incentives that encouraged up-and-coming Chinese intellectuals to actively engage in scientific and technological endeavors. The absence of motivating factors rooted in the imperial examinations stifled the development of scientific and technological innovation and resulted in a stagnation of Chinese scientific and technological creativity and development over the last several centuries. By the 17th century, Europe and the Western world surpassed China in scientific and technological advancement. The causes of this early modern Great Divergence continue to be debated by scholars to this day.

After being defeated repeatedly by Japan and Western nations in the 19th century, Chinese reformers began promoting modern science and technology as part of the Self-Strengthening Movement. After the Communist victory in 1949 science and technology research was organized based on the model of the Soviet Union. It was characterized by a bureaucratic organization led by non-scientists, research according to the goals of central plans, separation of research from production, specialized research institutes, concentration on practical applications, and restrictions on information flows. Researchers should work as collectives for society rather than as individuals seeking recognition. Many studied in the Soviet Union which also transferred technology.

China began a formal computing development program in 1956 when it launched the Twelve-Year Science Plan and formed the Beijing Institute of Computing Technology under the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

Beginning in 1964, China through the Third Front construction built a self-sufficient industrial base in its hinterlands as a strategic reserve in the event of war with the Soviet Union or the United States. The Third Front construction was primarily carried out in secret, with the location for Third Front projects following the principle of “close to the mountains, dispersed, and hidden” (). From 1964-1974, China invested more than 40% of its industrial capacity in Third Front regions. After Nixon&#x27;s China trip in 1972, investment to the Third Front region gradually declined. Rapprochement between the United States and China decreased the fear of invasion which motivated the Third Front construction. Through its distribution of infrastructure, industry, and human capital around the country, the Third Front created favorable conditions for subsequent market development and private enterprise.

The Cultural Revolution (1966-1976), which sought to remove perceived bourgeois influences and attitudes, caused large negative effects and disruptions. Construction of the Third Front slowed during its early stages. Among other measures it saw the scientific community and formal education attacked, intellectuals were sent to do manual labor, universities and academic journals were closed, most research ceased, and for nearly a decade China trained no new scientists and engineers.

In 1966, China transitioned from vacuum-tube computers to fully transistorized computers. In the mid-1960s through the late 1960s, China began a semiconductor program and was producing third-generation computers by 1972.

After Mao Zedong&#x27;s death, S&amp;T was established as one of the Four Modernizations in 1976. The new leader Deng Xiaoping, and architect of the Chinese economic reform, was a strong promoter of S&amp;T and reversed the policies of the Cultural revolution. The Soviet inspired system was then gradually reformed. Media began promoting the value of S&amp;T, scientific thinking, and scientific achievement. The third and fourth generations of leaders came almost exclusively from technical backgrounds.

In March 1986, China launched the large-scale technology development plan, the 863 Project.

The State Council of the People&#x27;s Republic of China in 1995 issued the &quot;Decision on Accelerating S&amp;T Development&quot; which described planned Science &amp; Technology development for the coming decades. It described S&amp;T as the chief productive force and affecting economic development, social progress, national strength, and living standards. S&amp;T should become closely associated with market needs. Not only Soviet style institutes should do research but also universities and private industries. State institutions should form joint ventures with Chinese or foreign venture capital in order for S&amp;T developments to reach the industry. S&amp;T personal should become more occupationally mobile, pay should be linked to economic results, and age and seniority should become less important for personal decisions. Intellectual property rights should be respected. Information exchange should improve and there should be competition and open bidding on projects. The environment should be protected. Chinese indigenous S&amp;T in certain key areas should be especially promoted. Public officials should improve their understanding of S&amp;T and incorporate S&amp;T in decision making. Society, including Communist Party youth organizations, labor unions and the mass media, should actively promote respect for knowledge and human talents.

Since the 1990s, China has concentrated on building physical infrastructure such as roads and ports. During the 2010s, a policy was implemented requiring technology transfer as a condition for foreign companies wanting entry into the Chinese market. However, China has shifted its growing focus towards prioritizing indigenous innovation to meet its national scientific and technological requirements. During this period China has succeeded in developing an innovation infrastructure, founded on the establishment of over 100 science and technology parks in many parts of the country, along with encouragement of entrepreneurship outside the state-owned sector. Yip and McKern argue that Chinese firms have evolved through three phases as their innovation capabilities have matured and that by 2017 many of them are of world standard. They are now strong competitors in the China market and increasingly in foreign markets, where they are establishing local operations.

== Techno-nationalism ==
While the term &quot;techno-nationalism&quot; was originally applied to the United States in the 1980s, it has since been used to describe nationalistic technology policies in many countries, particularly in Asia. Chinese techno-nationalism is rooted in the country&#x27;s humiliation at the hands of more advanced countries in the 19th century. Indeed, China&#x27;s leaders (like those of other countries) have long seen scientific and technological development as vital for achieving economic affluence, national security, and national prestige. Lacking indigenous technological intellectual property and innovation are seen as key national problems. The 21st century has thus seen a series of central government initiatives designed to promote &quot;indigenous innovation&quot; and technological development more generally in China. These include the National Medium- and Long-Term Program for Science and Technology Development (2006–20), the Strategic Emerging Industries initiative, the Internet Plus initiative, and the Made in China 2025 Program, among others.

Through these initiatives, the Chinese state has intervened in the economy in a variety of ways to promote national technological development and reduce reliance on other countries. Prioritized industries and firms are protected and guided. There are systematic efforts to replace foreign technology and intellectual properties with indigenous technology. Foreign companies are given many incentives for technology transfer and for moving R&amp;D to China. At the same time the technological abilities of domestic companies are supported in various ways. Such policies have generated considerable conflict between China and developed countries, particularly the United States, although China has often proven flexible when its policies have been challenged.

Nationalism and nationalistic achievements have been seen as becoming the main ideological justifications and societal glue for the regime as Marxism loses influence. Some science and technology mega-projects has been seen as questionable trophy projects done for propaganda purposes with Chinese state-controlled media being filled with reports of Chinese achievements. In 2019, reports surfaced stating that the Chinese government has ordered all foreign PC hardware and operating systems that are installed in government offices to be replaced in the next three years. Other reports stated that the Chinese government would be increasing subsidies for tech firms.

== Gross domestic expenditure on research and development ==
In its &quot;Medium and Long-Term Plan for the Development of Science and Technology&quot; (2006–2020), China fixed itself the target of devoting 2.5% of GDP to research and development by 2020. Between 2003 and 2012, gross domestic expenditure on research and development (GERD) rose from 1.13% to 1.98% of GDP, suggesting that the country was on track to meet its target.

The research firm Battelle estimates that China&#x27;s GERD will exceed that of the United States by 2023. However, several convergent factors cast doubt over the accuracy of Battelle&#x27;s prediction: the deceleration in China&#x27;s rate of economic growth in 2014, the considerable drop in industrial production since 2012 and the major stock market slide in mid-2015. After progressing rapidly for a decade, GERD stabilized at 2.07% of GDP in 2015.

China devoted 5.1% of total research spending to basic research in 2015, according to the UNESCO Institute for Statistics. This is up from 4.8%, on average, over the past decade, but less than in 2004 (6.0%). The prolonged policy focus on experimental development has resulted in enterprises contributing three-quarters of Chinese research spending (77% of total expenditure on R&amp;D in 2015). Enterprises focus on experimental development, which accounted for as much as 97% of their total research expenditure by 2015. Business enterprises contributed 60% of GERD in 2000 and 74% in 2008. In 2004, 74% of GERD went on experimental development. China aims to increase the share of basic research to 15% of total research spending by 2020.

== Institutions ==

The State Council of the People&#x27;s Republic of China is the top administrative organ in China. Immediately below it are several ministries and ministry level organisations involved with various aspects of science and technology. The State Council Science and Education Leading Group, consisting of the leaders of the major science bodies, attempts to organize the national policy. Efficiency of overall coordination has been questioned with various agencies seen as having overlapping missions and rivalries for resources and sometimes engaging in wasteful duplication.

The Ministry of Science and Technology of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, formerly the State Science and Technology Commission, is the body primarily responsible for science and technology strategy and policy. It also administers national research programs, S&amp;T development zones, and international cooperation. The Ministry of Education of the People&#x27;s Republic of China oversees education as well as research institutes at universities. Several other ministries such as the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, the Ministry of Health of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, and the Ministry of Agriculture of the People&#x27;s Republic of China are also involved in S&amp;T.

The National Planning Office of Philosophy and Social Sciences directs planning for social sciences and philosophy.

The Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) is the most prestigious professional science organization in China with China&#x27;s scientific elite being members. It directs many research institutes, research programs, graduate training programs, and gives influential advice. The Chinese Academy of Engineering (CAE) gives important advice but unlike the CAS does not have research institutes of its own. The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (CASS) has a similar role to CAS for social sciences and philosophy. There are also many more narrow academies such as the Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences.

The National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) gives grants to individual researchers after peer-review.

The People&#x27;s Liberation Army General Armaments Department directs military R&amp;D.

The national scientific and academic organizations affiliated to the China Association for Science and Technology are also important forces in scientific and technological research.

The Society of Chinese Scientific Journalism presides over the Society of Chinese Technical Communication, China&#x27;s first government approved technical communication association. Since 2002, the group has held annual conferences.

Research is carried out by governmental research institutes, in higher learning institutions, and by private enterprises.

Local governments have become increasingly important in R&amp;D funding and may now contribute up to half of government spending. Intense rivalry for research and high-tech industry has been argued to sometimes create wasteful subsidized overcapacity, dispersal of efforts better centralized in a few localities, and poorly judged bureaucratic subsidizing of technologies that soon become out-dated.

== National programmes ==
As of 2010, China&#x27;s national R&amp;D programmes encompassed the:
* Key Technologies Program (renamed in 2006 as &quot;zhicheng&quot; or Support)
* National High Technology Program (863 Program)
* National Basic Research Program (973 Program)
* Spark Program - Rural technology
* Torch Program - New technology commercialization by creating special hi-tech zones and incubators
* Key Laboratories Program
* Engineering Research Centers
* State Key and New Product Program
* Innovation Fund for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises
* Special Technology Development Project for Research Institutes
* Action Plan for Promoting Trade by Science and Technology
* National New Products Program
* Agricultural S&amp;T Transfer Fund

The major national programs received 15-20% of government R&amp;D spending in 2010. They funded research, after a stated competitive proposal procedure, in universities, institutes, and enterprise. Important project may receive funding from several programs. The programs have arguably had a strong effect but have also been involved in scandals, corruption and fraud. They have been accused mainly of producing derivative works rather than driving innovation and it has been claimed that they ignore merit in selecting projects in favor of cronyism. China is trying to improve its efficiency through measures such as more peer-review and evaluations.

In 2014, the China Integrated Circuit Industry Investment Fund was established in an effort to reduce dependence on foreign semiconductor companies.

== Economic and Technological Development Zones ==

Based on the success of the Special Economic Zones of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, China has created Economic and Technological Development Zones. They have the purposes of building up high-tech industries, attracting foreign investment, increasing exports, and improve the regional economy. They are considered to have been very successful and have been expanded from an initial fourteen to fifty-four.

== Education and R&amp;D personnel ==
In the first participation of Chinese student in an international student assessment test, the 2009 Programme for International Student Assessment, 15-year-old students from Shanghai ranked first in all of the three categories: mathematics, science, and reading. The Chinese students scored particularly well compared to other nations in mathematics. One explanation for the Chinese results may be a culture emphasizing education and competitive examinations and more time spent studying in part due to less participation in activities such as sports. Teaching has become a higher status occupation. Also, industrialized Shanghai which has done important educational reforms may not be representative for the rest of China. While there was no evidence of cheating or technical problems with the testing, Shanghai attracts many immigrants from the rest of China may have allowed particularly good students to study in the city. The OECD director of the testing, Andreas Schleicher, said that the results were expected to produce astonishment and had been examined for accuracy by international experts after the OECD received the Shanghai scores. He also said that the results &quot;refute the commonly held hypothesis that China just produces rote learning&quot; and &quot;Large fractions of these students demonstrate their ability to extrapolate from what they know and apply their knowledge very creatively in novel situations&quot;. He believes that China has moved away from learning by rote. According to Schleicher, Russia performs well in rote-based assessments, but not in PISA, whereas China does well in both rote-based and broader assessments. In 2018 four major regions (Beijing, Shanghai, Jiangsu and Zhejiang) in China topped the rankings in reading, mathematics and science and China&#x27;s school children are now the smartest in the world. Chinese high school students won multiple gold medals every year consistently at many International Science Olympiad Competitions like the International Biology Olympiad, the International Olympiad on Astronomy and Astrophysics, the International Olympiad in Informatics, the International Earth Science Olympiad, the International Mathematical Olympiad, the International Physics Olympiad and the International Chemistry Olympiad.

China&#x27;s rank based on number of Gold Medals in last 10 years(2014-2023):
* Physics - 1-st
* Chemistry -1-st
* Biology - 2-nd
* Mathematics - 1-st

China has become one of the world&#x27;s biggest sources for research and development personnel. Between 2000 and 2008, the number of engineers and scientists more than doubled to 1.59 million. Relative to population size this is still low compared to major developed nations like the United States and Japan but the gap is rapidly closing. The number of doctorate awards in science and engineering have increased tenfold since the early 1990s. The number of students in general at universities increased from 1 million to 5.4 million during the 1998-2007 period. In 2009 alone, China produced over 10,000 PhD engineering graduates, and as many as 500,000 BSc graduates in engineering, mathematics, information technology, and computer science – more than any other country.

The C9 League, pitched as China&#x27;s Ivy League, is an alliance of nine elite Chinese universities which receive a high amount of national research funding and produce a large share of national research output.

Chinese universities contribute an unusually large share of patents. The universities receive about half of R&amp;D money from private enterprises.

Eight out of nine members of the Politburo Standing Committee of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) have engineering degrees, including CCP general secretary Hu Jintao.

2.25 million students have studied abroad since 1978. 340,000 were studying abroad in 2011 which was an increase by 20% over the previous year. In total 818,400 have returned to China with this occurring in particular in recent years. 186,200 returned to China in 2011 which was an increase by 38% over the previous year. China offers several benefits for high-achieving foreign educated Chinese who return to China. Students are now also returning because increased job opportunities unlike previously when many stayed abroad due lack of jobs in China. A 2009 study found that only 10% of Chinese students plan to stay in the United States due to visa restrictions, fear of lack of job opportunities, and belief that US growth will lag behind average world growth rates. 52% believed that the best job opportunities were in China which was in marked contrast with earlier surveys. 74% felt that the best days of China&#x27;s economy was coming. 68% intended to start businesses. When they return, foreign educated students often provide crucial science and technology knowledge, management skills, and innovation abilities for scientific research and industry. The senior management in high-tech companies are often foreign educated.

== Chinese diaspora ==
Overseas Chinese, as is the case for other diasporas and their homelands, have played a substantial role in contributing to China&#x27;s scientific and technological development. The Chinese diaspora have been seen as a key conduit for channelling and facilitating expertise, investment, trade, and modern technology transfers to the country through their engagement in both commercial activities and public non-profit cooperation. By using &#x27;Brain Gain&#x27; to attract highly educated overseas Chinese to return to China to work, China has made significant improvements in its innovation ecosystem although there are some limitations to how sustainable this technique may be.

== Industrial espionage ==
One of the objectives of Chinese intelligence activity abroad is alleged to be industrial espionage as well gaining military technology. Also private companies have been accused of espionage. Intelligence agencies suspect that thousands of Western companies may have been affected by data breaches that can be traced back to China.

== International cooperation ==
The China Internet Information Center stated in a 2005 article that China had inter-governmental cooperative S&amp;T agreements with 96 nations, cooperative S&amp;T programs with 152 nations and regions, and participated in more than 1,000 international S&amp;T cooperative organizations. NGO international exchanges and cooperative activities had increased. The China Association for Science and Technology and related organizations as well as the National Natural Science Foundation of China participated in many cooperative international organizations. Chinese researchers held 281 leading posts on international organizations&#x27; expert committees and held 293 executive member-director or higher level positions.

== Technology transfer and R&amp;D by multinational corporations ==
In the early 1980s foreign companies began transferring technology by licensing agreements and sales of equipment. Later in the 1980s many multinational corporations started transferring technology by entering into joint ventures with Chinese companies in order to expand in China. China in the 1990s introduced increasingly sophisticated regulations of foreign investment by which access to the Chinese market was traded for technology transfer. The entry of China into the World Trade Organization in 2001 required this practice stop but critics argue that it continues. Chinese critics have argued such technology transfer may be useful for catching up but does not create new, cutting-edge technologies.

China has increasingly encouraged multinational corporations to create R&amp;D centers in China. Chinese critics have argued that foreign owned R&amp;D mainly benefits foreign companies and removes many talented Chinese researchers from indigenous companies and institutions. Chinese supporters have argued that the foreign R&amp;D serves as a role model and encouragement for indigenous companies and creates skilled communities from which labor and knowledge can easily flow to indigenous companies. In 2010 there were 1,200 such R&amp;D centers and 400 out the Fortune 500 corporations had created such R&amp;D centers. Corporations have argued that this is a necessity in order to adapt products for the local requirements of the Chinese market as well as it being essential for maintaining global competitiveness to make use the many available Chinese engineers and scientists. China is now ranked first when multinational corporations are asked in which nation future R&amp;D centers are most likely to be located.

== Innovation ==
A 2005 report found serious shortcomings to China&#x27;s national innovation system. There were problems with services to help turn S&amp;T work into results and the allocation of national funding to support S&amp;T was far from optimal. Sometimes researchers became short-sighted if they get too close to the market. Another serious problem was that companies facing severe competition looked first to purchase foreign technology rather than investing in developing technology and technology development capacity at home in China. Many of the patent applications came from medium-sized enterprises (70%) since small enterprises invest little in research. China&#x27;s hierarchical, top-down society where authority is greatly respected and feared has been argued to stifle creative debate.

China in a 2006 report outlined policies for improving innovation. They include 20 large megaprojects in areas such as nanotechnology, high-end generic microchips, aircraft, biotechnology, and new drugs. This is combined with a more bottom-up approach on a Silicon Valley model consisting of small start-ups, venture capital, and cooperation between industry and universities.

It has also been argued that China is the world leader in making small, innovative improvements to existing designs. One example is continual improvements to the design of power supplies making them gradually smaller, less expensive, and more energy efficient. This may not create completely new products or create headlines but may be more important for creating employment.

A 2016 NBER paper found that the Chinese economy is becoming increasingly innovative. The study found that rising labor costs in China and &quot;expanded market opportunities in the world economy&quot; were the main drivers behind innovations. The study also found that state-owned firms innovated less than private firms, even though state-owned firms received far greater subsidies.

In 2020, China&#x27;s spending on research and development climbed 10.3% to a record 2.44 trillion Chinese yuan ($378 billion) according to the nation&#x27;s National Bureau of Statistics.

A 2023 Australian Strategic Policy Institute study of what it deemed as 44 critical technologies concluded that China leads the world in 37 of them, including 5G internet, electric batteries, and hypersonic missiles.

Per the Global Innovation Index in 2023, China was one of the most competitive in the world, ranking 12th in the world, 3rd in the Asia &amp; Oceania region and 2nd for countries with a population of over 100 million. China is the only middle-income economy and the only newly industrialized economy in the top 30. It has increased its ranking considerably since 2013, where it was ranked 35th globally. China ranks No. 1 globally in patents, utility models, trademarks, industrial designs, and creative goods exports. It also has two (Shenzhen-Hong Kong-Guangzhou and Beijing in the 2nd and 3rd spots respectively) of the global top5 science and technology clusters, which is more than any other country.

As of 2024, the Nature Index ranks seven Chinese universities or institutions in the global top ten for volume of research output. The Leiden Ranking rates six in the global top ten.

== Procurement ==
The central Chinese government, a large buyer of high-tech products, in 2009 proposed controversial policies demanding that companies selling to it promote Chinese innovation and that the products sold are free of foreign intellectual property. The most controversial parts were later withdrawn but local Chinese governments continue to use procurement to encourage indigenous innovation.

== Intellectual property ==
China&#x27;s legal framework for intellectual property (IP) protection is developing rapidly as China becomes a source of innovation, but its IP framework is still less developed than most industrialized nations as of 2023. The general trend of its IP system has been to develop towards increasing similarity with the E.U. and U.S. systems.

=== Patents ===
In 2011, China became the nation with the greatest number of filed patent applications. Nevertheless, this reflects in part that the government gives companies incentives for filing patent applications whether the patent ends up granted or does not. The percentage of patents applications in China filed by Chinese companies rose from less than 52% in 2006 to nearly 73% in 2010. World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) data show that Chinese companies have also become more important regarding patents overseas; Chinese companies are in places two and four, respectively, regarding the number of patent applications filed by individual companies. China aims to transform the economy from &quot;Made in China&quot; to &quot;Designed in China,&quot; and from contract manufacturing to having brand name companies with resulting improved profit margins.

According to the recent data from the World Intellectual Property Indicators, China&#x27;s patent office received 1.54 million patent applications in 2018, representing nearly half of patent applications worldwide—more than double the U.S. In 2019, China surpassed the U.S. as the top source of international patent applications filed with WIPO. China-based applicants filed for 58,990 patent applications; 57,840 applications were filed by American applicants.

In addition, although China is catching up fast, it still trails the U.S. and Japan for the number of patents made oversea. According to the WIPO, the U.S. had 247,609 equivalent patent applications filed abroad in 2021; Japan and China followed with 190,399 and 111,905, respectively. China ranked second after South Korea in the gross domestic product (GDP)-adjusted number of applications, with 8,159 resident patent applications per US$100 billion in GDP. China also had 5,738 applications in this category. When considering patent applications adjusted for population, China held the fourth global position. South Korea led with 3,599 equivalent patent applications per million population, followed by Japan (1,770), Switzerland (1,119), and China (1,010).

== Standards ==
To encourage innovation and avoid foreign intellectual property China has been developing indigenous technical standards. One example is the TD-SCDMA 3G standard. Critics have seen it as costly and delaying 3G introduction while supporters argue that it has increased technical abilities and experience which has increased Chinese competitiveness regarding 4G. Long-Term Evolution Time-Division Duplex is being implemented as China&#x27;s indigenous 4G standard.

== Academic publishing ==

The Royal Society in a 2011 report on academic publishing stated that in share of English scientific research papers the United States was first followed by China, the UK, Germany, Japan, France, and Canada. The report predicted that China would overtake the United States some time before 2020, possibly as early as 2013. Science-Metrix, a Canadian data-analysis company, predicted that in 2010 China would publish as many natural sciences and engineering peer-reviewed papers as the United States. In 2015 China is predicted to publish as many papers as the US across all fields. In 2030 China is predicted to surpass the US in life and social sciences. In 2017, China overtakes the U.S. with the highest number of scientific publications.

An analysis of ISI Web of Knowledge data found that China had increased its share of the most highly cited science articles from 1.85% in 2001 to 11.3% in 2011. By 2019, China overtakes UK in &#x27;highly cited researchers&#x27; table and ranks second after the United States according to Web of Science, who publish the annual list. Chinese research papers in the fields of material science, chemistry and engineering technology were the most cited in the world in the past decade, according to the same report. The share of the United States declined from 64.3% to 50.7% during the same ten-year period.

A 2009 study of Chinese social science studies in the Social Sciences Citation Index found a slow increase until 1999. The 1999-2007 period saw a very rapid increase. However, in 2007 China still only contributed 1.39% of the studies and mainland China only surpassed Hong Kong in 2006. Economics &amp; business had larger share than social, political &amp; communication science and psychology. The low share of social sciences compared to natural sciences may reflect that this is a common pattern in Asian nations, that Chinese social scientists publish in national journals not included in the Index and have less career incitements regarding publishing in international journals, and that state ideology and control is more important for social sciences than natural sciences. In China natural sciences are administered by the Ministry of Science and Technology while social sciences are administered by the National Planning Office of Philosophy and Social Sciences which may hinder inter-disciplinary collaboration. Although the proportion of Social Science Citation Index (SSCI) articles published internationally from Mainland China has been increasing over time during 1999–2018, it only accounted for 14% of the world in 2018 compared to Eastern Europe (around 25 percent) and Western Europe (around 50 percent).

Articles published in China related to basic medial science and clinical research and indexed by PubMed increased on average by 31.2% and 22% each year between 2000 and 2009. Randomized clinical trial were about 1/3 of clinical research articles. However, in 2009 this still represented only 1.5% of worldwide clinical research articles and 1.7% of worldwide randomized clinical trials. Clinical research education for medical students and the involvement and the supporting environment for medical doctors regarding clinical research have shortcomings.

There are 8,000 journals and 4,600 in scientific fields. Almost all Chinese science organisations publish their own journal. The government owns or supports most journals with only a small number being privately owned. The &quot;publish or perish&quot; system has been argued to contribute to many low quality journals and articles that are infrequently cited and also to plagiarism and fraud. The Chinese government has put into place stricter regulations, punished or terminated some journals, and aims increase quality control and peer evaluation of journals as well as to create five to ten large publishing groups. As part of the reforms, in 2012 the China Association for Science and Technology, which oversees 1,050 journals, in a declaration listed various forms of misconduct, plagiarism, and fraud and as well, the penalties for perpetrating them such as written warnings, blacklisting, contacting the researcher&#x27;s home institution or funding agencies, or public disclosure. It has also been seen as important by increasing pressure on other journals and by informing editors who may not know that some actions such as favoring researchers based on personal relations are unacceptable. China also plans to give substantial financial incentives to top journals based on factors such as their Chinese and international impact factor. It has been questioned if this will have an effect on the many poor quality journals who in return for money help researchers fill their institutional requirements for published papers.

In 2022, China passed both the US and the European Union in the number of high-impact research papers published.

== State-owned enterprises ==
Chinese state-owned enterprises are owned by a variety of actors such as local governments and governmental agencies. They may benefit from advantages not available for smaller, more innovative firms which have been seen as problematic. In 2010 state owned enterprises won many biddings for renewable energy projects since they did not have worry about paying off investments for several decades and could ignore risks and costs. The owners may attempt to protect their enterprises from competition by regulations or otherwise use their influence in an unfair manner which may stifle more innovative, private competitors. Private enterprises surpassed stated owned enterprises during the 2002-2007 period regarding rapidity of increase of research spending, patent applications, and R&amp;D laboratories. The number of research scientists and engineers increased rapidly in private enterprises while they declined in state owned enterprises.

== Corruption ==
Concerned about corruption in Chinese science, some Chinese scientists, including Professor Liu Ming (刘明) of Zhejiang University in his 2005 book &quot;Critique of the Academic Evaluation System&quot; (学术评价制度批判), argue that interference from government officials and university bureaucrats makes peer review far less effective in China than it could be. The time scientists spend cultivating politically influential people is lost to scientific research. Liu argues that the command economy mentality of measuring everything by the numbers combined with pervasive political interference results in a great waste of money, human talent as well as considerable corruption in Chinese science. A 2008 investigation into a certification for high-tech enterprises allowing large tax breaks and other advantages found that more than 70% of the enterprises had gained this under questionable circumstances and an investigation of a sample found that 73% did not pass the requirements.

== Awards ==
The State Science and Technology Prizes, including the State Preeminent Science and Technology Award, are the highest honor in People&#x27;s Republic of China in science and technology, in order to recognize citizens and organizations who have made remarkable contributions to scientific and technological progress, and to promote the development of science and technology.

== Specific areas of R&amp;D ==
The &quot;13th Five-Year Plan for the National Economy and Social Development&quot; (2016–2020) will initiate the key Scientific and Technological Innovation 2030 Project in the following key areas: aero-engines and gas turbines; a deep sea station; quantum communication and quantum computers; brain sciences and brain research. The project also encompasses nine other sub-projects, including an innovative seed industry, smart grid, space-terrestrial information network, intelligent manufacturing and robots.

=== Agriculture ===
There is a lack of arable land and water which means only new technology can increase the output of Chinese agriculture. Chinese Communist Party former general secretary Jiang Zemin has therefore called for a &quot;new revolution in agricultural science and technology.&quot; Restrictions and regulations concerning genetically modified foods have been introduced or proposed after widespread public concern. China has been buying millions of foreign breeder animals as well as large amount of foreign semen and livestock embryos in order to rapidly improve the genetics of Chinese livestock. More advanced agricultural methods such as increasing use of pesticides has contributed to concerns regarding the Food safety in China.

=== Aquaculture and fishing ===

In 2008 the fishing industry in China accounted for 34% of the global output. Aquaculture in China had more than twice the output of capture fishing and contributed 62.3% of the global aquaculture output. The rapid growth of aquaculture is in part due to Chinese research such as regarding the artificial breeding of carps.

===Chemistry, materials science and nanotechnology===
A 2012 study found that China&#x27;s share of academic papers in the field of nanotechnology had increased from less than 10% in 2000 to nearly a quarter in 2009 and had overtaken the United States for first position. However, China was less influential in the top three journals and regarding citations, suggesting a lesser quality. In terms of the density of publication, however, the United States remained ahead, with 68.76 articles on nanotechnology per million inhabitants, compared to 25.44 per million for China in 2014. China was in second place for the number of patents granted. A number of bodies have been created to establish national standards and ensure oversight.

According to the Institute of Scientific and Technical Information of China, which is affiliated with the Ministry of Science and Technology, China contributed about one-quarter of all academic articles published around the world in materials science and chemistry and 17% of those published in physics between 2004 and 2014 but just 8.7% of those in molecular biology and genetics. This nevertheless represents a steep rise from just 1.4% of the world share of publications in molecular biology and genetics over 1999–2003.
KPMG in 2010 predicted that the Chinese chemical industry will become world&#x27;s largest producer by 2015. The Chinese government aims to make China self-sufficient regarding petrochemicals and plastics with the exception of the raw feedstock of oil and gas. The Chinese industry is increasing R&amp;D in order to create higher value products using more advanced technology.

=== Deep sea exploration ===
China is developing its deep sea exploration capabilities, such as by the Jiaolong submersible, with an eye to future applications such as deep sea mining.

=== Electronics and information technology ===

In 2009 China manufactured 48.3% of the world&#x27;s televisions, 49.9% of mobile phones, 60.9% of personal computers and 75% of LCD monitors. Indigenously made electronic components have become an important source of recent growth.

==== Artificial intelligence ====
On 8 July 2017, the Chinese State Council announced plans to turn China into the world leader in artificial intelligence (AI) by 2030, seeking to make the industry worth 1 trillion yuan. The State Council published a three-step road map to that effect in which it outlined how it expects AI to be developed and deployed across a wide number of industries and sectors, such as in areas from the military to city planning. According to the road map, China plans to catch up to current AI world leaders&#x27; technological abilities by 2020, make major breakthroughs by 2025 and be the world leader in 2030.

==== Drones and robotics ====
China is the leader in drone technology, it is the first country in the world to create large scale transport drones, as well as the first to produce an amphibious drone. Chinese drone companies such as DJI and Ehang (Beijing Yi-Hang Creation Science &amp; Technology) conquered majority of the civilian drone industry, with DJI alone dominating 85% of the global market share. Ehang also created the world&#x27;s first &quot;flying taxi&quot; drone, Ehang 184, an eco-friendly low altitude autonomous aerial vehicle capable of providing transportation and medium distance communication.

In some regions, such as the Pearl River Delta, manufacturers have problems with labor shortages, raising wages, and higher expectations regarding work from more highly educated young people. This has increased the demand for industrial robots. As of 2017, China is the largest user and producer of robotics technology, as well as the first country in the world to perform an automated dental implant. It is the largest and fastest-growing robotics market in the world, and plans to manufacture at least 100,000 industrial robots annually by 2020.

==== Software industry ====
The Chinese software industry in 2010 had a higher than 15% share of the world&#x27;s software and information service market and had been growing by an average 36% each year during the previous decade. Chinese IT companies have been moving away from narrow downstream services and products to having a full range. China, with the active support of the Chinese government, is a leading pioneer in Internet of Things technology.

According to the China Internet Network Information Center there were 751 million internet users as of 2017, with 53.2% of the population being internet users. The number of mobile internet users reached 724 million, with high penetration rates for mobile phones and broadband internet. By 2017, China has the largest e-commerce market in the world, worth US$1.132 trillion, with a significant lead on other markets and almost tripling US market, the second largest.

In 2017, there were more than 1.36 billion mobile subscribers in China, with the number of fixed line subscriptions hitting 310 million. The number of 4G users increased significantly, hitting 932 million by August 2017. By 2020, China plans to adopt 5G network nationwide. State-owned China Telecom has already deployed 5G-oriented C-RAN fronthaul network, unveiling that it will be conducting commercial trials of 5G technology in 2019 and carry out network field trials in six Chinese cities in the latest sign of China&#x27;s determination to lead the global deployment of the next-generation mobile technology.

====Microprocessors====
China has its own versions of microprocessors, manufactured and developed domestically, which are also used to build the world&#x27;s most powerful supercomputers.
==== Supercomputing ====
Supercomputing in China has expanded rapidly. Supercomputing affects the possibility to do cutting-edge research in many areas such as design of pharmaceuticals, cryptanalysis, natural resource exploration, climate models, and military technology. As of 2017, China had 202 of the 500 most powerful supercomputers in the world, far exceeding any other country (including the US which has 143), in addition to possessing the top 2 most powerful supercomputers. China is developing the capacity to manufacture the components domestically and plans to be the first to build an exascale supercomputer. China may also be planning to create much more powerful large-scale distributed supercomputing by connecting its supercomputer centers together. Tianhe-1 was for a period in 2010-2011 the world&#x27;s fastest supercomputer. In June 2013, Tianhe-2, the successor to Tianhe-1, took the crown from its predecessor. In 2016, China&#x27;s new supercomputer, Sunway TaihuLight became the world&#x27;s most powerful supercomputer, significantly surpassing Tianhe-2&#x27;s capabilities by three folds, while using Chinese-made chips. This signals China&#x27;s success not only in the supercomputing industry, but also its domestic chip-making technology.

==== Semiconductors ====

China&#x27;s semiconductor industry has, despite extensive governmental support, had many problems, such as innovative new designs. This may be due to factors such as poorly guided state and local government support for soon outdated technologies and geographically scattered efforts, lacking engineering education, and poor protection of intellectual property. However various trends may change this, such a new emphasis on market mechanisms rather than direct support, concentration of efforts, the return of Chinese who have studied abroad, increased pressure on foreign companies to transfer technology, indigenous Chinese technological standards, and increased demands for indigenous technology in the local market.

The country has rapidly progressed in the semiconductor industry, while backing its largest chip maker and developer, Tsinghua Unigroup, with a US$150 billion funding to secure China&#x27;s dominance in the semiconductor technology, and build a world-class semiconductor industry over the next 5 years. However, as of 2020 China has yet to achieve dominance.

=== Entertainment-related technologies ===
The Chinese animation industry and access to the latest technology, such as 3D computer-generated imagery technology, is actively supported by the Chinese government and included in the latest national planning. In part, this may be because of a desire to increase Chinese soft power. The same technology as in Hollywood is available and much postproduction is outsourced to China. Successful indigenous artistic creativity is seen as a problem and may be restricted by factors such as production being aimed at getting government patronage rather than public approval, censorship, and some storylines based on Chinese culture not appealing to foreign audiences. DreamWorks Animation, in a joint venture with Chinese companies, will set up a studio in Shanghai that may eventually get bigger than DreamWorks HQ, in part to avoid to quota restrictions on foreign films with China within a decade having been predicted to become the world&#x27;s biggest cinema and entertainment market. Disney has also entered into a partnership in order to help develop the Chinese animation industry.

The China Research Institute of Film Science &amp; Technology and the China Film Group Corporation developed and in 2012 put into commercial use the DMAX motion picture film format as well as associated technologies. It has been described as a competitor to IMAX and as laying the foundation for Chinese film projection technology using indigenous Chinese technology and intellectual property.

=== Environment-friendly technologies ===

Rapid industrialization has been accompanied by many environmental problems and rising pollution in China. One part of the Chinese response involves advanced technology such as the world&#x27;s largest high-speed rail network and high fuel efficiency requirements for vehicles. China is rapidly expanding its wastewater treatment systems and power plant emission reduction systems. Due to the Chinese water crisis, as well as for future exports, China is building up its desalination technological abilities and plans to create an indigenous industry. Some cities have introduced extensive water conservation and recycling programmes and technologies.

=== Health sciences ===
==== Biotechnology and genetics ====

Monitor Group in a 2010 report predicted that China within a decade will become the world leader in discovery and innovation in life sciences. Some research is seen as less controversial in China than elsewhere such as research regarding the genetic causes of intelligence. BGI, formerly Beijing Genomics Institute, has been described as having the world&#x27;s largest DNA sequencing facilities.

Stem cell research and stem cell treatments are less controversial in Chinese culture which have supported Chinese research as well medical tourism to China in order to receive experimental and often unproven therapies. In 2012 a regulatory crackdown was instituted which may increase the ability of the Chinese industry to get approval for sales of future therapies to other nations. More generally, China aims and has made progress towards becoming a world leader in regenerative medicine which also includes areas such as tissue engineering and gene therapy.

China in 2011 stated that biotechnology (including biopharmacy, biological engineering, bio-agriculture and biomanufacturing) was a major priority for science and technology spending. Biotechnology will be used to enhance economic development as well as for improving Chinese environmental protection, nutrition, healthcare, and medicine. The Chinese governments expects biotechnology to add 1 million jobs during the 2011-2015 period.

==== Neuroscientific research ====
On 22 March 2018, an agreement was signed establishing the Chinese Institute for Brain Science, Beijing. The launch of this institute may represent a significant departure from the current policy focus on applied research and development.

Once completed, the new brain institute will serve as a core facility for the country&#x27;s planned project to study the human brain. The institute will not be part of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. Rather, it will collaborate with the academy, along with Beijing&#x27;s other leading biomedical institutions, including Tsinghua University, Peking University and the Academy of Military Medical Sciences.

The new institute will probably receive funding both from the National Natural Science Foundation and from the mega-science programmes within the Scientific and Technological Innovation 2030 Project. In March 2018, the government announced plans to place the National Natural Science Foundation under the Ministry of Science and Technology but the implications of this latest reorganization of science are unclear, as the two agencies have different missions in support of basic research.

==== Pharmaceuticals and medical technology ====
Merrill Lynch predicted in 2011 that China would become the world&#x27;s second largest pharmaceutical market in 2013 and the largest in 2020. The chief executive of Hoffmann-La Roche in 2012 stated a few years ago many Chinese life sciences scientists had to leave China but that many were now returning to conditions often better than in the West regarding laboratories, funding, and political support for the industry. Counterfeit drugs have caused a number of scandals as well as being a problem for drug development and authorities have increased regulations and enforcement.

A 2011 report by PwC stated that a decade earlier China barely had any presence in the medical technology industry but its abilities had been rapidly growing. China could well become more important than Europe by 2020.

=== Industrial manufacturing ===
Development of advanced machine tools, such as computer numerical control machine tools, are seen as a priority and supported by the Chinese government. China is the world&#x27;s leading producer and consumer of machine tools. A 2010 US government report stated that US export controls of advanced five axis machine tools were ineffectual due to the technical capabilities of Chinese and Taiwanese manufacturers.

=== Military technology ===
One example of new Chinese military technology is the DF-21D anti-ship ballistic missile which reportedly has contributed to a quick and major change in US naval strategy. China is developing anti-satellite weapons and plans to make the navigational Beidou system global by 2020. Other new technologies include Chinese anti ballistic missile developments, the Chengdu J-20 fifth-generation jet fighter, and possibly electromagnetic pulse weapons. Chinese reconnaissance satellites are, according to a 2011 report, almost equal to those of the United States in some areas in which China had almost no capability a decade earlier. Despite increased defense spending, China&#x27;s share of the world&#x27;s import of arms is rapidly falling, in part reflecting the increased abilities of the indigenous military production. China is also developing power projection military capabilities such as through the Chinese aircraft carrier programme and the Type 071 amphibious transport dock.

15-28% of governmental R&amp;D expenditures may go to military research according to some unofficial estimates. The Chinese defense sector remains almost completely state-owned but military equipment production has been reorganized into corporate bodies allowing limited competition and the defense patent system has been reformed to allow greater rewards to innovative enterprises and individuals. The organizational structure has shed civilian applications while at the same time cooperation with the civilian sector has increased and state supported civilian research sometimes have dual use applications. Chinese jet engines remains a problematic area that has caused concern at the highest levels with China still being largely dependent on imports from foreign manufacturers. One possible explanation is a continued Soviet style fragmentation of the research and production line into many isolated units having little contact with one another causing problems with overall standardization, integration, and quality control. More problems from this may be duplication of efforts, dispersal of efforts, and unproductive competition over patronage causing problems such as dishonest reporting of problems. High precision jet engines may be particularly sensitive to accumulated quality problems.

==== History of China&#x27;s hydrogen bomb ====
China successfully tested a hydrogen bomb on June 17, 1967, at Lop Nur Nuclear Weapon Test Base, in Malan, Xinjiang (also known as &quot;Test No. 6&quot;). China became the fourth country to have successfully developed a thermonuclear weapon after the United States, Soviet Union and the United Kingdom. The device was dropped from a Hong-6 (Chinese manufactured Tu-16) and was parachute-retarded for an airburst at 2960 meters. The bomb was a three-stage device with a boosted U-235 primary and U-238 pusher. The yield was 3.3 megatons.

It was a fully functional, full-scale, three-stage hydrogen bomb, tested 32 months after China had made its first fission device. China thus produced the shortest fission-to-fusion development known in history. China had received extensive technical help from the Soviet Union to jump-start their nuclear program, but by 1960, the rift between the Soviet Union and China had become so great that the Soviet Union ceased all assistance to China.[1] Thus, the Number 6 test was indeed an independent endeavor, after the induced military and economic sanctions enacted by the superpowers at the time, the United States and the Soviet Union.

China&#x27;s H-bomb was different from the traditional Teller-Ulam configuration. As an advantage, it was completed without the calculations needed from supercomputers, which would consume a lot of time. To shrink the size of the weapon, the reflectors were made parabolic with the solid fusion fuel located at the foci. It is also known as Yu Min Design (or Yu-Deng Design) as Yu Min made major contributions including the solutions to a series of fundamental and critical theoretical problems of nuclear weapons, which led to breakthrough of the unique hydrogen bomb.

The goal of China was to produce a thermonuclear device of at least a megaton in yield that could be dropped by an aircraft or carried by a ballistic missile. Several explosions to test thermonuclear weapon designs, characteristics and yield boosting preceded the thermonuclear test.[1]

=== Mining and rare earth industry ===

Advisory firm The Beijing Axis director Lilian Luca in 2010 stated that China was becoming a world leader in mining technology. Technological solutions were initially concentrated on achieving massive low-cost production but increasing emphasis has been placed on environmental and safety issues in part reflecting greater concern in China with environmental issues. China was already a world leader in certain areas such as rare earth elements. China has imposed export quotas on rare earth elements, 95% of which are mined in China, citing environmental issues, but has been accused of wanting to force high-tech industry using rare earth elements to move to China.

Finding rare earth elements is only the first and some argue the easiest step. Other steps towards manufacturing such as refining is controlled by China and Japan with the previously dominant United States having lost all of its producers and much of its fundamental technological ability with the number of scientists and engineers in the area declining dramatically.

=== Polar research ===
The Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration (CAA) organizes China&#x27;s scientific programme for both the Arctic and Antarctic. Polar research by China, in particular in Antarctica, has been growing rapidly. China now has three Antarctic research stations and one in the Arctic on the Norwegian island of Svalbard.

=== Space science ===
The Chinese space program is a major source of national pride. In 1970 the first Chinese satellite, Dong Fang Hong I, was launched. In 2003 China become the third country to independently send humans into space with Yang Liwei&#x27;s spaceflight aboard Shenzhou 5. In 2008 China conducted a spacewalk with the Shenzhou 7 mission. In 2011 Tiangong-1 was launched which was the first step towards a Chinese space station around 2020. The active Chinese Lunar Exploration Program includes a lunar rover in 2013 and possibly a crewed lunar landing in the 2020s. Experience gained from the lunar program will be used for future programs such as exploration of Mars and Venus.

China plans to launch 5 commercial satellites for foreign customers in 2012 and aims to capture 15% of the commercial launch market and 10% of the satellite export market by 2015. In 2011 China launched a total of 19 rockets, which was the second most after Russia.

The Five hundred meter Aperture Spherical Telescope, completed in 2016, is the world&#x27;s largest radio telescope.

=== Textiles ===
China in 2012 produced more than one-third of the developed world&#x27;s apparel import but the share has been decreasing in recent years as low-technology and labor-intensive production has been moving to regions like Southeast Asia and Eastern Europe.

=== Transportation ===

Transportation infrastructure continues to be rapidly developed. The National Trunk Highway System was in 2011 estimated to surpass the US interstate system in length. Many Chinese cities have or are planning to build metros or other forms of rapid transit.

==== Commercial aircraft ====
The state owned Comac aerospace manufacturer aims to reduce Chinese dependency on foreign companies for large passenger aircraft. The future C919 aims to be completely made in China.

==== Motor vehicles ====
The automotive industry in China is the world&#x27;s largest producer of motor vehicles. However, China&#x27;s indigenous car companies have had difficulties on the global market and the growing electric vehicle market has been seen as way to remedy this. China in 2010 proposed controversial legislation requiring foreign electric vehicle producers to form minority joint-ventures and share technologies with Chinese carmakers in order to get market access. A 2011 report financed by the World Bank stated that China was becoming the world leader on electric vehicles.

==== Shipbuilding ====
In 2009-2010 China become the world&#x27;s largest shipbuilder but South Korea regained the top position in 2011 in part due to more advanced technology. China is developing its technological abilities and competition is expected to increase.

==== Trains ====

The BBC wrote in a 2011 article on high-speed rail in China that China in 2005 had no high-speed railways. In 2010 it had more than Europe and in 2012 China was expected to have more than the rest of the world combined. China demanded that foreign companies wanting to participate had to share their technology. Some 10,000 Chinese engineers and academics then in three years produced a faster Chinese high-speed train that China is now exporting to other nations.

==See also==

*CERNET
*Chinese Academy of Sciences
*Chinese Academy of Engineering
*Chinese Academy of Social Sciences
*China–United States trade war (2018–present)
*CSTNET
*History of science and technology in the People&#x27;s Republic of China
*List of Chinese inventions
*Made in China 2025
*Science in newly industrialized countries

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==

* Ministry of Science and Technology
* China Association for Science and Technology (CAST)
* Science &amp; Technology Links
* SciTech: Popular Science in China China Radio International
* Chinese Science and the &#x27;Nobel Prize Complex&#x27; by Cong Cao
* In Memoriam: Dr. Joseph Needham, 1900–1995 Erik Zürcher, International Institute for Asian Studies (IIAS) Newsletter
* 1995 CCP Central Committee and State Council &quot;Decision on Accelerating S&amp;T Development&quot;
* Nanotechnology Ecosystem of China

; Videos
* Modern Unbelievable High Technologies in China</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q93913" start="0" end="61" title="Science and technology in China" label="Science and technology in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q936190" start="225" end="274" title="government of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="government of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668388" start="301" end="312" title="863 Program" label="863 Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="994" end="1017" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="1365" end="1377" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243670" start="1400" end="1419" title="List of Chinese discoveries" label="Chinese discoveries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434077" start="1424" end="1443" title="List of Chinese inventions" label="Chinese innovations"/>
<link wikidata="Q335415" start="1452" end="1463" title="papermaking" label="papermaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255779" start="1465" end="1473" title="History of typography in East Asia" label="printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="1479" end="1486" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="1492" end="1501" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349214" start="1507" end="1528" title="Four Great Inventions" label="Four Great Inventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="1757" end="1770" title="Western World" label="Western World"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2024" end="2035" title="Han dynasty#Structural and geotechnical engineering" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="2496" end="2516" title="imperial examination" label="imperial examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238584" start="3078" end="3094" title="Great Divergence" label="Great Divergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="3179" end="3184" title="First Sino-Japanese war" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q320404" start="3189" end="3204" title="Eight-Nation Alliance" label="Western nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q498117" start="3305" end="3332" title="Self-Strengthening Movement" label="Self-Strengthening Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3442" end="3454" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q530471" start="4074" end="4101" title="Chinese Academy of Sciences" label="Chinese Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q10866590" start="4141" end="4152" title="Third Front (China)" label="Third Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q862054" start="4602" end="4625" title="1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China" label="Nixon&amp;#x27;s China trip"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="5019" end="5038" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="5085" end="5094" title="bourgeois" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834322" start="5566" end="5590" title="Transistor computer" label="transistorized computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q111460071" start="5647" end="5660" title="Semiconductor industry in China" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920631" start="5687" end="5713" title="Third generation computer" label="third-generation computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="5730" end="5740" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q636187" start="5793" end="5812" title="Four Modernizations" label="Four Modernizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="5837" end="5850" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="5873" end="5896" title="Chinese economic reform" label="Chinese economic reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q966646" start="6138" end="6166" title="Generations of Chinese leadership" label="third and fourth generations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668388" start="6310" end="6321" title="863 Program" label="863 Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="6328" end="6380" title="State Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="State Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="6876" end="6889" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="6915" end="6930" title="venture capital" label="venture capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="7164" end="7185" title="Intellectual property" label="Intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="7591" end="7602" title="labor union" label="labor union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="7612" end="7622" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="9267" end="9288" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="10515" end="10526" title="Nationalism" label="Nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="10657" end="10664" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q810911" start="11637" end="11645" title="Battelle Memorial Institute" label="Battelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="12841" end="12893" title="State Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="State Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q839875" start="13416" end="13489" title="Ministry of Science and Technology of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ministry of Science and Technology of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042167" start="13737" end="13797" title="Ministry of Education of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ministry of Education of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002010" start="13902" end="13988" title="Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604300" start="13994" end="14051" title="Ministry of Health of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ministry of Health of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050095" start="14061" end="14123" title="Ministry of Agriculture of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ministry of Agriculture of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q530471" start="14276" end="14303" title="Chinese Academy of Sciences" label="Chinese Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q689633" start="14545" end="14575" title="Chinese Academy of Engineering" label="Chinese Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073828" start="14674" end="14708" title="Chinese Academy of Social Sciences" label="Chinese Academy of Social Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100369" start="14832" end="14867" title="Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences" label="Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501917" start="14874" end="14918" title="National Natural Science Foundation of China" label="National Natural Science Foundation of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="14971" end="14982" title="peer-review" label="peer-review"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148033" start="14989" end="15047" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army General Armaments Department" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army General Armaments Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099580" start="15144" end="15188" title="China Association for Science and Technology" label="China Association for Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668388" start="16229" end="16240" title="863 Program" label="863 Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248392" start="16277" end="16288" title="Program 973" label="973 Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q10964327" start="17312" end="17320" title="cronyism" label="cronyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q117354848" start="17437" end="17486" title="China Integrated Circuit Industry Investment Fund" label="China Integrated Circuit Industry Investment Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="17548" end="17561" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328727" start="17654" end="17715" title="Special Economic Zones of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Special Economic Zones of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073535" start="17735" end="17779" title="Economic and Technological Development Zones" label="Economic and Technological Development Zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q323481" start="18177" end="18223" title="Programme for International Student Assessment" label="Programme for International Student Assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="18251" end="18259" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="19008" end="19012" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q71557" start="19038" end="19056" title="Andreas Schleicher" label="Andreas Schleicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="19761" end="19768" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="19770" end="19778" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963" start="19780" end="19787" title="Jiangsu" label="Jiangsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="19792" end="19800" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q406039" start="19977" end="19987" title="gold medal" label="gold medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q671111" start="20021" end="20064" title="International Science Olympiad" label="International Science Olympiad Competitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160329" start="20074" end="20104" title="International Biology Olympiad" label="International Biology Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944134" start="20110" end="20162" title="International Olympiad on Astronomy and Astrophysics" label="International Olympiad on Astronomy and Astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q742584" start="20168" end="20205" title="International Olympiad in Informatics" label="International Olympiad in Informatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657439" start="20211" end="20247" title="International Earth Science Olympiad" label="International Earth Science Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983" start="20253" end="20288" title="International Mathematical Olympiad" label="International Mathematical Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q505654" start="20294" end="20324" title="International Physics Olympiad" label="International Physics Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q861060" start="20333" end="20365" title="International Chemistry Olympiad" label="International Chemistry Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20458" end="20462" title="International Physics Olympiad#Distribution of medals" label="1-st"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20476" end="20480" title="International Chemistry Olympiad#Distribution of medals" label="1-st"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20493" end="20497" title="International Biology Olympiad#Distribution of medals" label="2-nd"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20514" end="20518" title="International Mathematical Olympiad#Medals (1959–2023)" label="1-st"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="21126" end="21129" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="21176" end="21179" title="BSc" label="BSc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634906" start="21300" end="21309" title="C9 League" label="C9 League"/>
<link wikidata="Q49113" start="21335" end="21345" title="Ivy League" label="Ivy League"/>
<link wikidata="Q197542" start="21692" end="21720" title="Politburo Standing Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Politburo Standing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="21728" end="21751" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="21794" end="21815" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP general secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q15029" start="21816" end="21825" title="Hu Jintao" label="Hu Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="23087" end="23103" title="Overseas Chinese" label="Overseas Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q131832106" start="23822" end="23858" title="Chinese intelligence activity abroad" label="Chinese intelligence activity abroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160650" start="23876" end="23896" title="industrial espionage" label="industrial espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q329864" start="23913" end="23932" title="military technology" label="military technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q907111" start="24166" end="24199" title="China Internet Information Center" label="China Internet Information Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099580" start="24525" end="24569" title="China Association for Science and Technology" label="China Association for Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501917" start="24611" end="24655" title="National Natural Science Foundation of China" label="National Natural Science Foundation of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="25090" end="25115" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="25166" end="25179" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="25305" end="25323" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="25426" end="25450" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="26224" end="26235" title="Fortune 500" label="Fortune 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="27748" end="27762" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="27800" end="27815" title="venture capital" label="venture capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q204157" start="28041" end="28055" title="power supplies" label="power supplies"/>
<link wikidata="Q475424" start="28253" end="28257" title="National Bureau of Economic Research" label="NBER"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151840" start="28829" end="28866" title="Australian Strategic Policy Institute" label="Australian Strategic Policy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="29048" end="29071" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q376860" start="29311" end="29339" title="newly industrialized economy" label="newly industrialized economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583237" start="29576" end="29604" title="Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macau Greater Bay Area" label="Shenzhen-Hong Kong-Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="29609" end="29616" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q51431089" start="29763" end="29775" title="Nature Index" label="Nature Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q17275094" start="29882" end="29896" title="CWTS Leiden Ranking" label="Leiden Ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="30792" end="30798" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="31105" end="31145" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="World Intellectual Property Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324638" start="31428" end="31441" title="Made in China" label="Made in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="31524" end="31534" title="brand name" label="brand name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601059" start="31624" end="31662" title="World Intellectual Property Indicators" label="World Intellectual Property Indicators"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="32361" end="32372" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q317623" start="32929" end="32947" title="technical standard" label="technical standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="32969" end="32977" title="TD-SCDMA" label="TD-SCDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="32978" end="32980" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79697" start="33185" end="33187" title="4G" label="4G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79703" start="33189" end="33229" title="Long-Term Evolution Time-Division Duplex" label="Long-Term Evolution Time-Division Duplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="33323" end="33336" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246046" start="33357" end="33376" title="academic publishing" label="academic publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988917" start="33669" end="33682" title="data-analysis" label="data-analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="33776" end="33787" title="peer-review" label="peer-review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201886" start="34077" end="34097" title="ISI Web of Knowledge" label="ISI Web of Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090953" start="34723" end="34753" title="Social Sciences Citation Index" label="Social Sciences Citation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q839875" start="35501" end="35535" title="Ministry of Science and Technology of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ministry of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q180686" start="36091" end="36097" title="PubMed" label="PubMed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436668" start="36169" end="36194" title="Randomized clinical trial" label="Randomized clinical trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q451845" start="36778" end="36795" title="publish or perish" label="publish or perish"/>
<link wikidata="Q164666" start="36921" end="36931" title="plagiarism" label="plagiarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099580" start="37205" end="37249" title="China Association for Science and Technology" label="China Association for Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330" start="37881" end="37894" title="impact factor" label="impact factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="38235" end="38257" title="state-owned enterprise" label="state-owned enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q197543" start="39296" end="39315" title="Zhejiang University" label="Zhejiang University"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="39483" end="39494" title="peer review" label="peer review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603519" start="40182" end="40217" title="State Science and Technology Prizes" label="State Science and Technology Prizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q841695" start="40233" end="40278" title="State Preeminent Science and Technology Award" label="State Preeminent Science and Technology Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827190" start="41218" end="41237" title="Agriculture in China" label="Chinese agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="41239" end="41262" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="41288" end="41299" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q394222" start="41434" end="41459" title="genetically modified food" label="genetically modified food"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="41772" end="41781" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117979" start="41825" end="41845" title="Food safety in China" label="Food safety in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455064" start="41893" end="41918" title="fishing industry in China" label="fishing industry in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604656" start="41959" end="41979" title="Aquaculture in China" label="Aquaculture in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751223" start="42198" end="42202" title="carp" label="carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="42338" end="42352" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q493751" start="43467" end="43471" title="KPMG" label="KPMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q207652" start="43507" end="43524" title="chemical industry" label="chemical industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364904" start="43644" end="43658" title="petrochemicals" label="petrochemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="43663" end="43671" title="plastics" label="plastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062149" start="43898" end="43918" title="deep sea exploration" label="deep sea exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546594" start="43948" end="43956" title="Jiaolong (submersible)" label="Jiaolong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570255" start="43957" end="43968" title="submersible" label="submersible"/>
<link wikidata="Q939183" start="44013" end="44028" title="deep sea mining" label="deep sea mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="44444" end="44472" title="Artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence (AI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144097" start="44575" end="44583" title="Technology roadmap" label="road map"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="45006" end="45011" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16924332" start="45186" end="45189" title="DJI (company)" label="DJI"/>
<link wikidata="Q18124524" start="45194" end="45251" title="Ehang UAV" label="Ehang (Beijing Yi-Hang Creation Science &amp;amp; Technology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18124524" start="45434" end="45443" title="Ehang UAV" label="Ehang 184"/>
<link wikidata="Q655870" start="45448" end="45460" title="Environmentally friendly" label="eco-friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="45474" end="45499" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="autonomous aerial vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144286" start="45601" end="45618" title="Pearl River Delta" label="Pearl River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128980" start="45798" end="45814" title="industrial robot" label="industrial robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="45871" end="45879" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q184199" start="45948" end="45957" title="Automation" label="automated"/>
<link wikidata="Q143680" start="45958" end="45972" title="dental implant" label="dental implant"/>
<link wikidata="Q251212" start="46546" end="46564" title="Internet of Things" label="Internet of Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099744" start="46595" end="46636" title="China Internet Network Information Center" label="China Internet Network Information Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="46660" end="46668" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="46827" end="46839" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472399" start="46845" end="46863" title="Internet access" label="broadband internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q484847" start="46896" end="46906" title="e-commerce" label="e-commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="47137" end="47161" title="Landline" label="fixed line subscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q79697" start="47197" end="47199" title="4G" label="4G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363408" start="47297" end="47299" title="5G" label="5G"/>
<link wikidata="Q24834296" start="47332" end="47345" title="China Telecom" label="China Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q10874121" start="47876" end="47899" title="Supercomputing in China" label="Supercomputing in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q121117" start="47922" end="47936" title="Supercomputing" label="Supercomputing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="48021" end="48036" title="pharmaceuticals" label="pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="48038" end="48051" title="cryptanalysis" label="cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="48053" end="48069" title="natural resource" label="natural resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q620920" start="48083" end="48096" title="climate model" label="climate model"/>
<link wikidata="Q329864" start="48103" end="48122" title="military technology" label="military technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q121117" start="48175" end="48188" title="supercomputer" label="supercomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450880" start="48450" end="48472" title="Exascale computing" label="exascale supercomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q473930" start="48619" end="48627" title="Tianhe-I" label="Tianhe-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800177" start="48712" end="48720" title="Tianhe-2" label="Tianhe-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q24702533" start="48827" end="48844" title="Sunway TaihuLight" label="Sunway TaihuLight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986369" start="49161" end="49183" title="semiconductor industry" label="semiconductor industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054681" start="49988" end="50005" title="Tsinghua Holdings" label="Tsinghua Unigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q987831" start="50277" end="50294" title="Chinese animation" label="Chinese animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="50349" end="50351" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="50352" end="50378" title="computer-generated imagery" label="computer-generated imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143951" start="50546" end="50556" title="soft power" label="soft power"/>
<link wikidata="Q648877" start="50616" end="50630" title="postproduction" label="postproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q500088" start="50936" end="50956" title="DreamWorks Animation" label="DreamWorks Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="51258" end="51264" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354972" start="51429" end="51457" title="China Film Group Corporation" label="China Film Group Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002308" start="51508" end="51512" title="DMAX (company)" label="DMAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="51513" end="51527" title="motion picture" label="motion picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q759853" start="51528" end="51539" title="film format" label="film format"/>
<link wikidata="Q188575" start="51617" end="51621" title="IMAX" label="IMAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381277" start="51850" end="51872" title="Environmental issues in China" label="environmental problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755206" start="51884" end="51902" title="pollution in China" label="pollution in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q336191" start="52106" end="52116" title="wastewater" label="wastewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q11363288" start="52190" end="52210" title="Chinese water crisis" label="Chinese water crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190873" start="52268" end="52280" title="desalination" label="desalination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462136" start="52387" end="52405" title="water conservation" label="water conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900476" start="52512" end="52525" title="Monitor Group" label="Monitor Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q864928" start="52640" end="52652" title="life science" label="life science"/>
<link wikidata="Q115806532" start="52786" end="52789" title="Beijing Genomics Institute" label="BGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="52882" end="52896" title="DNA sequencing" label="DNA sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q48196" start="52910" end="52919" title="Stem cell" label="Stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533033" start="52933" end="52953" title="stem cell treatments" label="stem cell treatments"/>
<link wikidata="Q757232" start="53042" end="53057" title="medical tourism" label="medical tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061415" start="53379" end="53400" title="regenerative medicine" label="regenerative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540285" start="53435" end="53453" title="tissue engineering" label="tissue engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q213901" start="53458" end="53470" title="gene therapy" label="gene therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="53499" end="53512" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q679692" start="53524" end="53535" title="biopharmacy" label="biopharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q580689" start="53537" end="53559" title="biological engineering" label="biological engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381277" start="53741" end="53773" title="Chinese environmental protection" label="Chinese environmental protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q334122" start="55133" end="55146" title="Merrill Lynch" label="Merrill Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q212646" start="55299" end="55316" title="Hoffmann-La Roche" label="Hoffmann-La Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140895" start="55555" end="55571" title="Counterfeit drug" label="Counterfeit drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="55732" end="55735" title="PwC" label="PwC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519843" start="55802" end="55820" title="medical technology" label="medical technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q19768" start="55992" end="56004" title="machine tool" label="machine tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q190247" start="56015" end="56041" title="computer numerical control" label="computer numerical control"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="56356" end="56362" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q425558" start="56464" end="56470" title="DF-21D" label="DF-21D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107641" start="56471" end="56498" title="anti-ship ballistic missile" label="anti-ship ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385916" start="56602" end="56623" title="anti-satellite weapon" label="anti-satellite weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q857141" start="56660" end="56673" title="Beidou system" label="Beidou system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56721" end="56751" title="Anti ballistic missile#People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Chinese anti ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q560319" start="56770" end="56782" title="Chengdu J-20" label="Chengdu J-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q560406" start="56783" end="56811" title="fifth-generation jet fighter" label="fifth-generation jet fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q64122" start="56826" end="56847" title="electromagnetic pulse" label="electromagnetic pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q466421" start="56865" end="56889" title="reconnaissance satellite" label="reconnaissance satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509344" start="57256" end="57272" title="power projection" label="power projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q849062" start="57315" end="57349" title="Chinese aircraft carrier programme" label="Chinese aircraft carrier programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599585" start="57358" end="57392" title="Type 071 amphibious transport dock" label="Type 071 amphibious transport dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262529" start="57981" end="57989" title="dual use" label="dual use"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="58012" end="58022" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="58771" end="58784" title="hydrogen bomb" label="hydrogen bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="58964" end="58984" title="thermonuclear weapon" label="thermonuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="58995" end="59008" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="59010" end="59022" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="59031" end="59045" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q39600" start="59077" end="59083" title="Xian H-6" label="Hong-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q192779" start="59106" end="59111" title="Tu-16" label="Tu-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q848497" start="59221" end="59226" title="Uranium-235" label="U-235"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148503" start="59239" end="59244" title="Uranium-238" label="U-238"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062538" start="59257" end="59262" title="Nuclear weapon yield" label="yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="59271" end="59279" title="TNT equivalent" label="megatons"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="59333" end="59346" title="hydrogen bomb" label="hydrogen bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329367" start="59726" end="59728" title="Test No. 6" label="[1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870502" start="59976" end="60001" title="History of the Teller–Ulam design" label="Teller-Ulam configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256919" start="60283" end="60287" title="Deng Jiaxian" label="Deng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329367" start="60775" end="60777" title="Test No. 6" label="[1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370637" start="60929" end="60946" title="mining engineering" label="mining technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381277" start="61143" end="61185" title="Environmental issues in China" label="concern in China with environmental issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q190444" start="61245" end="61263" title="rare earth element" label="rare earth element"/>
<link wikidata="Q682483" start="61610" end="61618" title="refining" label="refining"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100383" start="61886" end="61929" title="Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration" label="Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="61993" end="61999" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555938" start="62004" end="62013" title="Antarctic" label="Antarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="62057" end="62067" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="62158" end="62164" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="62192" end="62200" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q162304" start="62229" end="62250" title="Chinese space program" label="Chinese space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q49678" start="62325" end="62341" title="Dong Fang Hong I" label="Dong Fang Hong I"/>
<link wikidata="Q378417" start="62478" end="62488" title="Shenzhou 5" label="Shenzhou 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="62516" end="62525" title="Extra-vehicular activity" label="spacewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q318646" start="62535" end="62545" title="Shenzhou 7" label="Shenzhou 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q131500" start="62563" end="62573" title="Tiangong-1" label="Tiangong-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100935" start="62622" end="62643" title="Chinese space station" label="Chinese space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q860037" start="62668" end="62701" title="Chinese Lunar Exploration Program" label="Chinese Lunar Exploration Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061879" start="62713" end="62732" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 3" label="lunar rover in 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q495307" start="62755" end="62768" title="lunar landing" label="lunar landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q716774" start="62865" end="62884" title="exploration of Mars" label="exploration of Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="62889" end="62894" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827255" start="63168" end="63215" title="Five hundred meter Aperture Spherical Telescope" label="Five hundred meter Aperture Spherical Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q184356" start="63264" end="63279" title="radio telescope" label="radio telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q986648" start="63647" end="63676" title="National Trunk Highway System" label="National Trunk Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="63714" end="63734" title="Interstate Highway System" label="US interstate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q248613" start="63796" end="63834" title="Rapid transit in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="metros or other forms of rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115363" start="63883" end="63888" title="Comac" label="Comac"/>
<link wikidata="Q936518" start="63889" end="63911" title="aerospace manufacturer" label="aerospace manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q429894" start="64008" end="64012" title="C919" label="C919"/>
<link wikidata="Q114465" start="64080" end="64108" title="automotive industry in China" label="automotive industry in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q752870" start="64149" end="64162" title="motor vehicle" label="motor vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629441" start="64271" end="64287" title="electric vehicle" label="electric vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="64443" end="64456" title="joint-venture" label="joint-venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="64565" end="64575" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="64721" end="64732" title="shipbuilder" label="shipbuilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="64737" end="64748" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059836" start="64967" end="64991" title="high-speed rail in China" label="high-speed rail in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="65018" end="65037" title="high-speed railways" label="high-speed railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010358" start="65413" end="65419" title="CERNET" label="CERNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q530471" start="65421" end="65448" title="Chinese Academy of Sciences" label="Chinese Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q689633" start="65450" end="65480" title="Chinese Academy of Engineering" label="Chinese Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073828" start="65482" end="65516" title="Chinese Academy of Social Sciences" label="Chinese Academy of Social Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q51557538" start="65518" end="65562" title="China–United States trade war (2018–present)" label="China–United States trade war (2018–present)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014399" start="65564" end="65570" title="CSTNET" label="CSTNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868791" start="65572" end="65644" title="History of science and technology in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="History of science and technology in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434077" start="65646" end="65672" title="List of Chinese inventions" label="List of Chinese inventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q20204729" start="65674" end="65692" title="Made in China 2025" label="Made in China 2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433691" start="65694" end="65735" title="Science in newly industrialized countries" label="Science in newly industrialized countries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277915" wikidata="Q357828" url="?curid=277915" title="Bristow">
<text>Bristow, or Bristowe, can refer to the following.

== People ==
*Bristow (surname)
*W.S. Bristowe (1901–1979), English naturalist
*Eric Bristow (1957-2018), English former professional darts player, nicknamed &quot;The Crafty Cockney&quot;

== Places ==
;In the United States
*Bristow, Indiana
*Bristow, Iowa
*Bristow, Mississippi
*Bristow, Missouri
*Bristow, Nebraska
*Bristow, Oklahoma
*Bristow, Virginia

== Companies ==
*Bristow Helicopters, a British helicopter airline

== Fictional characters ==
*Bristow (cartoon), British strip cartoon character
*Sydney Bristow</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q357828" start="0" end="7" title="Bristow" label="Bristow"/>
<link wikidata="Q357828" start="12" end="20" title="Bristow" label="Bristowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16860470" start="65" end="82" title="Bristow (surname)" label="Bristow (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568983" start="84" end="97" title="W.S. Bristowe" label="W.S. Bristowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q675591" start="131" end="143" title="Eric Bristow" label="Eric Bristow"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197771" start="277" end="293" title="Bristow, Indiana" label="Bristow, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q579175" start="295" end="308" title="Bristow, Iowa" label="Bristow, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969132" start="310" end="330" title="Bristow, Mississippi" label="Bristow, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28091930" start="332" end="349" title="Bristow, Missouri" label="Bristow, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206798" start="351" end="368" title="Bristow, Nebraska" label="Bristow, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856388" start="370" end="387" title="Bristow, Oklahoma" label="Bristow, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969135" start="389" end="406" title="Bristow, Virginia" label="Bristow, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969137" start="425" end="444" title="Bristow Helicopters" label="Bristow Helicopters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644975" start="504" end="521" title="Bristow (cartoon)" label="Bristow (cartoon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640773" start="556" end="570" title="Sydney Bristow" label="Sydney Bristow"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277919" wikidata="Q914050" url="?curid=277919" title="Brie (region)">
<text>Brie (; ) is a historic region of northern France notable in modern times for Brie cheese. It was once divided into three sections ruled by different feudal lords: the western &quot;Brie française&quot;, corresponding roughly to the modern department of Seine-et-Marne in the Île-de-France region; the eastern &quot;Brie champenoise&quot;, forming a portion of the modern department of Marne in the historic region of Champagne (part of modern-day Grand Est); and the northern &quot;Brie pouilleuse&quot;, forming part of the modern department of Aisne in Picardy.

The Brie forms a plateau with few eminences, varying in altitude between roughly in the west, and in the east. Its scenery is varied by forests of some size—the chief being the Forest of Sénart, the , and the . The surface soil is clay in which are embedded fragments of siliceous sandstone, used for millstones and constructional purposes; the subsoil is limestone. The Marne and its tributaries the Grand Morin and the Petit Morin are the chief rivers, but the region is not abundantly watered and the rainfall is only between .

Main towns:

* Brie-Comte-Robert
* Château-Thierry
* Coulommiers
* Crécy-la-Chapelle
* La Ferté-Gaucher
* La Ferté-sous-Jouarre
* Meaux
* Nangis
* Melun
* Provins

Main rivers:

* Marne
* Grand Morin
* Petit Morin

Main forests:

* Forêt d&#x27;Armainvilliers
* Forêt de Crécy-la-Chapelle
* Forêt de Ferrières
* Forêt de Notre-Dame
* Forest of Sénart
* Forêt de Villefermoy

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q914050" start="0" end="4" title="Brie (region)" label="Brie"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="43" end="49" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q193411" start="78" end="89" title="Brie cheese" label="Brie cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="240" end="250" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q12753" start="254" end="268" title="Seine-et-Marne" label="Seine-et-Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q13917" start="276" end="289" title="Île-de-France" label="Île-de-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q36784" start="290" end="296" title="Regions of France" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q12594" start="386" end="391" title="Marne (department)" label="Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q273827" start="418" end="427" title="Champagne (historical province)" label="Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q18677983" start="448" end="457" title="Grand Est" label="Grand Est"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093" start="547" end="552" title="Aisne" label="Aisne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249603" start="556" end="563" title="Picardy" label="Picardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q639713" start="743" end="759" title="Forêt de Sénart" label="Forest of Sénart"/>
<link wikidata="Q41983" start="937" end="942" title="Marne (river)" label="Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q693066" start="967" end="978" title="Grand Morin" label="Grand Morin"/>
<link wikidata="Q952791" start="987" end="998" title="Petit Morin" label="Petit Morin"/>
<link wikidata="Q250399" start="1113" end="1130" title="Brie-Comte-Robert" label="Brie-Comte-Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q194145" start="1133" end="1148" title="Château-Thierry" label="Château-Thierry"/>
<link wikidata="Q251731" start="1151" end="1162" title="Coulommiers, Seine-et-Marne" label="Coulommiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q839527" start="1165" end="1182" title="Crécy-la-Chapelle" label="Crécy-la-Chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q430885" start="1185" end="1201" title="La Ferté-Gaucher" label="La Ferté-Gaucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q907721" start="1204" end="1225" title="La Ferté-sous-Jouarre" label="La Ferté-sous-Jouarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q207620" start="1228" end="1233" title="Meaux" label="Meaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q271599" start="1236" end="1242" title="Nangis" label="Nangis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41139" start="1245" end="1250" title="Melun" label="Melun"/>
<link wikidata="Q203285" start="1253" end="1260" title="Provins" label="Provins"/>
<link wikidata="Q41983" start="1278" end="1283" title="Marne (river)" label="Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q693066" start="1286" end="1297" title="Grand Morin" label="Grand Morin"/>
<link wikidata="Q952791" start="1300" end="1311" title="Petit Morin" label="Petit Morin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1330" end="1357" title="Forêt d&amp;#x27;Armainvilliers" label="Forêt d&amp;#x27;Armainvilliers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1360" end="1386" title="Forêt de Crécy-la-Chapelle" label="Forêt de Crécy-la-Chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1389" end="1407" title="Forêt de Ferrières" label="Forêt de Ferrières"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1410" end="1429" title="Forêt de Notre-Dame" label="Forêt de Notre-Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q639713" start="1432" end="1448" title="Forêt de Sénart" label="Forest of Sénart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1451" end="1471" title="Forêt de Villefermoy" label="Forêt de Villefermoy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277921" wikidata="Q239623" url="?curid=277921" title="Bailey">
<text>(The) Bailey(s) may refer to:
==Arts and entertainment==
* Bailey, a type of robot in the television series &quot;Cleopatra 2525&quot;
* Bailey, New Hampshire, a fictional town depicted in the comic book &quot;Mister Miracle&quot;
* The Baileys, an Australian band comprising Charlie Collins (née Bailey) and her siblings

==Constructions==
* Bailey (castle), or ward, a courtyard of a castle or fortification, enclosed by a curtain wall
* Bailey bridge, a portable prefabricated truss bridge

==People and fictional characters==
* Bailey (surname)
* Bailey (given name)

==Places==
===United States===
* Bailey, Colorado, an unincorporated community
* Bailey, Minnesota, an unincorporated community
* Bailey, Mississippi, an unincorporated community
* Bailey, Missouri, an unincorporated community
* Bailey, North Carolina, a town
* Bailey, Oklahoma, a ghost town
* Bailey, Texas, a city
* Bailey Brook (West Branch French Creek tributary), Pennsylvania
* Bailey Park, Austin, Texas
* Bailey Peninsula, Washington, site of Seward Park (Seattle)

===Elsewhere===
* The Bailey, an historic area in the centre of Durham, England
* Bailey Creek (disambiguation), several rivers (including the US)
* Bailey Peninsula, Wilkes Land, Antarctica
** Bailey Rocks, on the north side of Bailey Peninsula
* Mount Bailey (disambiguation), several mountains (including the US)

==Other uses==
* Bailey (dog), Elizabeth Warren&#x27;s dog
* Bailey, a sea area in the BBC Shipping Forecast
* Bailey Aviation, a British aircraft manufacturer
* Bailey Distinguished Member Award, the highest honor of The Clay Minerals Society
* Bailey Road, Patna, India
* Bailey Sweet (apple), also referred to as Bailey, a cultivar of the domesticated apple
* Baileys Irish Cream, a type of alcoholic liqueur commonly known as Baileys
* Baileys Women&#x27;s Prize for Fiction, now known as the Women&#x27;s Prize for Fiction

==See also==
* Old Bailey, nickname of the Central Criminal Court in London, England
* Bailey House (disambiguation)
* Bailey Limestone, a geologic formation in Indiana, US
* BAILII, British and Irish Legal Information Institute
* Baily (disambiguation)
* Baley (disambiguation)
* Bayley (disambiguation)
* Bəyli, village in the Qabala Rayon of Azerbaijan.
* Bayli (singer), American singer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q239623" start="1" end="4" title="Bailey" label="The"/>
<link wikidata="Q239623" start="6" end="12" title="Bailey" label="Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q239623" start="13" end="14" title="Bailey" label="s"/>
<link wikidata="Q867935" start="114" end="128" title="Cleopatra 2525" label="Cleopatra 2525"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723865" start="137" end="158" title="Bailey, New Hampshire" label="Bailey, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q72049608" start="276" end="291" title="Charlie Collins (musician)" label="Charlie Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q10971470" start="343" end="358" title="Bailey (castle)" label="Bailey (castle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q803818" start="440" end="453" title="Bailey bridge" label="Bailey bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658113" start="532" end="548" title="Bailey (surname)" label="Bailey (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848330" start="551" end="570" title="Bailey (given name)" label="Bailey (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879858" start="605" end="621" title="Bailey, Colorado" label="Bailey, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985714" start="653" end="670" title="Bailey, Minnesota" label="Bailey, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848324" start="702" end="721" title="Bailey, Mississippi" label="Bailey, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27985458" start="753" end="769" title="Bailey, Missouri" label="Bailey, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960160" start="801" end="823" title="Bailey, North Carolina" label="Bailey, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848329" start="834" end="850" title="Bailey, Oklahoma" label="Bailey, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q969718" start="867" end="880" title="Bailey, Texas" label="Bailey, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49844459" start="891" end="940" title="Bailey Brook (West Branch French Creek tributary)" label="Bailey Brook (West Branch French Creek tributary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848382" start="957" end="968" title="Bailey Park" label="Bailey Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713892" start="1024" end="1045" title="Seward Park (Seattle)" label="Seward Park (Seattle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715344" start="1065" end="1075" title="The Bailey" label="The Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848343" start="1129" end="1158" title="Bailey Creek (disambiguation)" label="Bailey Creek (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15196140" start="1196" end="1212" title="Bailey Peninsula" label="Bailey Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952492" start="1241" end="1253" title="Bailey Rocks" label="Bailey Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919556" start="1295" end="1324" title="Mount Bailey (disambiguation)" label="Mount Bailey (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372991" start="1381" end="1393" title="Bailey (dog)" label="Bailey (dog)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004285" start="1455" end="1472" title="Shipping Forecast" label="Shipping Forecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q22101871" start="1475" end="1490" title="Bailey Aviation" label="Bailey Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23579153" start="1526" end="1559" title="Bailey Distinguished Member Award" label="Bailey Distinguished Member Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q15196141" start="1610" end="1628" title="Bailey Road, Patna" label="Bailey Road, Patna"/>
<link wikidata="Q60755376" start="1638" end="1658" title="Bailey Sweet (apple)" label="Bailey Sweet (apple)"/>
<link wikidata="Q285480" start="1727" end="1746" title="Baileys Irish Cream" label="Baileys Irish Cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q18884" start="1861" end="1891" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Prize for Fiction" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Prize for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194829" start="1908" end="1918" title="Old Bailey" label="Old Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q803801" start="1980" end="2009" title="Bailey House (disambiguation)" label="Bailey House (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q125101769" start="2012" end="2028" title="Bailey Limestone" label="Bailey Limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971282" start="2076" end="2121" title="British and Irish Legal Information Institute" label="British and Irish Legal Information Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670243" start="2124" end="2146" title="Baily (disambiguation)" label="Baily (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q804917" start="2149" end="2171" title="Baley (disambiguation)" label="Baley (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q345508" start="2174" end="2197" title="Bayley (disambiguation)" label="Bayley (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813862" start="2200" end="2205" title="Bəyli" label="Bəyli"/>
<link wikidata="Q115820014" start="2252" end="2266" title="Bayli (singer)" label="Bayli (singer)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277922" wikidata="Q11269" url="?curid=277922" title="New Year's Eve">
<text>In the Gregorian calendar, New Year&#x27;s Eve refers to the evening, or commonly the entire day, of the last day of the year, 31 December, also known as Old Year&#x27;s Day. In many countries, New Year&#x27;s Eve is celebrated with dancing, eating, drinking, and watching or lighting fireworks. Many Christians attend a watchnight service to mark the occasion. New Year&#x27;s Eve celebrations generally continue into New Year&#x27;s Day, 1 January, past midnight.

The local time zone determines the advent of the New Year; the first places to welcome the New Year are west of the International Date Line: the Line Islands (part of Kiribati), Samoa and Tonga, in the Pacific Ocean. In contrast, American Samoa, Baker Island and Howland Island (part of the United States Minor Outlying Islands) are among the last.

==By region==
===Africa===
====Algeria====
In Algeria, New Year&#x27;s Eve is usually celebrated with family and friends. In the largest cities, there are fireworks at midnight. The Martyrs&#x27; Memorial is the main attraction during the celebration, while some Algerians prefer celebrate outside the country, generally in Tunis or Paris.

At , the President&#x27;s message of greetings is read on TV. The EPTV network airs an entertainment show, with different hosts and guests.

====Egypt====
In Egypt, New Year&#x27;s Eve is celebrated with fireworks and often evening parties with friends and family.

====Ghana====
In Ghana, Ghanaians celebrate New Year&#x27;s Eve by going to church; others go to nightclubs, pubs or take to the streets to celebrate. At midnight, fireworks are displayed across various cities of Ghana, especially in Accra and Tema.

====Morocco====

In Morocco, New Year&#x27;s Eve is celebrated in the company of family and friends. Moroccans get together to eat cake, dance, and laugh. Traditionally, Moroccans celebrate it at home, but some prefer to go to nightclubs. At midnight, fireworks are displayed across Ain Diab, in the corniche of Casablanca.

====Nigeria====

In Nigeria, Nigerians often Celebrate the New Year&#x27;s Eve by going to church; others go to nightclubs and parties organized by individuals, communities, and other organizations.

In Lagos, a year-end festival known as Lagos Countdown (later renamed One Lagos Fiesta) was first held in 2012, as part of an effort to establish tourism-oriented New Year&#x27;s festivities more in line with those of other major metropolitan areas.

====Rwanda====
In Rwanda, Rwandans celebrate New Year&#x27;s Eve by going to church, taking part in social gatherings and organizing family activities. The services usually start from 6pm for the Roman Catholic church and 10pm for the Protestants. At 00:00, at midnight, the president delivers an end-of-year address which is broadcast live on many radio and television stations. Fireworks were introduced in recent years, with the most significant displays happening at Kigali Convention Centre, Rebero Hill, Mount Kigali.

====South Africa====
In South Africa, South Africans vote on a top ten music countdown before 31 December. When the countdown reaches number one, the song with the most votes plays on all the country&#x27;s radio stations. Fireworks are lit all around South Africa. South Africans engage in occasional drinking and braais.

====South Sudan====
In South Sudan, South Sudanese attend church services at many churches in Juba. The service begins at 9pm. At the stroke of midnight, the famous carol, &quot;Hark! The Herald Angels Sing&quot; is sung to mark the end and beginning of the year with a blessing. The service ends at 12:30am.

====Tunisia====
In Tunisia, Tunisians celebrate by spending the evening in restaurants and hotels and exchange gifts and flowers, or travel outside Tunisia to spend New Year&#x27;s Eve in a European country. But most Tunisians prefer to celebrate it at home in a family evening with relatives and friends.

Tunisians buy cakes or prepare them at home, in addition to holding dinner banquets, as roast chicken remains the main dish for this occasion, and staying up until midnight to eat cake as the first moments of the new year arrive.

In recent years, the popular Tunisian film &quot;Choufli Hal on New Year&#x27;s Eve&quot; is broadcast every year, ending just minutes before the new year. This has become an annual tradition.

===Asia===
====Azerbaijan====
The Gregorian calendar is still in force after Azerbaijan became an independent republic, and 1 January is celebrated as a day off. The day before, 31 December, is also marked as International Solidarity Day of Azerbaijanis, marking the double anniversary of that day in 1989 when the local residents took down the Soviet–Iranian border in then-Nakhichevan ASSR to reunite with Iranian Azerbaijanis south of the border, as well as the Istanbul-held first World Congress of Azerbaijanis which tackled issues regarding the Azeri expat communities.

Celebrations of the holiday are influenced from its Soviet history, at midnight the national anthem is played on all TV stations following the message of the President of Azerbaijan produced by state channel AzTV.

====Bangladesh====

The New Year celebrations take place in all around the country mostly in Dhaka, Chittagong, Sylhet, Rajshahi, Khulna, Barishal, Cox&#x27;s Bazar etc. The celebrations mostly take place at night. On this day, Bangladeshis go to parties at clubs or hotels, beaches, at the crowded roadsides and bridges where firecrackers are blasted out in the sky at night. The roadsides and bridges are also lighted up by colorful lights at night. Bangladeshis do a get-together as well as enjoy with their families. That day, Cox&#x27;s Bazar becomes a popular tourist destination for both Bangladeshi and foreign tourists.

Music, songs and dances are organized in the auditoriums, hotels, beaches and as well as in the grounds which are shown live concert on television where many Dhallywood celebrities along with many personalities participate in the dance, music, songs and often drama to liven up the concert more. Sometimes marriages and weddings take place in the clubs on the night of 31 December so that Bangladeshis can enjoy more. Bangladeshis also enjoy New Year&#x27;s Eve with their families, relatives, and friends in the ships and yachts especially in the sea while going to Saint Martin where DJs liven up their night through their music and songs.

Muslims during the year&#x27;s last Jumu&#x27;ah prayer of mosque permanently pray a Munajat, which is done all over the mosques of the country, so that Allah may bless them and the coming year can be fruitful. Hindus organize a Puja so that the coming year can be fruitful for them. The Christians go to the churches for a watch night service till midnight, praying for blessing in the coming new year as it is also part of the Christmastide season observances.

====China====
In China, although the celebrations of the Lunar New Year are not until a few weeks after the Gregorian New Year, celebrations of the Gregorian New Year are held in some areas, particularly in major cities. For example, celebrations with fireworks and concerts have taken place in Beijing&#x27;s Solana Blue Harbor Shopping Park, while cultural shows and other events are held at the city&#x27;s Millennium Monument, Temple of Heaven, Great Wall of China, Olympic Green, and the Summer Palace. Since 2011, a light and sound show has been held at The Bund in Shanghai, a few minutes before midnight.

====Hong Kong====
In Hong Kong, many gather in shopping districts like Central, Causeway Bay and Tsim Sha Tsui. A special edition of &quot;A Symphony of Lights&quot; —the nightly light and sound show conducted across the buildings of Hong Kong&#x27;s Victoria Harbour—is held on New Year&#x27;s Eve, incorporating a fireworks show.

From 1993 to 2014, the Times Square shopping centre in Causeway Bay hosted New Year&#x27;s Eve festivities featuring the &quot;lowering&quot; of an apple (via of signage), in imitation of the ball drop at New York City&#x27;s Times Square. The countdown event was discontinued in 2015 in favor of other events over the holiday season.

====India====
In India, New Year&#x27;s Eve is a blend of modern celebrations and traditional festivities. Metropolitans like Mumbai, Delhi, Bengaluru, and Kolkata have parties, concerts, and colorful fireworks displays as part of the celebrations to attract crowds of people. Goa and Manali celebrate the day with beach parties and winter festivals. So, many people celebrate the festival by praying and performing rituals, since India is a culturally diverse country.

New Year&#x27;s Eve celebrations are the biggest in large cities, and include Goa&#x27;s beaches and Park Street, Kolkata. Other cities such as New Delhi and Mumbai also celebrate extravagantly

====Israel====
New Year&#x27;s Eve has been observed in Israel since the introduction of the Gregorian calendar in 1918; it is referred to as &quot;Silvester&quot; to distinguish it from the Jewish New Year, Rosh Hashanah, which falls in either September or October on the Gregorian calendar. It is largely celebrated through social gatherings and parties. The New Year&#x27;s holiday has historically attracted a negative stigma among parts of the Israeli Jewish population due to its connection to Pope Sylvester I—who is widely considered to have been an antisemite. As a result, celebrations have historically been modest in comparison to other countries. In December 2014, wearables manufacturer Jawbone published a report estimating that only 67.4% of Israelis were awake at midnight on New Year&#x27;s Eve in 2013, and most people only stayed up as late as 12:45 a.m. IST.

During the era of Mandatory Palestine in the early-1930s, promotional material for formal New Year&#x27;s Eve parties and masquerade balls was targeted primarily towards Arabic and English-speaking residents (by contrast, posters for Hanukkah parties were written in Hebrew). These parties also became popular among German and Austrian Jews that had emigrated to avoid the rise of Nazi Germany. The increasing popularity of Silvester faced criticism from the Orthodox population, including the Hapoel HaMizrachi, who considered them contrary to Zionist values. In 1934, it was reported that the municipal council of Tel Aviv had passed a resolution to ban Silvester parties, calling them &quot;contrary to the spirit and traditions of the people of Israel&quot;. However, reported efforts to ban the holiday were unsuccessful or left unenforced, and it continued to increase in popularity—especially among secular populations.

Following the post-Soviet aliyah, Novy God was imported into Israel by emigrants. The observance was initially obscure outside of Israel&#x27;s Russian Jewish community, and also faced stigma from those who mistook its traditions for being Christmas or Silvester. In the mid-2010s, a campaign was launched to promote awareness of the holiday among the 1.5 generation of immigrants, as well as non-Russian residents. By the late-2010s, public awareness of Novy God had increased; Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu began to acknowledge Novy God in his holiday greetings, and it became more common for retailers to stock Novy God-related goods. In a 2020 survey, 72% of Israelis surveyed stated they were familiar with the holiday, while 54% did not perceive Novy God to be part of the country&#x27;s culture.

====Japan====
In Japan, New Year&#x27;s Eve is used to prepare for and welcome , the New Year&#x27;s god. Japanese clean their homes and prepare Kadomatsu or Shimenawa to welcome the god before New Year&#x27;s Eve. Buddhist temples ring their bells 108 times at midnight in the traditional . The rings represent the 108 elements of , mental states that lead Japanese to take unwholesome actions.

In most cities and urban areas across Japan, New Year&#x27;s Eve celebrations are usually accompanied by concerts, countdowns, fireworks and other events. In Tokyo, revelers gather at the Zojoji Temple in Minato, who release helium balloons with New Year&#x27;s wishes up in the sky and watch the lighting of Tokyo Tower and Tokyo Skytree with a year number displayed on the observatory at the stroke of midnight. Shibuya Crossing formerly hosted a gathering of revellers at midnight, but this ended in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as a subsequent crackdown on gatherings around Halloween and New Year&#x27;s Eve due to issues with overtourism and public intoxication.

Since 1951, NHK has traditionally broadcast the &quot;Kōhaku Uta Gassen&quot; (&quot;Red and White Song Battle&quot;) on New Year&#x27;s Eve, a music competition where two teams of popular musicians (the red and white teams, whose performances contain female and male vocalists respectively) perform songs. The winning team is determined by a panel of judges, audience members at the NHK Hall in Tokyo, and televotes. The special was previously one of Japan&#x27;s most-watched television programs overall; its audience has since declined, and hit a record low of 34.3% in the Video Research ratings in 2021. 

From 1996 to 2022, the talent agency Johnny &amp; Associates organised &quot;Johnny&#x27;s Countdown&quot;—a concert event at the Tokyo Dome televised by Fuji Television. In the wake of sexual abuse allegations surrounding the agency&#x27;s founder, a new agency known as Starto Entertainment was formed in 2023 to take on Johnny &amp; Associates&#x27; roster: the new agency has yet to organise a successor to &quot;Johnny&#x27;s Countdown&quot;. The Japan Record Awards were previously held on New Year&#x27;s Eve from 1959 to 2006, but have since been held on 30 December.

A more recent tradition in Japan have been combat sports supercards; the Saitama Super Arena has hosted an MMA event on New Year&#x27;s Eve since 2001, which were initially promoted by Pride Fighting Championships. After its dissolution and sale to UFC, Yarennoka! was organized by former Pride executives in 2007, while its successor Dream would hold the event through 2012 (which marked its final event). These cards have also featured kickboxing matches, promoted by groups such as Glory and K-1 Rizin Fighting Federation took over the tradition beginning in 2015 with its inaugural event.

====Kazakhstan====
In Central Asia, such as Kazakhstan, New Year&#x27;s Eve celebrations were inherited from Soviet traditions; thus they are similar to those of Russia. An example of such traditions would be the playing of the national anthem at midnight and the presidential address before it.

====Korea====
Although the traditional Korean New Year &quot;(Seollal)&quot; is typically a more important holiday in both North and South Korea, the 31 December New Year&#x27;s Eve of the Gregorian calendar is also celebrated. Most cities and urban areas in both Koreas host New Year&#x27;s Eve gatherings.

In South Korea, two of the biggest celebrations take place in the capital of Seoul: the ringing of Bosingak bell 33 times at midnight and fireworks display at Myeong-dong, and an LED laser light show and fireworks display at the Lotte World Tower in Songpa-gu. Television networks KBS and SBS both broadcast award shows, the KBS Drama Awards and SBS Drama Awards, to honor achievements in the television dramas aired by the networks. Until 2022 South Koreans calculated their age using the East Asian age reckoning method, with all South Koreans adding a year to their age at midnight of the New Year (of the Gregorian, not the Korean calendar), the government finally ended the practice for 2023 and onwards.

In Pyongyang, the capital of North Korea, the chimes of the clock at the Grand People&#x27;s Study House and the national fireworks display along Kim Il-sung Square, Juche Tower and the surrounding areas signal the start of the New Year. The celebration in Pyongyang, however, also marks the beginning of the North Korean calendar or the Juche Year, which is based on 15 April 1912, Kim Il Sung&#x27;s date of birth, the celebrations are more recent in origin with the fireworks displays dating from 2013. For 2018–19, Kim Il Sung Square hosted a concert performance by the state Moranbong Band, midnight fireworks, and a drone show.

====Lebanon====
In Lebanon. Lebanese people celebrate New Year&#x27;s Eve with a dinner attended by family and friends. The dinner features traditional dishes such as tabouli, hummus, kibbi, and other Lebanese foods. These celebrations could also take place in restaurants and clubs. Game shows are also organized where contestants can try to win money. The countdown to New Year&#x27;s is broadcast through the leading TV channel and the celebrations usually continue until sunrise. Fireworks are lit throughout the night.

====Malaysia====

&quot;Ambang Tahun Baru&quot;, a celebration sponsored by the government was held at Merdeka Square, the field opposite the Sultan Abdul Samad Building in the Malaysian capital of Kuala Lumpur in the early days. The event was broadcast live on government as well as private TV stations at those times. The countdown is now broadcast live on Government television from Putrajaya and the Broadcasting Centre in which the concert is held and fireworks are displayed at the Petronas Towers.

There are New Year countdown parties in major cities such as George Town, Shah Alam and Kuching, typically organized by the private sector in these cities.

====Mongolia====
Mongolians began celebrating the Gregorian New Year in the Socialist period, with influence from the former Soviet Union. As a modern tradition, New Year&#x27;s Eve as well as New Year&#x27;s Day are public holidays, and are two of the biggest holidays of the year. They celebrate New Year&#x27;s Eve with families. It is common, just like in the former Soviet Union, that the National Anthem of Mongolia is to be played at the midnight hour on television following the holiday address by the President of Mongolia.

====Pakistan====
New Year&#x27;s Eve is usually celebrated with fireworks in big cities (e.g. Lahore, Karachi and Islamabad). Musical nights and concerts are also held.

Many Pakistani youngsters enjoy the type of celebrations held the world over. The elite and educated classes participate in night-long activities in urban and cosmopolitan cities like Karachi, Lahore, and the capital of Islamabad. Young teenagers also use bikes for one wheeling on the roads. 

====Philippines====

In the Philippines, New Year&#x27;s Eve (&quot;Bisperas ng Bagong Taon&quot;) is a special non-working holiday (except for 2021 and 2022, in which it was a special working holiday), and Filipinos usually celebrate in the company of family or close friends. Traditionally, most households would attend church for year-end services and afterwards, host or attend an abundant midnight feast called the &quot;Medianoche&quot;. Typical dishes include &quot;pancit&quot; (a noodle dish meant to symbolize for a longer life) and &quot;hamón&quot; (dry-cured ham), while &quot;lechon&quot; (roasted pig) is usually prepared as is barbecued food and various desserts. Some refrain from serving chicken, as their scratching and pecking for food is said to be an unlucky idiom for a hand-to-mouth existence. Many Filipinos also buy firecrackers and fireworks to be used in New Year&#x27;s Eve, which is believed to drive away any bad luck in the start of the new year.

Many opt to wear new, bright, or colorful clothes with circular patterns, such as polka dots, or display sweets and twelve round fruits in the belief that circles attract money, while candies represent a sweeter year ahead. Several customs must be done exactly at midnight: scattering coins to increase wealth in the coming year, jumping to increase height, or the Spanish custom of eating twelve grapes, one for each month of the year. Filipinos also make loud noises by blowing on cardboard or plastic horns called &quot;torotot&quot;, banging on pots and pans, playing loud music, blowing car horns, or by lighting firecrackers and bamboo cannons. It is an apotropaic ritual, as the din is believed to scare away bad luck and evil spirits.

Although many Filipinos typically spend their New Year&#x27;s Eve at their family homes, in some urban areas, many New Year&#x27;s Eve parties and countdown celebrations are also hosted by the private sector with the help of the local government. These parties, which include balls hosted by hotels, usually display their own fireworks and are also well-attended.

====Saudi Arabia====

Until 2016, Saudi Arabia used the Umm al-Qura calendar—which is based on astronomical calculations—for administrative purposes. The Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice (CPVPV, the Saudi religious police) also enforced a ban on public celebrations of the Gregorian New Year as per a religious edict, and could fine shops for offering New Year&#x27;s-related products and confiscate them. However, the religious police did not go after individual citizens holding private celebrations.

The power of the CPVPV was curtailed by the 2016 reforms of Mohammed bin Salman. The country also began to base the salaries of public sector employees on the Gregorian calendar as a cost savings measure, while retaining the Islamic calendar for religious purposes. In 2019, the capital of Riyadh introduced a new winter entertainment festival known as Riyadh Season, in support of Saudi Vision 2030. The inaugural festival included New Year&#x27;s festivities centred upon Boulevard Riyadh City, including fireworks and a concert at Mohammed Abdo Arena featuring top Arabic music performers.

====Singapore====
In Singapore, New Year&#x27;s Eve is typically celebrated via public events such as fireworks shows, with the largest traditionally being held at Marina Bay (as organised by the Urban Redevelopment Authority). Major celebrations are also held in other parts of the Central Region (such as Clarke Quay and Sentosa), and various neighbourhood-level events are organised by the People’s Association. State broadcaster Mediacorp organises and televises a New Year&#x27;s concert event, which for 2025 was held at Singapore Sports Hub in conjunction with the launch of commemorations for Singapore&#x27;s 60th anniversary of independence.

====Taiwan====
The most prominent New Year&#x27;s event in Taiwan is a major fireworks show launched from the Taipei 101 skyscraper in Taipei. In 2018, the show was enhanced by the installation of a new LED lighting system on the north face of the tower between its 35th and 90th floors. This change countered a reduction in the number of firework shells launched during the show, as part of an effort to produce less pollution.

A new tradition that emerged in 2023 is a flash mob gathering at Taipei&#x27;s Daan Forest Park at midnight to re-enact the closing scene of Tsai Ming-liang&#x27;s 1994 film &quot;Vive l&#x27;amour&quot;, in which lead character May Lin cries on a bench at the then-incomplete park. The first event was inspired by a viral social media post. On 31 December 2024, the Taiwan Film and Audiovisual Institute organized a formal version of the gathering (including a screening of the film and guest appearances by Tsai Ming-liang and the film&#x27;s co-stars) at Daan Forest Park to mark the film and park&#x27;s 30th anniversary.

====Thailand====

Aside from the traditional Thai New Year &quot;Songkran (Thailand)&quot; (which falls on 13 April or 14 April), Thais also celebrate the arrival of the Gregorian New Year on 1 January with families, relatives and friends, which includes a family dinner and following different customs. It is a public holiday. In most cities and urban areas across Thailand, New Year&#x27;s Eve celebrations are accompanied by countdowns, fireworks, concerts and other major events, notably, the CentralWorld Square at CentralWorld and the area along Chao Phraya River at ICONSIAM and Asiatique in Bangkok, and the Pattaya Beach in Pattaya, while public places such as hotels, pubs, restaurants and nightclubs, also host New Year&#x27;s Eve parties by offering food, entertainment and music to the guests, and they usually stay open until the next morning.
====Turkey====

Numerous decorations and customs traditionally associated with Christmas and Bayrams are part of secular New Year&#x27;s Eve celebrations in Turkey. Homes and streets are lit in glittering lights. Small gifts are exchanged, and large family dinners are organized with family and friends, featuring a special turkey dish stuffed with a zante currant, pine nuts, pimiento and dill &quot;iç pilav&quot;, dolma, hot börek, baklava, and various other Turkish dishes; accompanied with rakı, Turkish wine, boza, &quot;şerbet&quot;, salep, Turkish tea, or coffee. Even though Turks generally do not celebrate Christmas, decorating New Year trees is an emerging tradition on New Year&#x27;s Eve in Turkey and Turks associate Santa Claus with New Year&#x27;s Eve.

Television and radio channels are known to continuously broadcast a variety of special New Year&#x27;s Eve programs, while municipalities all around the country organize fundraising events for the poor, in addition to celebratory public shows such as concerts and family-friendly events, as well as more traditional forms of entertainment such as the Karagöz and Hacivat shadow-theater, and even performances by the Mehter—the Janissary Band that was founded during the days of the Ottoman Empire.

Public and private parties with large public attendances are organized in a number of cities and towns, particularly in the largest metropolitan areas such as Istanbul, Ankara, İzmir, Adana, Bursa and Antalya, with the biggest celebrations taking place in Istanbul&#x27;s Taksim, Beyoğlu, Nişantaşı and Kadıköy districts and Ankara&#x27;s Kızılay Square, which generally feature dancing, concerts, laser and light shows as well as the traditional countdown and fireworks display.

In addition, on day, the president addresses citizens in his New Year&#x27;s message, congratulates them on the new year and talks about his goals for the new year.

====United Arab Emirates====
In Dubai, United Arab Emirates, the Burj Khalifa—the world&#x27;s tallest building—has hosted an annual fireworks display, which is among the world&#x27;s most expensive. A fireworks show was not held for 2017–2018: instead, a multimedia light and sound show was presented using the tower&#x27;s lighting system, which set a Guinness World Record for the largest light and sound show staged on a single building. The fireworks show returned for 2018-2019, in tandem with a multimedia presentation. From 2019 onwards, the fireworks are launched along with laser, multimedia and music shows.

===Europe===
====Albania====
Preparations for New Year&#x27;s Eve in Albania start with the Christmas tree, which in Albania is known as &quot;New Year&#x27;s Tree&quot; or &quot;New Year&#x27;s Pine&quot;. At midnight, Albanians toast and greet each other and fireworks are lit.

====Austria====
In Austria, New Year&#x27;s Eve is usually celebrated with friends and family. At exactly midnight, all radio and television programmes operated by ORF broadcast the sound of the Pummerin, the bell of St. Stephen&#x27;s Cathedral in Vienna, followed by the &quot;Donauwalzer&quot; (&quot;The Blue Danube&quot;) by Johann Strauss II. Many Austrians dance to this at parties or in the street. Large crowds gather in the streets of Vienna, where the municipal government organizes a series of stages where bands and orchestras play. Fireworks are set off by both municipal governments and individuals.

====Belgium====
In Belgium, New Year&#x27;s Eve ( [&quot;Saint Sylvester&#x27;s Eve&quot;] or [&quot;old year&quot;]) is celebrated with family parties called [let&#x27;s wake up] in the French speaking areas. On television, a stand-up comedian reviews the past year after which a musical or variety show signals midnight, when Belgians kiss, exchange good luck greetings, and toast the New Year and absent relatives and friends with champagne. Many Belgians light fireworks or go into the street to watch them. Most cities have their own fireworks display: the most famous is at Mont des Arts in Brussels. Cities, cafés and restaurants are crowded. Free bus services and special New Year&#x27;s Eve taxis (the &quot;Responsible Young Drivers&quot;) bring Belgians home afterwards.

On 1 January () children read their &quot;New Year&#x27;s letter&quot; and give holiday greeting cards of decorated paper featuring golden cherubs and angels, colored roses and ribbon-tied garlands to parents and godparents, on decorated paper.

====Bosnia and Herzegovina====
New Year is widely celebrated in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Streets are decorated for New Year&#x27;s Eve and there is a fireworks show and concerts in all the larger cities. Restaurants, clubs, cafes and hotels are usually full of guests and they organize New Year&#x27;s Eve parties.

In the capital Sarajevo, Bosnians gather in the Square of children of Sarajevo where a local rock band entertains them. Several trumpet and rock groups play until the early morning hours. At midnight there is a big fireworks show.

====Czechia and Slovakia====

New Year&#x27;s Eve (&quot;Silvestr/Silvester&quot;) celebrations and traditions in Czech Republic and Slovakia are very similar. New Year&#x27;s Eve is the noisiest day of the year. Czechs and Slovaks generally gather with friends at parties, in pubs, clubs, in the streets, or city squares to eat, drink, and celebrate the new year. Fireworks are a popular tradition; in large cities such as Bratislava, or Prague, the fireworks start before noon and steadily increase until the clock strikes midnight. In the first minutes after midnight, Czechs and Slovaks toast with champagne, wish each other a happy new year, fortune and health, and go outside for the fireworks displays.

In both countries all major TV stations air entertainment shows before and after the midnight countdown, which is followed by the National anthem of each country. The Presidents of the republics gave their New Year speech in the morning – ex-Czech President Miloš Zeman renewed the tradition of Christmas speeches. In recent years however the Czechoslovak national anthem is played at midnight in some stations, in honor of the shared history of both nations.

====Denmark====

Danes in Denmark may go to parties or entertain guests at home. There is a special evening meal that concludes with Kransekage, a special dessert, along with champagne. Other traditional dishes are boiled cod, stewed kale and cured saddle of pork. However, expensive cuts of beef as well as sushi have become increasingly popular.

Multiple significant traditional events are broadcast on television and radio on 31 December. This includes, but is not limited to:

The monarch&#x27;s New Year message from Amalienborg Palace at 18:00 and the Town Hall Clock in Copenhagen striking midnight. Thousands of Danes gather together in Rådhuspladsen (the Town Hall Square) and cheer.

The Royal Guard parade in their red gala uniforms. The climax of the celebration is fireworks launched as the Town Hall Tower bells chime on the stroke of midnight. After midnight, all radio &amp; television stations play: &quot;&quot; [Danish new year&#x27;s hymn] and followed by &quot;Kong Christian stod ved højen mast&quot; [Danish Royal Anthem] and &quot;Der er et yndigt land&quot; [Danish National Anthem].

Like in the surrounding nations, the German comedy sketch &quot;Dinner for One&quot; is broadcast every year at 23:45, and ends just minutes before the new year. This has been a tradition every year since 1980 (except in 1985).

Another reoccurring broadcast is the 1968 film &quot;The Party&quot;, which is aired after midnight on 1 January.

====Estonia====
To celebrate New Year&#x27;s Eve in Estonia, Estonians decorate villages, visit friends and prepare lavish meals.

Some believe that Estonians should eat seven, nine, or twelve times on New Year&#x27;s Eve. These are lucky numbers in Estonia; it is believed that for each meal consumed, the person gains the strength of that many men the following year. Meals should not be completely finished—some food should be left for ancestors and spirits who visit the house on New Year&#x27;s Eve.

Traditional New Year food includes pork with sauerkraut or Estonian sauerkraut (&quot;mulgikapsad&quot;), baked potatoes and swedes with hog&#x27;s head, and white and blood sausage. Vegetarians can eat potato salad with navy beet and pâté. Gingerbread and marzipan are very popular for dessert. Traditional New Year drinks include beer and mead, but mulled wine and champagne have become modern favourites.

====Finland====

In Finland, New Year&#x27;s Eve is usually celebrated with family or friends. Late supper is served, often featuring wieners, Janssons frestelse, and potato salad. Some municipalities organize fireworks at midnight. Consumer fireworks are also very popular. A Finnish tradition is molybdomancy – to tell the fortunes of the New Year by melting &quot;tin&quot; (actually lead) in a tiny pan on the stove and throwing it quickly in a bucket of cold water. The resulting blob of metal is analyzed, for example by interpreting shadows it casts by candlelight. These predictions are however never taken seriously.

The principal broadcast is aired by YLE at Helsinki Senate Square featuring Finnish music stars. The countdown to the New Year is with the Helsinki Cathedral clock. Preceding this the German comedy sketch &quot;Dinner for One&quot; is shown every year in the afternoon. On the radio, just before midnight, the poem &quot;Hymyilevä Apollo&quot; (Smiling Apollo) by Eino Leino is read.

====France====

In France, New Year&#x27;s Eve (&quot;la Saint-Sylvestre&quot;) is usually celebrated with a feast, &quot;le Réveillon de la Saint-Sylvestre&quot; (&quot;Cap d&#x27;Any&quot; in Northern Catalonia). This feast customarily includes special dishes including foie gras, seafood such as oysters, and champagne. The celebration can be a simple, intimate dinner with friends and family or, &quot;une soirée dansante&quot;, a much fancier ball.

On New Year&#x27;s Day (&quot;le Jour de l&#x27;An&quot;) friends and family exchange New Year&#x27;s resolutions, kisses, and wishes. Some people eat ice cream.

Paris and Marseille host the main festivities of the day. A sound and light show using video mapping techniques has been held on the Arc de Triomphe since 2014 (except in 2021 and 2022 due to the COVID-19 pandemic), ending with a fireworks display at midnight. It is broadcast live on major television networks like France 2.

====Germany====
In Germany, parties are common on New Year&#x27;s Eve (&quot;Silvester&quot;), and wishes of luck may be worded as &quot;„Guten Rutsch ins neue Jahr!“&quot;, which literally translates into &quot;“Good slide into the new year!”&quot; or &quot;“Slide well into the new year!”&quot;, as well as &quot;„Prost Neujahr!“&quot; for &quot;“Cheers (to the) New Year!”&quot; or &quot;„Frohes Neues!“&quot; literally meaning &quot;“Happy new one!”&quot; Fireworks are very popular, both with individuals and at large municipal displays. 31 December and the three days leading up to it are the only four days of the year on which fireworks may be sold in Germany. Every year Berlin hosts one of the largest New Year&#x27;s Eve celebrations in all of Europe, attended by over a million Germans. The focal point is the Brandenburg Gate, where midnight fireworks are centered, with a live broadcast on ZDF under the name &quot;Willkommen&quot; with musical guests beginning in 2011. Germans toast the New Year with a glass of Sekt (German sparkling wine) or champagne. Molybdomancy is another German New Year&#x27;s Eve tradition, which involves telling fortunes by the shapes made by molten lead dropped into cold water. Other auspicious actions are to touch a chimney sweep or rub some ash on one&#x27;s forehead for good luck and health. Jam-filled doughnuts with or without alcoholic fillings are eaten. Finally a tiny marzipan pig is consumed for more good luck. In some northern regions of Germany (e.g. East Frisia) the making of &quot;&quot; (also ) is another tradition – Germans go door to door visiting their neighbors and partaking in this dish. It looks similar to a pancake, but the recipe calls for either dark molasses or dark syrup, topped with a few mettwurst slices and bacon strips.

Another notable tradition is watching the British comedy sketch &quot;Dinner for One&quot;, which has traditionally been broadcast on German television on New Year&#x27;s Eve since 1972. The version traditionally broadcast on German television was originally recorded in 1963, and was occasionally used as filler programming by NDR due to popular demand; in 1972, &quot;Dinner for One&quot; received its traditional New Year&#x27;s Eve scheduling. The sketch, as well as its catchphrase &quot;the same procedure as every year&quot;, are well known in German pop culture. &quot;Dinner for One&quot; is also broadcast on or around New Year&#x27;s Eve in other European countries, although it is, ironically, relatively unknown in the United Kingdom.

In 2023 On New Year&#x27;s Eve in Berlin, the fire department reported 38 separate incidents, including 14 cases where firetrucks were supposedly &quot;lured into ambushes&quot; and shot at with fireworks and pelted with beer crates.The level of aggression toward emergency service staff was completely unexpected, Berlin fire department spokesman Thomas Kirstein told public radio RBB. A total of 15 emergency responders were injured in Berlin, with one requiring hospital treatment. The police department said 18 of its officers had been injured.

Berlin&#x27;s fire department said it was &quot;shocked and saddened&quot; by the incidents, which left many asking what lies behind the apparent increase in violence toward emergency service staff and why they in particular have become a target.

====Greece====

A midnight fireworks display is held over the historic Parthenon temple in the capital of Athens.

A common tradition among Greek Orthodox families is the cutting of a vasilopita (&quot;King&#x27;s pie&quot; or &quot;St. Basil&#x27;s pie&quot;) at midnight. A coin or similar object is usually baked inside, and whoever finds it is said to have luck over the next year. New Year&#x27;s Day is considered a feast day for Basil of Caesarea, and it is also considered a custom to reserve the first slice of the vasilopita for St. Basil.

====Hungary====

New Year&#x27;s Eve (&quot;Szilveszter&quot;) in Hungary is celebrated with home parties and street parties, including a gathering in downtown Budapest. Fireworks and firecrackers are popular. Champagne, wine and traditional Hungarian New Year dishes—frankfurter sausages with horseradish, lentil soup, fish, and roast pig—are consumed. The national anthem is commonly sung at midnight.

Television channels usually broadcast comedic and musical programs most of the day and in the evening. At midnight, a countdown is followed by the national anthem and the President&#x27;s speech (which is usually pre-recorded).

A common greeting is &quot;BUÉK!&quot;, a common slang expression to &#x27;wish a Happy New Year&#x27; (or &quot;Boldog Új évet&quot;).

In past centuries, some Hungarians believed that animals were able to speak on New Year&#x27;s Eve, and that onion skins sprinkled with salt could indicate a rainy month.

Hungarian Christian communities focus on celebrating Mass on both New Year&#x27;s Eve and New Year&#x27;s Day. The Kiskarácsony traditions are also connected to the time (a holiday which has been present since the Middle Ages or longer)

====Iceland====

Fireworks are very popular in Iceland, particularly on New Year&#x27;s Eve. Iceland&#x27;s biggest New Year&#x27;s Eve events are usually in and around the capital, Reykjavík.

Since the 1940s, the country&#x27;s public broadcaster RÚV has traditionally broadcast &quot;Áramótaskaupið&quot; (literally &quot;The New Year&#x27;s Comedy&quot; or &quot;The New Year&#x27;s Lampoon&quot;), a special which features comedy sketches satirizing the events and news headlines of the past year. Originating from radio and later moving to television, the special is the most-watched television program of the year in Iceland (with an estimated 75% of the population having watched the special in 2018, across 98% of all televisions in the country). Some of its sketches have become well known in local popular culture, such as a 1989 sketch that portrayed then Minister of Finance Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson as a Batman-esque superhero known as &quot;Skattmann&quot; (&quot;Taxman&quot;), and a 2008 sketch which popularized the catchphrase &quot;Helvítis fokking fokk!&quot; as a reaction to the Icelandic financial crisis.

====Ireland====
New Year&#x27;s Eve (, or , the night of big portion) when traditionally households would partake in a large feast that was believed to ensure a plentiful new year. Beliefs around the day meant that no food or other goods would be taken from the house, to guard against lack or hunger in the year to come, believing that if anything was taken from the house on this day the house would remain empty for the year and have no luck. It was traditional for no water to be drawn from a well after sunset. Even the homeless and those in need would not be offered food or alms on this day. In some parts of the country, a large barmbrack would be baked during the day, with the man of the house taking three large bites of the cake in the evening, and throwing it against the inside of the front door as an offering to the Holy Trinity. An invocation accompanied this:
::&lt;poem&gt;&quot;Fógraímíd an gorta
Amach to tír na dTurcach;
Ó &#x27;nocht go bliain ó &#x27;nocht
Agus &#x27;nocht féin amach&quot;&lt;/poem&gt;
This translates as &quot;We warn famine to retire, To the land of the Turks; From tonight to this night twelve months, And from this night itself.&quot; The bits of cake would be gathered, and eaten by the family. Other variations include throwing the cake to someone outside the door, or conducting the ritual in the stables or other animal housing. Church bells ringing, the lighting of bonfires, and singing would take place towards midnight.

In modern times, celebrations in major cities are modest, with most Irish citizens favoring small parties in the home for family and friends.

====Italy====

In Italy, New Year&#x27;s Eve ( or &quot;Notte di San Silvestro&quot;) is celebrated by the observation of traditional rituals, such as wearing red underwear. An ancient tradition in southern regions which is rarely followed today was disposing of old or unused items by dropping them from the window.

Dinner is traditionally eaten with relatives and friends. It often includes zampone or cotechino (a meal made with pig&#x27;s trotters or entrails), lentils and (in Northern Italy) polenta. At 20:30, the President of Italy&#x27;s address to the nation, produced by RAI, the state broadcaster, is broadcast countrywide on radio and TV networks.

Rarely followed today is the tradition that consist in eating lentil stew when the bell tolls midnight, one spoonful per bell. This is supposed to bring good fortune; the round lentils represent coins.

Usually the evening is spent with family or friends in a square (where concerts or various parties are organised) but also at home. Generally, starting from 10 seconds before midnight, it is customary to count down until reaching zero, thus wishing a happy new year, toasting with spumante and watching or lighting fireworks, shooting firecrackers or guns loaded with blanks.

On television, Rai 1 broadcasts a special to welcome the New Year at 21:00 called &quot;L&#x27;anno che verrà&quot; hosted by Amadeus with musical guests, surprises and many more.

====Malta====
Malta organized its first New Year&#x27;s street party in 2009 in Floriana. The event was not highly advertised and proved controversial, due to the closing of an arterial street for the day. In 2010 there were the first national celebrations in St. George&#x27;s Square, Valletta Although professional fireworks are very popular in Malta, they are almost totally absent on New Year&#x27;s Eve. Maltese Usually hit nightclubs and specific dance music parties to celebrate New Year&#x27;s Eve.

====Montenegro====
In Montenegro, New Year&#x27;s Eve celebrations are held in all large cities, usually accompanied by fireworks. It is usually celebrated with family or friends, at home or outside. Restaurants, clubs, cafés and hotels organize celebrations with food and music.

====Netherlands====
New Year&#x27;s Eve (&quot;Oud en Nieuw&quot; or &quot;Oudejaarsavond&quot;) in the Netherlands is usually celebrated as a cozy evening with family or friends, although big organized parties can also be attended. Traditional snack foods are &quot;oliebollen&quot; (Dutch doughnuts) and &quot;appelbeignets&quot; (apple slice fritters). On television, the main feature is the &quot;oudejaarsconference&quot;, a performance by one of the major Dutch cabaretiers (comparable to stand-up comedy, but more serious, generally including a satirical review of the year&#x27;s politics). Historically, in Reformed Protestant families, Psalm 90 is read, although this tradition is now fading away. At midnight, Glühwein &quot;(bishops wine)&quot; or champagne is drunk. Many Dutch citizens light their own fireworks. City centres are usually intensely crowded, and large crowds combined with the fire quickly turn into a safety hazard. Towns do not organize a central fireworks display, except for Rotterdam where the national fireworks display can be viewed near the Erasmus Bridge. Additionally, there are certain types of fireworks that are banned. In rural areas, the tradition of :nl:Carbidschieten (&quot;blasting off footballs or churnlids with Calcium carbide gas filled milk churns&quot;) is performed instead of or alongside the lighting of fireworks.

Since 1999, originally to mark the new millennium, NPO Radio 2 has broadcast an annual countdown of the top 2000 songs of all-time, as determined by a survey of its listeners. The Top 2000 usually begins on Christmas Day, and airs non-stop through New Year&#x27;s Eve.

On 31 January 2020, the Dutch government announced that the setting off of private firecrackers and rockets was now prohibited. This was the result of a rapidly shifting public opinion after numerous fireworks incidents had occurred again, mainly with illegal fireworks during New Year&#x27;s Eve.

====Macedonia====
New Year&#x27;s Eve is celebrated across North Macedonia. New Year&#x27;s Day is celebrated by day-long fireworks shows. The day is celebrated together with family or friends at home or in restaurants, clubs, cafés and hotels. During the daytime celebration, children get gifts. Evening celebrations include food, music, and dancing to both traditional Macedonian folk music, and modern music. New Year&#x27;s Eve is celebrated on 31 December and also on 14 January according to the Macedonian Orthodox Calendar.

====Norway====
In Norway, New Year&#x27;s Eve (&quot;Nyttårsaften&quot;) is the second biggest celebration of the year, after Christmas Eve. While Christmas Eve is a family celebration, New Year&#x27;s Eve is an opportunity to celebrate with friends.

Traditionally, there is first a feast, commonly consisting of stuffed, roast turkey with potatoes, sprouts, gravy and Waldorf salad. The accompanying beverage is traditionally beer (commonly either Christmas beer or lager beer). Dessert will often be vanilla pudding or rice cream, and there will be cakes and coffee later in the evening – commonly accompanied by a glass of cognac. Then, at close to midnight on New Year&#x27;s Day, Norwegians will go outside to send up fireworks. Fireworks are only permitted to be sold to the general public on the days leading up to New Year&#x27;s Eve, and only to be launched that night.

Due to the general use of fireworks, more fires occur on New Year&#x27;s Eve than on any other day of the year in Norway. Accordingly, most Norwegian cities, and many towns, host a large, public fireworks display in order to discourage private use of fireworks in built-up areas. Norwegians will then congregate in a central square or similar to watch and celebrate.

====Poland====
In Poland, New Year&#x27;s Eve (&quot;Sylwester&quot;) celebrations include both indoor and outdoor festivities. A large open-air concert is held in the Main Square in Kraków. 150,000 to 200,000 revelers celebrate the New Year with live music and a fireworks display over St. Mary&#x27;s Basilica. Similar festivities are held in other cities around Poland.

For those who do not wish to spend the New Year in the city, the mountains are a popular destination. Zakopane, located in the Carpathian Mountains, is the most popular Polish mountain resort in winter.

Also, New Year&#x27;s Eve (&quot;Sylwester&quot;) celebrations are in Katowice, near the Spodek arena. In Sławatycze, Polish Citizens tour the streets dressed up as bearded men.

Major television networks broadcast the events live all across the country on New Year&#x27;s Eve like Polsat and TVP.

====Portugal====

In Portugal, the New Year celebration is taken very seriously. The tradition is to drink champagne and eat twelve raisins – one for each month of the year, making a wish for each. Another Portuguese tradition is a special cake called &quot;Bolo-Rei&quot; (literally: King Cake). &quot;Bolo-Rei&quot; is a round cake with a large hole in the centre, resembling a crown covered with crystallized and dried fruit. It is baked from a soft, white dough, with raisins, various nuts and crystallized fruit. Inside is hidden the characteristic &quot;fava&quot; (broad bean). Tradition dictates that whoever finds the &quot;fava&quot; has to pay for the &quot;Bolo-Rei&quot; next year. Initially, a small prize (usually a small metal toy) was also included within the cake. However, the inclusion of the prize was forbidden by the European Union for safety reasons. The Portuguese brought the recipe of the &quot;Gateau des Rois&quot; from France in the second half of the 19th century. To this day, this recipe is a very well kept secret.

In Lisbon, the New Year is celebrated with a grand concert. The New Year&#x27;s Concert is held at the CCB (Centro Cultural de Belém) on the evening of 1 January, featuring the prestigious Lisbon Metropolitan Orchestra.

====Romania====

Traditional celebrations of New Year&#x27;s Eve (&quot;Revelion&quot;) are the norm in Romania. Romanians follow centuries-old customs, rituals, and conventions. Children sing &quot;Plugușorul&quot; and &quot;Sorcova&quot;, traditional carols that wish goodwill, happiness and success.

Parties are common in the evening. Since the Romanian Revolution of 1989, Romanians have gathered in the University Square in Bucharest. Other significant parties occur in Piața Constituției. New Year&#x27;s Eve is also marked by a national all-night telecast on Romanian Television, which also celebrates its anniversary on this holiday, having opened its doors in the New Year&#x27;s Eve of 1956.

====Russia====
The most prominent public celebration of the New Year is held at Moscow&#x27;s Red Square under the Kremlin Clock—whose chimes at midnight are traditionally followed by the playing of the Russian national anthem, and a fireworks display. The President&#x27;s New Year&#x27;s address is traditionally televised shortly before midnight in each time zone, reflecting on the previous year and the state of the country. In 1999, unpopular president Boris Yeltsin famously announced his resignation during his New Year&#x27;s address.

Novy God () is celebrated as a gift-giving holiday with similarities to Christmas; New Year trees (&quot;yolka&quot;) are decorated and displayed in homes and public spaces, and Ded Moroz () is depicted as delivering presents to children on New Year&#x27;s Eve. with assistance from his granddaughter Snegurochka (). 

The Novy God traditions were established under Soviet rule, when the Communist Party abolished Christmas and other religious holidays in 1928 as part of policies meant to curtail the practice of religion. In 1935, Soviet officials, including politician Pavel Postyshev, began promoting the New Year as a non-working holiday in the benefit of youth. Christmas traditions such as trees and a Santa Claus-like figure were adapted in a secular form. Even after the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the reinstatement of religious holidays, Novy God has remained a popular celebration in modern Russia, and among Soviet and Russian expats living in other countries.

Two Soviet comedy films set during the holiday—&quot;Carnival Night&quot; (1956) and &quot;The Irony of Fate&quot; (1976)—are often broadcast by Russian television channels on New Year&#x27;s Eve, with the latter having been compared to the traditional Christmas Eve airing of &quot;It&#x27;s a Wonderful Life&quot; in the United States. The Soviet variety show &quot;Little Blue Light&quot; traditionally broadcast a New Year&#x27;s special, which was revived by Russia-1 in 1997.
====Serbia====
The Gregorian calendar was adopted by Yugoslavia in 1919, but the Serbian Orthodox Church continues to follow the Julian calendar, meaning that the new year is often celebrated twice. Prior to World War II, the New Year&#x27;s holiday was celebrated more often by Serbs in urban regions, with large parties held on both 1 and 14 January. By contrast, residents of rural regions rarely celebrated the new year, and placed a larger focus on Christmas.

In 1945 after World War II, the League of Communists of Yugoslavia came into power, and the Kingdom of Yugoslavia was succeeded by the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFR Yugoslavia). As in the Soviet Union, the communist government discouraged the observance of religious holidays, encouraged celebrations of the New Year on 1 January as a secular gift-giving holiday, and similarly adopted the figure of Grandfather Frost (&quot;Deda Mraz&quot;). Some residents (especially those in opposition to the communist government) continued to celebrate the Orthodox New Year, doing so quietly by candlelight in order to evade attention from authorities.

After the end of communist rule and the breakup of Yugoslavia, the three holidays began to co-exist: the Gregorian New Year and the Serbian New Year (14 January) are both marked by festivities in major Serbian cities, although festivities for the Serbian New Year (which became designated as a public holiday again in 2013) are usually modest in comparison to their Gregorian counterparts.

====Slovenia====
As in the other constituents of SFR Yugoslavia, Christmas and other religious holidays were abolished by the communist government in the mid-1940s, with the New Year promoted as a secular holiday in the place of Saint Nicholas Day and Christmas. Grandfather Frost is referred to in Slovenian as &quot;Dedek Mraz&quot;, and was originally billed as having come from Siberia. After Yugoslavia broke from the Eastern Bloc, the character was stated to come from the Triglav mountain instead, and artist Maksim Gaspari created a new depiction of Dedek Mraz in traditional Slovenian apparel.

Saint Nicholas Day and Christmas were reinstated as holidays after the end of communist rule.

====Spain====

In Spain, the main public celebration of New Year&#x27;s Eve (, literally &quot;Old Night&quot;, or ) is held at Puerta del Sol in Madrid, where revellers await the midnight chimes of the clock tower at the Royal House of the Post Office. A notable Spanish tradition is to eat twelve grapes at midnight—one for each chime of the clock—which is said to bring luck and prosperity. The tradition dates back as early as 1895 but first gained wider attention in 1909, when it was promoted by Alicante grape growers to help spur sales of that year&#x27;s surplus harvest. In the lead-up to the holiday, grocery stores are usually stocked with large amounts of grapes. The tradition has also been adopted in other communities with cultural ties to Spain or Latin America, including Hispanic and Latino Americans. 

It is common to attend &quot;cotillones de nochevieja&quot; that last into the following morning, including smaller parties at bars and larger-scale events at hotels. After midnight, Spaniards often drink sparkling wines such as cava and champagne. 

Several Spanish television personalities have become well known in Spanish popular culture for their involvement in New Year&#x27;s specials, including Ramón García—who has hosted specials for Televisión Española (TVE) and Antena 3, and model Cristina Pedroche—who is known for the often-provocative dresses she has worn on-air.

A race known as the San Silvestre Vallecana is also held in Madrid on the evening of New Year&#x27;s Eve, which includes an amateur fun run and a competitive event for elite athletes. In 2012 the event hosted a record of around 40,000 runners.

====Sweden====

In Sweden, New Year&#x27;s Eve is usually celebrated with families or with friends. A few hours before and after midnight, Swedish citizens usually party and eat a special dinner, often three courses. New Year&#x27;s Eve is celebrated with large fireworks displays throughout the country, especially in the cities, major ones in particular having distinguishing celebrations. Swedish citizens over the age of 18 are allowed to buy fireworks, which are sold by local stores or by private people. While watching or lighting fireworks at midnight, Swedish citizens usually drink champagne.

On television, the lottery show &quot;BingoLotto&quot; features a special New Year&#x27;s Eve edition to commemorate the holiday with musical guests, four bingo games, and surprises.

====Switzerland====
In Switzerland, New Year&#x27;s Eve is typically celebrated in private gatherings or public events.

The final of the Spengler Cup ice hockey tournament is traditionally held on New Year&#x27;s Eve.

====Ukraine====

The main public celebration is held at Maidan Nezalezhnosti in Kyiv, including concerts and a fireworks display. For 2013–14, amid the Euromaidan movement, it also included a world record attempt at the largest simultaneous singing of a national anthem. New Year&#x27;s Eve also coincides with Malanka, a folk custom that has similarities to mummering.

Under Soviet rule, Ukrainian New Year&#x27;s celebrations were patterned off the secular Novy God traditions, with Christmas (which, among those who practice Eastern Christianity, is held on 7 January) officially considered abolished—if not celebrated in secret by those opposed to the communist regime. Christmas regained prominence after the dissolution, with figures such as Grandfather Frost eventually being displaced by Western figures such as Saint Nicholas and Santa Claus, and traditions associated with Novy God have been demonized by Ukrainians amid the Russo-Ukrainian War and the 2014 annexation of Crimea—such as &quot;yolka&quot; (New Year&#x27;s trees) and the Soviet film &quot;The Irony of Fate&quot; (which was pulled by STB in 2015 as part of the Boycott Russian Films campaign, citing a lead actress who had been blacklisted by the Ukraine government for her support of the annexation).

====United Kingdom====
=====England=====

The most prominent New Year&#x27;s Eve (Old Year&#x27;s Night) celebration in England is that of Central London, where the arrival of midnight is greeted with the chimes of Big Ben. In recent years, a major fireworks display has also been held, with fireworks launched from the nearby London Eye Ferris wheel. On New Year&#x27;s Eve 2010, an estimated 250,000 spectators gathered to view an eight-minute fireworks display around and above the London Eye which was, for the first time, set to a musical soundtrack. A drone show was added to the fireworks for the first time in 2021.

Other major New Year events are held in the cities of Birmingham, Manchester, Leeds, Liverpool, and Newcastle.

=====Scotland=====


In Scotland, New Year&#x27;s (&quot;Hogmanay&quot;) is celebrated with several different customs, such as First-Footing, which involves friends or family members going to each other&#x27;s houses with a gift of whisky and sometimes a lump of coal.

Edinburgh, the Scottish capital, hosts one of the world&#x27;s most famous New Year celebrations. The celebration is focused on a major street party along Princes Street. The cannon is fired at Edinburgh Castle at the stroke of midnight, followed by a large fireworks display. Edinburgh hosts a festival of four or five days, beginning on 28 December, and lasting until New Year&#x27;s Day or 2 January, which is also a bank holiday in Scotland.

From 1953 to 1985, Hogmanay had received exposure across the entire United Kingdom via the BBC, who televised BBC Scotland-produced specials such as &quot;The White Heather Club&quot; as part of their New Year&#x27;s Eve programming. The specials were often lambasted by critics for their stereotypical portrayal of Scottish culture, but were popular enough to spawn competitors on ITV. The practice ended after 1985, when the poor reception to that year&#x27;s &quot;Live into 85&quot; led to the BBC, among others, abandoning the concept altogether. BBC One Scotland has since continued to air a local Hogmanay special from Edinburgh as a regional opt-out, with the rest of the UK taking a London-centric special (albeit with one exception in 1998–99, when BBC One networked an Edinburgh-based special that would turn out to be equally-shambolic).

=====Wales=====
The Welsh tradition of giving gifts and money on New Year&#x27;s Day () is an ancient custom that survives in modern-day Wales, though nowadays it is now customary to give bread and cheese.

Thousands of Welsh citizens descend every year on Cardiff to enjoy live music, catering, ice-skating, funfairs, and fireworks. Many of the celebrations take place at Cardiff Castle and Cardiff City Hall.

Every New Year&#x27;s Eve, the Nos Galan road race (&quot;Rasys Nos Galan&quot;), a running contest, is held in Mountain Ash in the Cynon Valley, Rhondda Cynon Taf, South Wales. The race celebrates the life and achievements of Welsh runner Guto Nyth Brân.

Founded in 1958 by local runner Bernard Baldwin, it is run over the five-kilometre route of Guto&#x27;s first competitive race. The main race starts with a church service at Llanwynno, and then a wreath is laid on Guto&#x27;s grave in Llanwynno graveyard. After lighting a torch, it is carried to the nearby town of Mountain Ash, where the main race takes place.

The race consists of a double circuit of the town Centre, starting in Henry Street and ending in Oxford Street, by the commemorative statue of Guto. Traditionally, the race was timed to end at midnight, but in recent times it was rescheduled for the convenience of family entertainment, now concluding at around 9pm.

This has resulted in a growth in size and scale, and the proceedings now start with an afternoon of street entertainment, and fun run races for children, concluding with the church service, elite runners&#x27; race, and presentations.

===North America===
====Canada====

New Year&#x27;s Eve traditions and celebrations in Canada vary regionally, but are typically similar to those in the United States, with a focus on social gatherings and public celebrations (such as concerts and fireworks displays). The Canadian men&#x27;s junior hockey team has usually played their final preliminary round game at the IIHF World Junior Championship on New Year&#x27;s Eve.

The CBC&#x27;s English- and French-language television networks have been well known for airing sketch comedy specials on New Year&#x27;s Eve, lampooning the major events and news stories of the year. From 1992 through 2019, CBC Television aired &quot;Year of the Farce&quot;, an annual special produced by the radio comedy troupe Royal Canadian Air Farce&quot;.&quot; The special became part of a weekly &quot;Royal Canadian Air Farce&quot; television series beginning in 1993, while the 2008 edition doubled as the program&#x27;s series finale. The troupe continued to produce &quot;Year of the Farce&quot; as an annual reunion special until 2019. In 2024, the CBC&#x27;s news satire series &quot;This Hour Has 22 Minutes&quot; took on a similar role with an hour-long &quot;New Year&#x27;s Eve Pregame&quot; special.

The CBC&#x27;s French network Ici Radio-Canada Télé airs a similar special, &quot;Bye Bye&quot;, which has been presented by various comedians and troupes, Originally running from 1968 to 1998, it was revived in 2006 by the Québécois troupe Rock et Belles Oreilles to mark its 25th anniversary. The program has continued to air annually since, although it was placed on hiatus for 2009 after the previous year&#x27;s edition was criticized by viewers for sketches they deemed to be derogatory and racist. Four out of the five highest-rated television broadcasts in Quebecois history have been editions of &quot;Bye Bye&quot;, with the 2021 edition being seen by a record 4.862 million viewers.

Beginning in 2017 (with the inaugural edition marking the beginning of the country&#x27;s sesquicentennial year), CBC Television has broadcast a more traditional countdown special: a localized version was broadcast for each time zone, which features music performances, and coverage of midnight festivities from communities across the country. Rick Mercer hosted the majority of these specials. The special was placed on hiatus in 2023 due to financial issues (with the network airing the premiere of a Mae Martin stand-up comedy special in its place), but revived in 2024 across CBC and CBC News Network. 

====Costa Rica====
In Costa Rica, families usually gather around 8pm for parties that last until 1 or 2am, the next day. There are several traditions among Costa Rican families, including eating 12 grapes representing 12 wishes for the new year, and running across the street with luggage to bring new trips and adventures in the upcoming year.

====El Salvador====
In El Salvador, New Year&#x27;s Eve is spent with families. Family parties start around 5:00pm, and last until 1:00 to 3:00am, the following day. Families eat dinner together and sing traditional New Year&#x27;s Eve songs, such as &quot;Cinco para las Doce&quot;. After the dinner, individuals light fireworks and continue partying outside. A radio station broadcasts a countdown to midnight. When the clock strikes midnight, fireworks are lit across the country. Salvadorans start exchanging hugs and wishes for the new year.

The main event takes place at midnight where fireworks are lit along with thousands of life-size effigies called &quot;Año Viejo&quot;. Almost every local family will either make such an effigy from scraps of paper and old clothes or buy one ready-made. The effigy is placed just outside the front of their home. Such effigies represent the things people hated about the departing year and are fashioned to resemble celebrities, politicians, public servants, cartoon characters etc. They are burnt on the stroke of midnight to banish the old year and mark a fresh start in the new. Some of the braver Salvadorans jump through these burning effigies 12 times to represent a wish for every month.

====Guatemala====
In Guatemala, banks close on New Year&#x27;s Eve, and businesses close at noon. In the town of Antigua, Guatemalans usually gather at the Santa Catalina Clock Arch to celebrate New Year&#x27;s Eve (). In Guatemala City the celebrations are centered on Plaza Mayor. Firecrackers are lit starting at sundown, continuing without interruption into the night. Guatemalans wear new clothes for good fortune and eat a grape with each of the twelve chimes of the bell during the New Year countdown, while making a wish with each one.

The celebrations include religious themes which may be either Mayan or Catholic. Catholic celebrations are similar to those at Christmas. Gifts are left under the tree on Christmas morning by the Christ Child for the children, but parents and adults do not exchange gifts until New Year&#x27;s Day.

====Mexico====

Mexicans celebrate New Year&#x27;s Eve (Spanish: &quot;Fin de Año&quot; or &quot;Nochevieja&quot;) observing many traditions, including the Spanish tradition of eating a grape with each of the twelve chimes of a clock&#x27;s bell during the midnight countdown, while making a wish with each one. Mexican families decorate homes and parties in colors that represent wishes for the upcoming year: red encourages an overall improvement of lifestyle and love, yellow encourages blessings of improved employment conditions, green for improved financial circumstances, and white for improved health. Mexican sweet bread is baked with a coin or charm hidden in the dough. When the bread is served, the recipient of the slice with the coin or charm is said to be blessed with good luck in the New Year . Another tradition is to make a list of all the bad or unhappy events over the past 12 months; before midnight, this list is thrown into a fire, symbolizing the removal of negative energy from the new year. At the same time, they are expressed for all the good things during the year that is ending so that they will continue in the new year.

Mexicans celebrate with a late-night dinner with their families, the traditional meal being turkey or pork loin. Afterwards many Mexicans attend parties outside the home, for example, in night clubs. In Mexico City the national street festival on New Year&#x27;s Eve takes place on the Zocalo, the city&#x27;s main square. After the twelfth chime, Mexicans will shout and wish each other a &quot;¡Feliz Año Nuevo!&quot; () and, in many places, celebrations also include fireworks, firecrackers and sparklers. Celebrations there are either Spanish in origin or those adding influences of Aztec nature.

====Panama====
In Panama, Panamanians usually celebrate New Year&#x27;s Eve with a dinner, followed by multiple individual fireworks celebrations. Fireworks begin around 11pm for parties that last until 1am, the next day. Many Panamanians leave the city and go to the rural towns across the country, to celebrate with families and friends.

====Trinidad and Tobago====
In Port of Spain the tradition is to celebrate in one&#x27;s yard with friends, families and neighbors, and eat and drink till sunrise. At midnight the city becomes festive with fireworks in every direction. The celebration only starts at midnight. Music is heard from all the houses and bars, nightclubs, street parties, and Soca raves. Trinidadians and Tobagonians celebrate not only the new year but the beginning of the carnival season as well.

====United States====

In the United States, New Year&#x27;s Eve is celebrated via a variety of social gatherings, and large-scale public events such as concerts, fireworks shows, and &quot;drops&quot;—an event inspired by time balls where an item is lowered or raised over the course of the final minute of the year.

Drop events are typically patterned after the annual &quot;ball drop&quot; held at New York City&#x27;s Times Square, where a , ball is lowered down a pole on the roof of One Times Square. The event has been held since 1907, and the ball itself—which is adorned with Waterford Crystal panels and an LED lighting system—has been displayed atop the building year-round since 2009. Drop events often use either a ball in imitation of Times Square, or items that represent local culture or history (such as Atlanta&#x27;s Peach Drop, which reflects Georgia&#x27;s identity as the &quot;Peach State&quot;).

New York City and Times Square serve as the focal point for national media coverage of the holiday. Bandleader Guy Lombardo and his band—The Royal Canadians—were well known for their annual broadcast from New York City. Their signature performance of &quot;Auld Lang Syne&quot; at midnight helped make the standard synonymous with the holiday. Beginning on radio in 1929, Lombardo moved to CBS television from 1956 to 1976, adding coverage of the ball drop. Following Lombardo&#x27;s death, &quot;Dick Clark&#x27;s New Year&#x27;s Rockin&#x27; Eve&quot; (which premiered for 1973 on NBC, and moved to ABC for 1975) became the dominant New Year&#x27;s Eve special on U.S. television—especially among younger viewers—with Dick Clark having anchored New Year&#x27;s coverage (including &quot;New Year&#x27;s Rockin&#x27; Eve&quot; and the one-off &quot;ABC 2000 Today&quot;) for 32 straight years. After Clark suffered a stroke in December 2004, Regis Philbin guest hosted the 2005 edition. Due to a lingering speech impediment brought upon by the stroke, Clark retired as host and was succeeded by Ryan Seacrest for 2006, but continued making limited appearances on the special until his death in 2012.

Other notable New Year&#x27;s events are held in New York besides those in Times Square; since 1984, the Cathedral of St. John the Divine in Manhattan has hosted the annual &quot;New Year&#x27;s Eve Concert for Peace&quot;, which was founded in 1984 by composer Leonard Bernstein. The New York Road Runners hosts a &quot;Midnight Run&quot; event at Central Park, which features a fireworks show and a footrace around the park that begins at midnight.
Other notable celebrations include the Las Vegas Strip&#x27;s &quot;America&#x27;s Party&quot;, which consists of a ticketed concert event at the Fremont Street Experience, and a public fireworks show at midnight that is launched from various casino resorts on the Strip. Nashville has typically held concerts featuring country music performers and a music note drop; since 2021, the festivities have been televised by CBS as part of its special &quot;New Year&#x27;s Eve Live: Nashville&#x27;s Big Bash&quot;. Los Angeles, a city long without a major public New Year celebration, held an inaugural gathering in Downtown&#x27;s newly completed Grand Park to celebrate the arrival of 2014. The event included food trucks, art installations, and culminated with a projection mapping show on the side of Los Angeles City Hall near midnight. The inaugural event drew over 25,000 spectators and participants. For 2016, Chicago introduced an event known as Chi-Town Rising. In Miami, major celebrations are centered around the downtown core, including the raising of the &quot;Big Orange&quot; on the side of the InterContinental Miami hotel, and concerts at Bayfront Park (which were televised as a New Year&#x27;s special on Fox, &quot;Pitbull&#x27;s New Year&#x27;s Revolution&quot;, until 2017–18).

Major theme parks also hold New Year&#x27;s celebrations. Disney and Universal theme parks, such as Walt Disney World Resort and Universal Orlando in Orlando, Florida; as well as Disneyland and Universal Studios Hollywood in California, are traditionally the busiest around the Christmas and New Year&#x27;s holidays.

===Oceania===
====Australia====

Falling in summer in the Southern Hemisphere, New Year&#x27;s Eve is often celebrated via public events including fireworks shows, exhibitions, and concerts, Many are concentrated towards the country&#x27;s beaches, and attract tourism from other parts of the world.

The most prominent celebration in the country is Sydney New Year&#x27;s Eve, which takes place at Sydney Harbour and consists of two fireworks shows — the evening Calling Country Fireworks (formerly &quot;Family Fireworks&quot;) held at 9:00 p.m., followed by the main show at midnight. Sydney Harbour Bridge is a focal point of the show, via pyrotechnics launched from the bridge, as well as lighting displays that illuminate it during the show—colloquially known as the &quot;bridge effect&quot;, and previously taking the form of a symbol on its trusses that reflected an annual theme.

Other major Australian cities also host fireworks events, including Brisbane&#x27;s Lord Mayor&#x27;s New Year&#x27;s Eve Fireworks on the Brisbane River, and Melbourne (which are launched from various locations in the city&#x27;s central business district, and have attracted upwards of 400,000 spectators), Perth, Semaphore, and Hobart. Celebrations have also been held in remote locations in the outback, including Cameron Corner—a location near the border between New South Wales, Queensland, and South Australia where a pub has traditionally celebrated for all three of their respective time zones in succession.
====Kiribati====
The parts of the Line Islands belonging to Kiribati, including Kiritimati, Tabuaeran and Teraina, are the first parts of the world to welcome the New Year as they are on the furthermost time zone at UTC+14:00. Other Kiribati islands follow at UTC+13:00 and UTC+12:00.

====New Zealand====

Many of New Zealand&#x27;s cities and towns see in the new year with open-air concerts and fireworks displays.

Auckland regularly has a fireworks display at midnight from the top of the Sky Tower. In Wellington, Frank Kitts Park is the venue for a festival including fireworks, music, and open-air film displays. Similar events occur in Hamilton, starting with a family-friendly event at Steele Park, followed by an adult-specific party at SkyCity Hamilton. Gisborne, one of the first cities in the world to see sunrise at new year also celebrates with a new year festival. The small town of Whangamatā, on the Coromandel Peninsula, is a major party venue in the new year, especially for Aucklanders.

In the South Island, both Christchurch and Dunedin host free live music concerts culminating with a midnight fireworks display. These are held at Hagley Park and The Octagon respectively. The South Island&#x27;s main resort town, Queenstown is also a major new year party venue, with music and fireworks.

====Samoa====
Samoa was the first country to receive the New Year as a whole from 2011 to 2021, when it used UTC+14:00 as its time zone during the Southern Hemisphere summer, sharing it with the Line Islands of Kiribati.

===South America===
====Argentina====

Traditional celebrations in Argentina include a family dinner of traditional dishes, including &quot;vitel tonné&quot;, &quot;asado&quot;, &quot;sandwiches de miga&quot;, &quot;piononos&quot;. Like dessert: &quot;turrón&quot;, &quot;mantecol&quot;, &quot;budín&quot; and &quot;pan dulce&quot;.

Just at midnight signalling the first day of the New Year, Argentines wish each other their regards and share toasts with their families, sometimes with the neighbours, with cider, champagne or alcohol. After it, some flock to the streets to enjoy light firecrackers and fireworks, although each year it has been gradually decreasing due to higher awareness of the danger of it and the economic crisis. 
Parties often continue until dawn or the early morning.

Citizens in La Plata have a long tradition of making giant dolls, mostly of paper and wood, although sometimes also incorporating fireworks, which are burnt after the stroke of midnight.

The celebration is during the summer, like in many South American countries, so many families in the New Year are seen at tourist centers of the Argentine Atlantic coast (Mar del Plata, Mar de Ajó, Villa Gesell, Miramar, etc.).

====Brazil====

In Brazil, Brazilians typically celebrate New Year&#x27;s Eve () at large parties hosted by restaurants and clubs; local traditions determine who opens a bottle of Champagne at midnight. People often wear colors with religious symbolism on New Year&#x27;s Eve, such as white for good luck, yellow for good energies, happiness and money, red for love. Rituals such as the consumption of grapes, lychees and lentils also take place due to this mixture.

The most prominent public celebration in Brazil is a fireworks display on Copacabana Beach in Rio de Janeiro, which is one of the world&#x27;s largest - justified as much of the nation is south of the Equator, the celebrations are held in summer time. In 2017, it was estimated that the fireworks would attract over three million spectators to welcome 2018. Beaches in major cities and tourist areas are crowded all day long especially for nighttime events. On television, the most prominent New Year&#x27;s Eve special is TV Globo&#x27;s &quot;&quot;, which features pre-recorded concert performances (usually filmed from a different Brazilian city annually), and live coverage of New Year&#x27;s celebrations across the country 

Brasília holds a public celebration on the Monumental Axis or Estádio Nacional Mané Garrincha. Celebrations in Manaus are centered upon a fireworks display on the Rio Negro Bridge, while Paulista Avenue hosts the main celebration in São Paulo, Brazil&#x27;s largest city.

Another notable New Year&#x27;s Eve tradition in São Paulo is the Saint Silvester Road Race, a 15K run through the city&#x27;s Central Zone. Held annually since 1925, its route incorporates several major streets and landmarks, including the Viaduto do Chá and Paulista Avenue.

====Chile====

New Year&#x27;s Eve is celebrated in Chile by the observation of various traditions, such as wearing yellow underwear and watching fireworks. Chileans who want to travel walk the streets with a suitcase in hand, others hold money in their hand or place coins at their door for good fortune in the new year. Celebrations include a family dinner with special dishes, usually lentils for good luck, and twelve grapes to symbolize wishes for each month of the coming year. Family celebrations usually last until midnight, then some continue partying with friends until dawn. In Chile&#x27;s capital Santiago, thousands of Chileans gather at the Entel Tower to watch the countdown to midnight and a fireworks display.

There are several fireworks shows across the country, and over one million spectators attend the most popular, the &quot;Año Nuevo en el Mar&quot;, in Valparaiso. Since 2000, the sale of fireworks to individuals has been illegal, meaning fireworks can now only be observed at fireworks displays during major events.

As in much of South America, New Year&#x27;s Eve is spent by Chileans in beach visits in major tourist areas of the nation as it falls in the southern hemisphere summer period.

====Colombia====
In Colombia it is a traditional celebration. There are many traditions across the country, including a family dinner with special dishes, fireworks, popular music, wearing special or new clothes, eating empanadas and the giving of parties of various kinds. With each stroke of the clock until midnight, the families eat grapes. It is a common practice to consume a variety of tropical foodstuffs, including melon, sandia, or watermelon, chontaduro and buñuelo

====Ecuador====
A New Year&#x27;s Eve tradition in Ecuador is for men to dress in drag, representing the &quot;widows&quot; of the past year. They dance in the streets and ask for a toll from drivers to pass.

There are also traditional family events, meals, and modern celebrations such as hosting parties and going to nightclubs. Ecuadorians usually eat grapes and drink Champagne with close family members and friends.

====Suriname====
In Suriname, Surinamese Citizens goes into cities&#x27; commercial districts to watch fireworks shows on New Year&#x27;s Eve. It is a spectacle based on the famous red-firecracker-ribbons. The bigger stores invest in these firecrackers and display them in the streets. Every year the length of them is compared, and high praises are held for the company that has managed to import the largest ribbon. These celebrations start at 10am and finish the next day. The day is usually filled with laughter, dance, music, and drinking. When the night starts, the big street parties are already at full capacity. The most popular fiesta is the one that is held at café &#x27;t Vat in the main tourist district. The parties stop between 10 and 11pm after which the people go home to light their &quot;pagaras&quot; (red-firecracker-ribbons) at midnight. After midnight, the parties continue and the streets fill again until daybreak.

====Uruguay====
In Uruguay, traditional celebrations begin at nightfall on New Year&#x27;s Eve (31 December), with family gatherings in which &quot;asado&quot; and &quot;lechon&quot; are usually eaten, as well as &quot;turrón&quot; and &quot;pan dulce&quot; as desserts. People usually wear white as it symbolizes optimism and purity. At the stroke of midnight, Uruguayans flock to the streets to enjoy fireworks and light firecrackers, and to eat Twelve Grapes.

Due to the fact that Uruguay lies in the Southern Hemisphere, the New Year is celebrated in summer, so resort cities such as Punta del Este are filled with Uruguayans and foreign tourists, including celebrities from the region, to attend parties and festivals of music, fireworks, and light shows on the beach.

In the Old City of Montevideo, a district where a large number of office buildings are concentrated, employees, prior to the end of the last working day of the year, throw torn daybooks and calendars through the windows, causing a &quot;paper rain&quot;, which adds to the buckets of water that are thrown from the balconies. In the Mercado del Puerto there is a street party with a massive &quot;cider fight&quot; accompanied by music. Every 30th December since the first half of the 20th century, the is drawn, a special lottery draw run by Uruguay&#x27;s state-owned National Lottery Directorate.

====Venezuela====
Radio specials give a countdown and announce the New Year. In Caracas, the bells of the Cathedral of Caracas ring twelve times. During these special programs, is a tradition to broadcast songs about the end of the year. It is a non-working holiday. Popular songs include &quot;Viejo año&quot; (&quot;Old year&quot;), by Gaita group Maracaibo 15, and &quot;Cinco pa&#x27; las 12&quot; (&quot;Five minutes before twelve&quot;), which was versioned by several popular singers including Nestor Zavarce, Nancy Ramos and José Luis Rodríguez El Puma. The unofficial hymn for the first minutes of the New Year is &quot;Año Nuevo, Vida Nueva&quot; (&quot;New Year, New Life&quot;), by the band Billo&#x27;s Caracas Boys. Venezuelans play the national anthem in their houses.

Traditions include wearing yellow underwear, eating Pan de jamón, and 12 grapes with sparkling wine.

Special holiday programs are broadcast on Venezuelan television stations including Venevisión and Venezolana de Televisión, which airs the principal national event from Caracas&#x27; Bolivar Square featuring major stars.

==Religious observances==

Many Christian congregations have watchnight services on New Year&#x27;s Eve, which is the seventh day of Christmastide. The Watch Night service (or Watch Night Mass if Holy Communion is celebrated) is part of the tradition of various denominations in Christianity, especially Moravians and Methodists, as well as congregations populated by certain ethnic communities, such as in the Korean community and African American community, in which the faithful congregate in services continuing past midnight, giving thanks for the blessings of the outgoing year and praying for divine favor during the upcoming year. In the English-speaking world, Watch Night services can be traced back to John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, who learned the custom from the Moravian Brethren who came to England in the 1730s. Moravian congregations still observe the Watch Night service on New Year&#x27;s Eve. Watch Night services took on special significance to African Americans on New Year&#x27;s Eve 1862, as slaves anticipated the arrival of 1 January 1863, when the Emancipation Proclamation became effective.

With Christianity, in the Roman Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodox Church, Lutheran Churches, and the Anglican Communion, 1 January is observed as the Feast of the Circumcision of Christ, and specifically within Roman Catholicism, as the Solemnity of Mary, Mother of God; it is a Holy Day of Obligation in most countries (Australia being a notable exception), thus the Church requires the attendance of all Catholics in such countries for Mass that day. However a vigil Mass may be held on the evening before a Holy Day; thus it has become customary to also have Mass on the night of New Year&#x27;s Eve (which are often referred to as Watchnight Masses). New Year&#x27;s Eve is a feast day honoring Pope Sylvester I in the Roman Catholic calendar (Saint Sylvester&#x27;s Day). The Catholic Church grants a plenary indulgence, under the usual conditions, to those who recite the Te Deum in public on New Year&#x27;s Eve, which is usually done prior to the celebration of Mass. In Vatican City, on 31 December, the Pope usually performs a solemn service of Vespers with recitation of the Te Deum in St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica. After the service, he usually goes out from the basilica into St. Peter&#x27;s Square to greet the faithful and visit the Nativity scene on the square.

==Music==

Music associated with New Year&#x27;s Eve comes in both classical and popular genres, and there is also Christmas song focus on the arrival of a new year during the Christmas and holiday season.
*&quot;Auld Lang Syne&quot; by Robert Burns.
*Johann Sebastian Bach, in the &quot;Orgelbüchlein&quot;, composed three chorale preludes for the new year: &quot;Helft mir Gotts Güte preisen&quot; [&quot;Help me to praise God&#x27;s goodness&quot;] (BWV 613); &quot;Das alte Jahr vergangen ist&quot; [&quot;The old year has passed&quot;] (BWV 614); and &quot;In dir ist freude&quot; [&quot;In you is joy&quot;] (BWV 615).
*&quot;The year is gone, beyond recall&quot; is a traditional Christian hymn to give thanks for the new year, dating back to 1713.
*&quot;Happy New Year&quot; by ABBA
*&quot;It&#x27;s Just Another New Year&#x27;s Eve&quot; by Barry Manilow
*&quot;Let&#x27;s Start the New Year Right&quot; by Bing Crosby
*&quot;New Year&#x27;s Day&quot; by U2
*&quot;Same Old Lang Syne&quot; by Dan Fogelberg
*&quot;Let&#x27;s Spend This New Year&#x27;s Eve At Home&quot; by Christi Bauerlee
*&quot;Kiss Me at Midnight&quot; by &#x27;N Sync from their 1998 album &quot;The Winter Album&quot;
*&quot;This Is the New Year&quot; by A Great Big World
*&quot;New Year&#x27;s Day&quot; by Taylor Swift
*&quot;1999&quot; by Prince
*&quot;Will 2K&quot; by Will Smith
*&quot;Millennium&quot; by Robbie Williams
*&quot;Disco 2000&quot; by Pulp
*&quot;New Year&#x27;s Day&quot; by Pentatonix
==See also==

*New Year&#x27;s food
*List of films set around New Year
*List of objects dropped on New Year&#x27;s Eve

== Notes ==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="7" end="25" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="27" end="46" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912" start="127" end="138" title="31 December" label="31 December"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="154" end="173" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="Old Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="285" end="294" title="fireworks" label="fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="301" end="311" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973180" start="321" end="339" title="watchnight service" label="watchnight service"/>
<link wikidata="Q196627" start="419" end="438" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150" start="440" end="449" title="January 1" label="1 January"/>
<link wikidata="Q12143" start="477" end="486" title="time zone" label="time zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q34812" start="516" end="524" title="New Year" label="New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q131389" start="583" end="606" title="International Date Line" label="International Date Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q234796" start="612" end="624" title="Line Islands" label="Line Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="634" end="642" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="645" end="650" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="655" end="660" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="669" end="682" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="697" end="711" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q46879" start="713" end="725" title="Baker Island" label="Baker Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q131305" start="730" end="744" title="Howland Island" label="Howland Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q16645" start="758" end="794" title="United States Minor Outlying Islands" label="United States Minor Outlying Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="863" end="870" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056085" start="999" end="1021" title="Martyrs&amp;#x27; Memorial, Algiers" label="Martyrs&amp;#x27; Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="1141" end="1146" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1150" end="1155" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140623" start="1224" end="1228" title="Établissement public de télévision" label="EPTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1316" end="1321" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="1441" end="1446" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="1588" end="1597" title="fireworks" label="fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761" start="1658" end="1663" title="Accra" label="Accra"/>
<link wikidata="Q726143" start="1668" end="1672" title="Tema" label="Tema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="1695" end="1702" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070799" start="1958" end="1966" title="Ain Diab" label="Ain Diab"/>
<link wikidata="Q489768" start="1975" end="1983" title="corniche" label="corniche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="2020" end="2027" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="2203" end="2208" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733752" start="2239" end="2254" title="Lagos Countdown" label="Lagos Countdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="2469" end="2475" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2647" end="2661" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="2686" end="2696" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25043410" start="2922" end="2946" title="Kigali Convention Centre" label="Kigali Convention Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="3000" end="3012" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783089" start="3291" end="3297" title="Regional variations of barbecue" label="braais"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="3323" end="3334" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947" start="3394" end="3398" title="Juba" label="Juba"/>
<link wikidata="Q503354" start="3465" end="3470" title="Christmas carol" label="carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585437" start="3478" end="3506" title="Hark! The Herald Angels Sing" label="Hark! The Herald Angels Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="3629" end="3636" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q899640" start="4005" end="4018" title="roast chicken" label="roast chicken"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4197" end="4231" title=":fr:Choufli Hal (téléfilm)" label="Choufli Hal on New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652194" start="4551" end="4595" title="International Solidarity Day of Azerbaijanis" label="International Solidarity Day of Azerbaijanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q284506" start="4717" end="4733" title="Nakhichevan ASSR" label="Nakhichevan ASSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426677" start="4750" end="4770" title="Iranian Azerbaijanis" label="Iranian Azerbaijanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q616799" start="5127" end="5131" title="AzTV" label="AzTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="5227" end="5232" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q376749" start="5234" end="5244" title="Chittagong" label="Chittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q466221" start="5246" end="5252" title="Sylhet" label="Sylhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q322155" start="5254" end="5262" title="Rajshahi" label="Rajshahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q243325" start="5264" end="5270" title="Khulna" label="Khulna"/>
<link wikidata="Q747840" start="5272" end="5280" title="Barishal" label="Barishal"/>
<link wikidata="Q949746" start="5282" end="5298" title="Cox&amp;#x27;s Bazar" label="Cox&amp;#x27;s Bazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q949746" start="5665" end="5681" title="Cox&amp;#x27;s Bazar" label="Cox&amp;#x27;s Bazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855428" start="5729" end="5740" title="Bangladeshis" label="Bangladeshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="5900" end="5910" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304693" start="5922" end="5932" title="Cinema of Bangladesh" label="Dhallywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q254495" start="6331" end="6343" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="6407" end="6414" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q924037" start="6443" end="6455" title="Jumu&amp;#x27;ah" label="Jumu&amp;#x27;ah"/>
<link wikidata="Q234801" start="6560" end="6565" title="Allah" label="Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="6618" end="6624" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10937578" start="6636" end="6640" title="Puja (Hinduism)" label="Puja"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="6695" end="6705" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q867780" start="6836" end="6849" title="Christmastide" label="Christmastide"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="6888" end="6893" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="6928" end="6942" title="Chinese New Year" label="Lunar New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="7166" end="7173" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q125445" start="7302" end="7318" title="Temple of Heaven" label="Temple of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="7320" end="7339" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q912817" start="7341" end="7354" title="Olympic Green" label="Olympic Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132" start="7364" end="7377" title="Summer Palace" label="Summer Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q125474" start="7431" end="7439" title="The Bund (Shanghai)" label="The Bund"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="7443" end="7451" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="7506" end="7515" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14767" start="7556" end="7563" title="Central, Hong Kong" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q564732" start="7565" end="7577" title="Causeway Bay" label="Causeway Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q15022" start="7582" end="7595" title="Tsim Sha Tsui" label="Tsim Sha Tsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068874" start="7624" end="7644" title="A Symphony of Lights" label="A Symphony of Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136999" start="7664" end="7684" title="light and sound show" label="light and sound show"/>
<link wikidata="Q155643" start="7736" end="7752" title="Victoria Harbour" label="Victoria Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q836051" start="7841" end="7853" title="Times Square (Hong Kong)" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q564732" start="7873" end="7885" title="Causeway Bay" label="Causeway Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631543" start="7945" end="7953" title="List of objects dropped on New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="lowering"/>
<link wikidata="Q253655" start="7980" end="7987" title="Electronic signage" label="signage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058395" start="8010" end="8019" title="Times Square Ball" label="ball drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="8023" end="8036" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="8044" end="8056" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="8280" end="8286" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="8288" end="8293" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355" start="8295" end="8304" title="Bengaluru" label="Bengaluru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="8310" end="8317" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="8703" end="8706" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183236" start="8726" end="8746" title="Park Street, Kolkata" label="Park Street, Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="8769" end="8778" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="8783" end="8789" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="8876" end="8882" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="9028" end="9041" title="Rosh Hashanah" label="Rosh Hashanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752440" start="9269" end="9283" title="Israeli Jews" label="Israeli Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q47149" start="9320" end="9336" title="Pope Sylvester I" label="Pope Sylvester I"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="9378" end="9388" title="antisemite" label="antisemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845080" start="9498" end="9507" title="Wearable technology" label="wearables"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166067" start="9521" end="9528" title="Jawbone (company)" label="Jawbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583609" start="9695" end="9698" title="Israel Standard Time" label="IST"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="9719" end="9738" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Mandatory Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641292" start="9823" end="9838" title="masquerade ball" label="masquerade ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="9871" end="9877" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="9882" end="9889" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q130881" start="9935" end="9943" title="Hanukkah" label="Hanukkah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="9968" end="9974" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="10017" end="10023" title="History of the Jews in Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q527934" start="10028" end="10036" title="History of the Jews in Austria" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="10082" end="10094" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="10160" end="10168" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917054" start="10195" end="10212" title="Hapoel HaMizrachi" label="Hapoel HaMizrachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="10246" end="10253" title="Zionism" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="10317" end="10325" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890021" start="10643" end="10661" title="1990s post-Soviet aliyah" label="post-Soviet aliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673302" start="10663" end="10671" title="Novy God" label="Novy God"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894539" start="10773" end="10797" title="Russian Jews in Israel" label="Russian Jewish community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10981" end="10995" title="Immigrant generations#1.5 generation" label="1.5 generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43723" start="11123" end="11141" title="Benjamin Netanyahu" label="Benjamin Netanyahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="11454" end="11459" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667233" start="11582" end="11591" title="Kadomatsu" label="Kadomatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887421" start="11595" end="11604" title="Shimenawa" label="Shimenawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="11992" end="11997" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q249139" start="12022" end="12035" title="Zōjō-ji" label="Zojoji Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q190088" start="12039" end="12045" title="Minato, Tokyo" label="Minato"/>
<link wikidata="Q183536" start="12143" end="12154" title="Tokyo Tower" label="Tokyo Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q57965" start="12159" end="12172" title="Tokyo Skytree" label="Tokyo Skytree"/>
<link wikidata="Q21083961" start="12248" end="12264" title="Shibuya Crossing" label="Shibuya Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q83872291" start="12353" end="12370" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Japan" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24899931" start="12480" end="12491" title="overtourism" label="overtourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887424" start="12496" end="12515" title="public intoxication" label="public intoxication"/>
<link wikidata="Q212128" start="12530" end="12533" title="NHK" label="NHK"/>
<link wikidata="Q257913" start="12572" end="12589" title="Kōhaku Uta Gassen" label="Kōhaku Uta Gassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q773124" start="12902" end="12910" title="NHK Hall" label="NHK Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q871188" start="13095" end="13109" title="Video Research" label="Video Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728013" start="13166" end="13189" title="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates" label="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q733748" start="13259" end="13269" title="Tokyo Dome" label="Tokyo Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q744800" start="13283" end="13298" title="Fuji Television" label="Fuji Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q119097968" start="13315" end="13339" title="Johnny Kitagawa sexual abuse scandal" label="sexual abuse allegations"/>
<link wikidata="Q123699488" start="13401" end="13421" title="Starto Entertainment" label="Starto Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q241257" start="13581" end="13600" title="Japan Record Awards" label="Japan Record Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128792" start="13749" end="13762" title="combat sports" label="combat sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038191" start="13763" end="13772" title="supercard" label="supercard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052149" start="13779" end="13798" title="Saitama Super Arena" label="Saitama Super Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q521096" start="13891" end="13919" title="Pride Fighting Championships" label="Pride Fighting Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q186471" start="13955" end="13958" title="UFC" label="UFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138424" start="13960" end="13970" title="Yarennoka!" label="Yarennoka!"/>
<link wikidata="Q606349" start="14041" end="14046" title="Dream (mixed martial arts)" label="Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q178678" start="14144" end="14154" title="kickboxing" label="kickboxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q892206" start="14191" end="14196" title="Glory (kickboxing)" label="Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q339165" start="14201" end="14204" title="K-1" label="K-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q21089381" start="14205" end="14230" title="Rizin Fighting Federation" label="Rizin Fighting Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8249787" start="14636" end="14651" title="Korean New Year" label="Korean New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="14720" end="14725" title="North Korea" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="14730" end="14741" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="14983" end="14988" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q487603" start="15005" end="15013" title="Bosingak" label="Bosingak"/>
<link wikidata="Q484407" start="15065" end="15076" title="Myeong-dong" label="Myeong-dong"/>
<link wikidata="Q494895" start="15135" end="15152" title="Lotte World Tower" label="Lotte World Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q50415" start="15156" end="15165" title="Songpa District" label="Songpa-gu"/>
<link wikidata="Q498825" start="15187" end="15190" title="Korean Broadcasting System" label="KBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q928831" start="15195" end="15198" title="Seoul Broadcasting System" label="SBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q624198" start="15231" end="15247" title="KBS Drama Awards" label="KBS Drama Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854813" start="15252" end="15268" title="SBS Drama Awards" label="SBS Drama Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q482612" start="15299" end="15316" title="Korean dramas" label="television dramas"/>
<link wikidata="Q850273" start="15396" end="15420" title="East Asian age reckoning" label="East Asian age reckoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="15620" end="15629" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q72218" start="15763" end="15781" title="Kim Il-sung Square" label="Kim Il-sung Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q321697" start="15783" end="15794" title="Juche Tower" label="Juche Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353159" start="15926" end="15947" title="North Korean calendar" label="North Korean calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="16000" end="16011" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q14561874" start="16197" end="16211" title="Moranbong Band" label="Moranbong Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q60744298" start="16239" end="16249" title="Drone display" label="drone show"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="16271" end="16278" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043065" start="16880" end="16894" title="Dataran Merdeka" label="Merdeka Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q615958" start="16919" end="16946" title="Sultan Abdul Samad Building" label="Sultan Abdul Samad Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="16954" end="16962" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="16975" end="16987" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q182378" start="17163" end="17172" title="Putrajaya" label="Putrajaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q83063" start="17265" end="17280" title="Petronas Towers" label="Petronas Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q61092" start="17344" end="17355" title="George Town, Penang" label="George Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q500033" start="17357" end="17366" title="Shah Alam" label="Shah Alam"/>
<link wikidata="Q220445" start="17371" end="17378" title="Kuching" label="Kuching"/>
<link wikidata="Q271864" start="17834" end="17861" title="National Anthem of Mongolia" label="National Anthem of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="18068" end="18074" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="18076" end="18083" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362" start="18088" end="18097" title="Islamabad" label="Islamabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="18467" end="18478" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597003" start="18912" end="18918" title="pancit" label="pancit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165047" start="18988" end="18993" title="Jamón" label="hamón"/>
<link wikidata="Q23015" start="19029" end="19035" title="lechon" label="lechon"/>
<link wikidata="Q588748" start="19281" end="19293" title="firecrackers" label="firecrackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="19298" end="19307" title="fireworks" label="fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429962" start="19501" end="19510" title="polka dot" label="polka dot"/>
<link wikidata="Q51632441" start="19784" end="19798" title="Spanish influence on Filipino culture" label="Spanish custom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853418" start="20054" end="20067" title="bamboo cannon" label="bamboo cannon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20584" end="20604" title="Islamic calendar#Saudi Arabia&amp;#x27;s Umm al-Qura calendar" label="Umm al-Qura calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094290" start="20682" end="20746" title="Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice (Saudi Arabia)" label="Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q976863" start="20765" end="20781" title="Islamic religious police" label="religious police"/>
<link wikidata="Q21996005" start="21108" end="21120" title="2016 in Saudi Arabia" label="2016 reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6892571" start="21124" end="21143" title="Mohammed bin Salman" label="Mohammed bin Salman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3692" start="21354" end="21360" title="Riyadh" label="Riyadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q70529561" start="21417" end="21430" title="Riyadh Season" label="Riyadh Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q23906335" start="21446" end="21463" title="Saudi Vision 2030" label="Saudi Vision 2030"/>
<link wikidata="Q109423009" start="21538" end="21559" title="Boulevard Riyadh City" label="Boulevard Riyadh City"/>
<link wikidata="Q113570315" start="21598" end="21617" title="Mohammed Abdu Arena" label="Mohammed Abdo Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q624044" start="21632" end="21644" title="Arabic music" label="Arabic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q40129" start="21822" end="21832" title="Marina Bay, Singapore" label="Marina Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899994" start="21854" end="21883" title="Urban Redevelopment Authority" label="Urban Redevelopment Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091778" start="21941" end="21955" title="Central Region, Singapore" label="Central Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095828" start="21965" end="21976" title="Clarke Quay" label="Clarke Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q870844" start="21981" end="21988" title="Sentosa" label="Sentosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165467" start="22051" end="22071" title="People’s Association" label="People’s Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368796" start="22091" end="22100" title="Mediacorp" label="Mediacorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523125" start="22185" end="22205" title="Singapore Sports Hub" label="Singapore Sports Hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="22370" end="22376" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83101" start="22421" end="22431" title="Taipei 101" label="Taipei 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="22446" end="22452" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q152263" start="22783" end="22792" title="flash mob" label="flash mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q114918" start="22820" end="22836" title="Daan Forest Park" label="Daan Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q698710" start="22882" end="22897" title="Tsai Ming-liang" label="Tsai Ming-liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q711684" start="22921" end="22938" title="Vive l&amp;#x27;amour" label="Vive l&amp;#x27;amour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685293" start="23108" end="23145" title="Taiwan Film and Audiovisual Institute" label="Taiwan Film and Audiovisual Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q215014" start="23433" end="23452" title="Songkran (Thailand)" label="Songkran (Thailand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="23734" end="23742" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270302" start="23888" end="23900" title="CentralWorld" label="CentralWorld"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="23920" end="23937" title="Chao Phraya River" label="Chao Phraya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q20585880" start="23941" end="23949" title="ICONSIAM" label="ICONSIAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q13026076" start="23954" end="23963" title="Asiatique" label="Asiatique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="23967" end="23974" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q170919" start="24001" end="24008" title="Pattaya" label="Pattaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q185630" start="24319" end="24326" title="Bayram (Turkey)" label="Bayrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303501" start="24339" end="24346" title="secular" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="24383" end="24389" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q745361" start="24550" end="24556" title="Stuffed turkey" label="turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382423" start="24577" end="24590" title="zante currant" label="zante currant"/>
<link wikidata="Q212933" start="24592" end="24601" title="pine nuts" label="pine nuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236127" start="24603" end="24611" title="pimiento" label="pimiento"/>
<link wikidata="Q26686" start="24616" end="24620" title="dill" label="dill"/>
<link wikidata="Q485796" start="24627" end="24635" title="pilaf" label="iç pilav"/>
<link wikidata="Q339193" start="24643" end="24648" title="dolma" label="dolma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8196212" start="24654" end="24659" title="börek" label="börek"/>
<link wikidata="Q187495" start="24661" end="24668" title="baklava" label="baklava"/>
<link wikidata="Q654493" start="24688" end="24702" title="Turkish cuisine" label="Turkish dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q638290" start="24721" end="24725" title="rakı" label="rakı"/>
<link wikidata="Q969280" start="24727" end="24739" title="Turkish wine" label="Turkish wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q744983" start="24741" end="24745" title="boza" label="boza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206969" start="24747" end="24765" title="Sharbat (beverage)" label="&amp;quot;şerbet&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q749524" start="24767" end="24772" title="salep" label="salep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979840" start="24774" end="24785" title="Turkish tea" label="Turkish tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q43022" start="24790" end="24796" title="Turkish coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="24843" end="24852" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594139" start="24865" end="24878" title="New Year tree" label="New Year tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q315796" start="24958" end="24969" title="Santa Claus" label="Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="25120" end="25134" title="Municipality" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q909011" start="25348" end="25367" title="Karagöz and Hacivat" label="Karagöz and Hacivat"/>
<link wikidata="Q854836" start="25368" end="25382" title="shadow theatre" label="shadow-theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261629" start="25413" end="25419" title="Mehter" label="Mehter"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="25424" end="25433" title="Janissary" label="Janissary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="25479" end="25493" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="25655" end="25663" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="25665" end="25671" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q35997" start="25673" end="25678" title="İzmir" label="İzmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q38545" start="25680" end="25685" title="Adana" label="Adana"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="25687" end="25692" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487" start="25697" end="25704" title="Antalya" label="Antalya"/>
<link wikidata="Q736072" start="25768" end="25774" title="Taksim Square" label="Taksim"/>
<link wikidata="Q217411" start="25776" end="25783" title="Beyoğlu" label="Beyoğlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q251601" start="25785" end="25794" title="Nişantaşı" label="Nişantaşı"/>
<link wikidata="Q932886" start="25799" end="25806" title="Kadıköy" label="Kadıköy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046415" start="25835" end="25849" title="Kızılay Square" label="Kızılay Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922067" start="26002" end="26011" title="President of Turkey" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="26175" end="26180" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="26182" end="26202" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q12495" start="26208" end="26220" title="Burj Khalifa" label="Burj Khalifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136999" start="26410" end="26430" title="Son et lumière (show)" label="light and sound show"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="26497" end="26518" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="26832" end="26839" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="27063" end="27070" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q262386" start="27208" end="27211" title="ORF (broadcaster)" label="ORF"/>
<link wikidata="Q686934" start="27239" end="27247" title="Pummerin" label="Pummerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5943" start="27261" end="27289" title="St. Stephen&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Vienna" label="St. Stephen&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="27293" end="27299" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q482621" start="27348" end="27363" title="The Blue Danube" label="The Blue Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q83309" start="27374" end="27391" title="Johann Strauss II" label="Johann Strauss II"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="27679" end="27686" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="27847" end="27868" title="Wallonia" label="French speaking areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q134862" start="28094" end="28103" title="Champagne (wine)" label="champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865794" start="28240" end="28253" title="Mont des Arts" label="Mont des Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="28753" end="28775" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="29019" end="29027" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="29350" end="29364" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="29369" end="29377" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="29660" end="29670" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="29675" end="29681" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q29032" start="30205" end="30216" title="Miloš Zeman" label="Miloš Zeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="30290" end="30302" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="30375" end="30405" title="Czechoslovakia" label="shared history of both nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="30434" end="30441" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q29326" start="30541" end="30551" title="Kransekage" label="Kransekage"/>
<link wikidata="Q211053" start="30931" end="30949" title="Amalienborg Palace" label="Amalienborg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="30986" end="30996" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178686" start="31054" end="31067" title="Rådhuspladsen" label="Rådhuspladsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186780" start="31107" end="31118" title="Royal Life Guards (Denmark)" label="Royal Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q908519" start="31391" end="31425" title="Kong Christian stod ved højen mast" label="Kong Christian stod ved højen mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q165747" start="31464" end="31485" title="Der er et yndigt land" label="Der er et yndigt land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226593" start="31583" end="31597" title="Dinner for One" label="Dinner for One"/>
<link wikidata="Q577407" start="31795" end="31816" title="The Party (1968 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Party&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="31915" end="31922" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="32798" end="32805" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197873" start="32921" end="32939" title="Janssons frestelse" label="Janssons frestelse"/>
<link wikidata="Q883621" start="33076" end="33088" title="molybdomancy" label="molybdomancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q54718" start="33441" end="33444" title="YLE" label="YLE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329554" start="33448" end="33470" title="Helsinki Senate Square" label="Helsinki Senate Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q738015" start="33544" end="33562" title="Helsinki Cathedral" label="Helsinki Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226593" start="33616" end="33630" title="Dinner for One" label="Dinner for One"/>
<link wikidata="Q360079" start="33769" end="33779" title="Eino Leino" label="Eino Leino"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="33809" end="33815" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q15580" start="33984" end="34002" title="Northern Catalonia" label="Northern Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34807" start="34062" end="34071" title="foie gras" label="foie gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q134862" start="34102" end="34111" title="Champagne (wine)" label="champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155091" start="34331" end="34358" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s resolutions" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s resolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="34396" end="34405" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="34408" end="34413" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="34418" end="34427" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136999" start="34468" end="34488" title="sound and light show" label="sound and light show"/>
<link wikidata="Q776483" start="34495" end="34508" title="video mapping" label="video mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="34541" end="34556" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="34604" end="34621" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q525894" start="34724" end="34732" title="France 2" label="France 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="34754" end="34761" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="35415" end="35421" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82425" start="35557" end="35573" title="Brandenburg Gate" label="Brandenburg Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989" start="35639" end="35642" title="Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen" label="ZDF"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35763" end="35767" title="Sparkling wine#Sekt" label="Sekt"/>
<link wikidata="Q883621" start="35806" end="35818" title="Molybdomancy" label="Molybdomancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152526" start="36078" end="36098" title="Berliner (doughnut)" label="Jam-filled doughnuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082973" start="36160" end="36172" title="marzipan pig" label="marzipan pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q165269" start="36247" end="36258" title="East Frisia" label="East Frisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14608155" start="36505" end="36514" title="mettwurst" label="mettwurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226593" start="36611" end="36625" title="Dinner for One" label="Dinner for One"/>
<link wikidata="Q201275" start="36869" end="36872" title="Norddeutscher Rundfunk" label="NDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q10288" start="38159" end="38168" title="Parthenon" label="Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="38194" end="38200" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="38228" end="38242" title="Greek Orthodox" label="Greek Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072235" start="38272" end="38282" title="vasilopita" label="vasilopita"/>
<link wikidata="Q44258" start="38524" end="38541" title="Basil of Caesarea" label="Basil of Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="38799" end="38807" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q26545" start="38933" end="38944" title="horseradish" label="horseradish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827035" start="38946" end="38957" title="lentil soup" label="lentil soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q520765" start="39215" end="39224" title="President of Hungary" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39697" end="39709" title="Kiskarácsony" label="Kiskarácsony"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="39867" end="39874" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="40002" end="40011" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428184" start="40069" end="40072" title="RÚV (TV channel)" label="RÚV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482227" start="40107" end="40121" title="Áramótaskaupið" label="Áramótaskaupið"/>
<link wikidata="Q743934" start="40248" end="40263" title="sketch comedy" label="comedy sketches"/>
<link wikidata="Q50041105" start="40688" end="40707" title="Ministry of Finance (Iceland)" label="Minister of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q57284" start="40708" end="40730" title="Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson" label="Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="40736" end="40742" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187660" start="40870" end="40891" title="Helvítis fokking fokk" label="Helvítis fokking fokk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137483" start="40920" end="40946" title="2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis" label="Icelandic financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993311" start="41586" end="41595" title="barmbrack" label="barmbrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="41781" end="41793" title="Trinity" label="Holy Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="42585" end="42590" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q198763" start="42730" end="42739" title="underwear" label="underwear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051460" start="42961" end="42968" title="zampone" label="zampone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137797" start="42972" end="42981" title="cotechino" label="cotechino"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118905" start="43000" end="43019" title="pig&amp;#x27;s trotters" label="pig&amp;#x27;s trotters"/>
<link wikidata="Q131226" start="43034" end="43040" title="lentil" label="lentil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="43050" end="43064" title="Northern Italy" label="Northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131607" start="43066" end="43073" title="polenta" label="polenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q332711" start="43089" end="43107" title="President of Italy" label="President of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19616" start="43150" end="43153" title="RAI" label="RAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q321263" start="43714" end="43722" title="spumante" label="spumante"/>
<link wikidata="Q258131" start="43825" end="43830" title="Rai 1" label="Rai 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q460657" start="43936" end="43943" title="Amadeus (presenter)" label="Amadeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="44005" end="44010" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q832807" start="44071" end="44079" title="Floriana" label="Floriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593197" start="44251" end="44275" title="St. George&amp;#x27;s Square" label="St. George&amp;#x27;s Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q23800" start="44277" end="44285" title="Valletta" label="Valletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="44521" end="44531" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="44884" end="44895" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q152536" start="45047" end="45054" title="oliebol" label="oliebol"/>
<link wikidata="Q690292" start="45125" end="45132" title="fritter" label="fritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557639" start="45181" end="45200" title="oudejaarsconference" label="oudejaarsconference"/>
<link wikidata="Q131183" start="45248" end="45259" title="Kleinkunst" label="cabaretiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q145806" start="45275" end="45290" title="stand-up comedy" label="stand-up comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="45396" end="45404" title="Reformed churches" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115607" start="45426" end="45434" title="Psalm 90" label="Psalm 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q6584" start="45501" end="45509" title="mulled wine" label="Glühwein"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="45788" end="45797" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348188" start="45858" end="45872" title="Erasmus Bridge" label="Erasmus Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="" start="45975" end="45993" title=":nl:Carbidschieten" label=":nl:Carbidschieten"/>
<link wikidata="Q421801" start="46042" end="46057" title="Calcium carbide" label="Calcium carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q730439" start="46204" end="46215" title="NPO Radio 2" label="NPO Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204848" start="46233" end="46249" title="Top 2000" label="annual countdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="46781" end="46796" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="47272" end="47278" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q106010" start="47380" end="47393" title="Christmas Eve" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q209464" start="47624" end="47637" title="Waldorf salad" label="Waldorf salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="48521" end="48527" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q770631" start="48671" end="48682" title="Main Market Square, Kraków" label="Main Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="48686" end="48692" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143171" start="48790" end="48814" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Basilica, Kraków" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q144786" start="48979" end="48987" title="Zakopane" label="Zakopane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="49004" end="49024" title="Carpathian Mountains" label="Carpathian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q588" start="49151" end="49159" title="Katowice" label="Katowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051683" start="49170" end="49176" title="Spodek" label="Spodek"/>
<link wikidata="Q834490" start="49187" end="49197" title="Sławatycze" label="Sławatycze"/>
<link wikidata="Q282171" start="49363" end="49369" title="Polsat" label="Polsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q129110" start="49374" end="49377" title="Telewizja Polska" label="TVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="49401" end="49409" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q177166" start="49638" end="49646" title="Bolo-Rei" label="Bolo-Rei"/>
<link wikidata="Q131342" start="49952" end="49962" title="broad bean" label="broad bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q177166" start="50302" end="50317" title="Gateau des Rois" label="Gateau des Rois"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="50433" end="50439" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054277" start="50538" end="50562" title="Centro Cultural de Belém" label="Centro Cultural de Belém"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="50755" end="50762" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181357" start="50850" end="50860" title="Plugușorul" label="Plugușorul"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="51000" end="51027" title="Romanian Revolution of 1989" label="Romanian Revolution of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850614" start="51060" end="51077" title="University Square, Bucharest" label="University Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="51081" end="51090" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382271" start="51127" end="51145" title="Piața Constituției" label="Piața Constituției"/>
<link wikidata="Q846168" start="51218" end="51237" title="Romanian Television" label="Romanian Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="51435" end="51441" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q41116" start="51449" end="51459" title="Red Square" label="Red Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q4507754" start="51470" end="51483" title="Kremlin Clock" label="Kremlin Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225991" start="51558" end="51581" title="Russian national anthem" label="Russian national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q218295" start="51612" end="51628" title="President of Russia" label="President&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q46992920" start="51629" end="51652" title="New Year Address by the President of Russia" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s address"/>
<link wikidata="Q187202" start="51712" end="51721" title="Time in Russia" label="time zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="51814" end="51827" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Boris Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="51972" end="51981" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594139" start="51983" end="51996" title="New Year tree" label="New Year tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q488159" start="52078" end="52087" title="Ded Moroz" label="Ded Moroz"/>
<link wikidata="Q917583" start="52201" end="52212" title="Snegurochka" label="Snegurochka"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="52266" end="52272" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="52288" end="52303" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571747" start="52372" end="52422" title="Soviet anti-religious legislation" label="policies meant to curtail the practice of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q685427" start="52472" end="52487" title="Pavel Postyshev" label="Pavel Postyshev"/>
<link wikidata="Q47128" start="52597" end="52602" title="Christmas tree" label="trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q315796" start="52609" end="52620" title="Santa Claus" label="Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303501" start="52651" end="52658" title="Secularity" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="52680" end="52711" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368678" start="52936" end="52950" title="Carnival Night" label="Carnival Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q913426" start="52974" end="52991" title="The Irony of Fate" label="The Irony of Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q106010" start="53136" end="53149" title="Christmas Eve" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q204191" start="53166" end="53192" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Wonderful Life" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Wonderful Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974095" start="53251" end="53268" title="Little Blue Light" label="Little Blue Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q211511" start="53347" end="53355" title="Russia-1" label="Russia-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="53418" end="53428" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="53446" end="53469" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q438198" start="53706" end="53716" title="Old New Year" label="14 January"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252562" start="53819" end="53828" title="Christmas in Serbia" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="53845" end="53857" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="53863" end="53897" title="League of Communists of Yugoslavia" label="League of Communists of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="53923" end="53944" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="53966" end="54006" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="54531" end="54552" title="breakup of Yugoslavia" label="breakup of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q760225" start="55111" end="55129" title="Saint Nicholas Day" label="Saint Nicholas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="55264" end="55271" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196099" start="55290" end="55295" title="Tito–Stalin split" label="broke"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="55305" end="55317" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024" start="55361" end="55368" title="Triglav" label="Triglav"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499450" start="55398" end="55412" title="Maksim Gaspari" label="Maksim Gaspari"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="55599" end="55604" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q427163" start="55709" end="55723" title="Puerta del Sol" label="Puerta del Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="55727" end="55733" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067027" start="55803" end="55833" title="Royal House of the Post Office" label="Royal House of the Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293380" start="55869" end="55886" title="Twelve Grapes" label="eat twelve grapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11959" start="56083" end="56091" title="Alicante" label="Alicante"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="56346" end="56359" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="56371" end="56400" title="Hispanic Americans" label="Hispanic and Latino Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051699" start="56633" end="56637" title="Cava (Spanish wine)" label="cava"/>
<link wikidata="Q134862" start="56642" end="56651" title="champagne (wine)" label="champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328374" start="56807" end="56819" title="Ramón García (TV host)" label="Ramón García"/>
<link wikidata="Q544560" start="56848" end="56867" title="Televisión Española" label="Televisión Española"/>
<link wikidata="Q571833" start="56878" end="56886" title="Antena 3 (Spanish TV channel)" label="Antena 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656441" start="56898" end="56915" title="Cristina Pedroche" label="Cristina Pedroche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549242" start="57005" end="57028" title="San Silvestre Vallecana" label="San Silvestre Vallecana"/>
<link wikidata="Q992060" start="57117" end="57124" title="fun run" label="fun run"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="57249" end="57255" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579330" start="57872" end="57882" title="BingoLotto" label="BingoLotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="58041" end="58052" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q382934" start="58156" end="58168" title="Spengler Cup" label="Spengler Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q863759" start="58294" end="58314" title="Maidan Nezalezhnosti" label="Maidan Nezalezhnosti"/>
<link wikidata="Q15224558" start="58390" end="58400" title="Euromaidan" label="Euromaidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q161744" start="58492" end="58507" title="National anthem of Ukraine" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961932" start="58549" end="58556" title="Malanka" label="Malanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935431" start="58597" end="58606" title="mummering" label="mummering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673302" start="58698" end="58706" title="Novy God" label="Novy God"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="58767" end="58787" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Eastern Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="59174" end="59193" title="Russo-Ukrainian War" label="Russo-Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920546" start="59202" end="59227" title="Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation" label="2014 annexation of Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594139" start="59255" end="59276" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s tree" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q913426" start="59304" end="59321" title="The Irony of Fate" label="The Irony of Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032137" start="59349" end="59352" title="STB (TV channel)" label="STB"/>
<link wikidata="Q18668651" start="59376" end="59397" title="Boycott Russian Films" label="Boycott Russian Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354215" start="59657" end="59671" title="Central London" label="Central London"/>
<link wikidata="Q41225" start="59733" end="59740" title="Big Ben" label="Big Ben"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012722" start="59759" end="59784" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve in London" label="a major fireworks display"/>
<link wikidata="Q160659" start="59845" end="59855" title="London Eye" label="London Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="60197" end="60207" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="60209" end="60219" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="60221" end="60226" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="60228" end="60237" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="60243" end="60252" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="60279" end="60287" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623403" start="60312" end="60320" title="Hogmanay" label="Hogmanay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452190" start="60382" end="60392" title="First-Foot" label="First-Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="60525" end="60534" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548664" start="60680" end="60694" title="Princes Street" label="Princes Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q212065" start="60719" end="60735" title="Edinburgh Castle" label="Edinburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q277436" start="60945" end="60957" title="bank holiday" label="bank holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="61063" end="61066" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q681822" start="61082" end="61094" title="BBC Scotland" label="BBC Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994785" start="61127" end="61149" title="The White Heather Club" label="The White Heather Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686820" start="61261" end="61304" title="Tartanry" label="stereotypical portrayal of Scottish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q674608" start="61354" end="61357" title="ITV1" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q125821346" start="61440" end="61452" title="Live into 85" label="Live into 85"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834887" start="61524" end="61540" title="BBC One Scotland" label="BBC One Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5877339" start="61570" end="61592" title="BBC Scotland&amp;#x27;s Hogmanay" label="local Hogmanay special"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042982" start="61613" end="61629" title="Regional variation" label="regional opt-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="61843" end="61848" title="Wales" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="62080" end="62087" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035742" start="62196" end="62210" title="Cardiff Castle" label="Cardiff Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974562" start="62215" end="62232" title="City Hall, Cardiff" label="Cardiff City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930444" start="62266" end="62285" title="Nos Galan road race" label="Nos Galan road race"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469852" start="62347" end="62359" title="Mountain Ash, Wales" label="Mountain Ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5199988" start="62367" end="62379" title="Cynon Valley" label="Cynon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q817960" start="62381" end="62398" title="Rhondda Cynon Taf" label="Rhondda Cynon Taf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="62400" end="62411" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404365" start="62475" end="62489" title="Guto Nyth Brân" label="Guto Nyth Brân"/>
<link wikidata="Q17715131" start="62666" end="62675" title="Llanwynno" label="Llanwynno"/>
<link wikidata="Q17715131" start="62727" end="62736" title="Llanwynno" label="Llanwynno"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="63497" end="63503" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687105" start="63683" end="63721" title="Canada men&amp;#x27;s national junior ice hockey team" label="Canadian men&amp;#x27;s junior hockey team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691459" start="63747" end="63775" title="Team Canada New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve Game" label="final preliminary round game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754117" start="63783" end="63813" title="IIHF World Junior Championship" label="IIHF World Junior Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="63843" end="63853" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="CBC&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q743934" start="63935" end="63948" title="sketch comedy" label="sketch comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="64064" end="64078" title="CBC Television" label="CBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445894" start="64170" end="64194" title="Royal Canadian Air Farce" label="Royal Canadian Air Farce"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002170" start="64244" end="64298" title="Royal Canadian Air Farce (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Royal Canadian Air Farce&amp;quot; television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252662" start="64371" end="64384" title="series finale" label="series finale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943864" start="64513" end="64524" title="news satire" label="news satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q953055" start="64538" end="64562" title="This Hour Has 22 Minutes" label="This Hour Has 22 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239233" start="64636" end="64643" title="Pre-game show" label="Pregame"/>
<link wikidata="Q986985" start="64690" end="64711" title="Ici Radio-Canada Télé" label="Ici Radio-Canada Télé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929141" start="64742" end="64749" title="Bye Bye (TV series)" label="Bye Bye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437835" start="64901" end="64924" title="Rock et Belles Oreilles" label="Rock et Belles Oreilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q27661713" start="65186" end="65221" title="List of most watched television broadcasts in Canada" label="highest-rated television broadcasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q28730778" start="65445" end="65461" title="150th anniversary of Canada" label="sesquicentennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q187188" start="65579" end="65588" title="Time in Canada" label="time zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069356" start="65699" end="65710" title="Rick Mercer" label="Rick Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27673046" start="65858" end="65868" title="Mae Martin" label="Mae Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062629" start="65943" end="65959" title="CBC News Network" label="CBC News Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="65985" end="65995" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="66332" end="66343" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="67574" end="67583" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q212773" start="67666" end="67673" title="Antigua Guatemala" label="Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555" start="67775" end="67789" title="Guatemala City" label="Guatemala City"/>
<link wikidata="Q220734" start="68160" end="68165" title="Maya mythology" label="Mayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="68169" end="68177" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="69756" end="69767" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348507" start="69839" end="69845" title="Zocalo" label="Zocalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="70173" end="70179" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q39178" start="70527" end="70540" title="Port of Spain" label="Port of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="71004" end="71017" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631543" start="71164" end="71169" title="List of objects dropped on New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="drops"/>
<link wikidata="Q185876" start="71197" end="71206" title="time ball" label="time ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058395" start="71352" end="71361" title="Times Square Ball" label="ball drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="71376" end="71389" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="71397" end="71409" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139633" start="71464" end="71480" title="One Times Square" label="One Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057963" start="71560" end="71577" title="Waterford Crystal" label="Waterford Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="71796" end="71803" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251536" start="71811" end="71821" title="Peach Drop" label="Peach Drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="71838" end="71845" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="71875" end="71880" title="Peach" label="Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q467087" start="72007" end="72019" title="Guy Lombardo" label="Guy Lombardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="72028" end="72032" title="Big band" label="band"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906708" start="72086" end="72095" title="Big band remote" label="broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q211939" start="72153" end="72167" title="Auld Lang Syne" label="Auld Lang Syne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196752" start="72202" end="72210" title="Traditional pop" label="standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="72286" end="72289" title="Columbia Broadcasting System" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q406497" start="72393" end="72443" title="Dick Clark&amp;#x27;s New Year&amp;#x27;s Rockin&amp;#x27; Eve" label="Dick Clark&amp;#x27;s New Year&amp;#x27;s Rockin&amp;#x27; Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="72479" end="72482" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="72497" end="72500" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261214" start="72551" end="72558" title="television special" label="special"/>
<link wikidata="Q366563" start="72616" end="72626" title="Dick Clark" label="Dick Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650121" start="72746" end="72760" title="ABC 2000 Today" label="ABC 2000 Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="72814" end="72820" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q463673" start="72839" end="72852" title="Regis Philbin" label="Regis Philbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282114" start="72903" end="72920" title="speech impediment" label="speech impediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q299266" start="72992" end="73005" title="Ryan Seacrest" label="Ryan Seacrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q865655" start="73203" end="73235" title="Cathedral of St. John the Divine" label="Cathedral of St. John the Divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="73360" end="73377" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021623" start="73383" end="73404" title="New York Road Runners" label="New York Road Runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="73447" end="73459" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q745608" start="73588" end="73603" title="Las Vegas Strip" label="Las Vegas Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742579" start="73617" end="73637" title="America&amp;#x27;s Party" label="America&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368842" start="73695" end="73720" title="Fremont Street Experience" label="Fremont Street Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="73821" end="73830" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="73869" end="73882" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q263478" start="73900" end="73910" title="Musical note" label="music note"/>
<link wikidata="" start="74001" end="74052" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve Live: Nashville&amp;#x27;s Big Bash" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve Live: Nashville&amp;#x27;s Big Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="74060" end="74071" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q995043" start="74161" end="74169" title="Downtown Los Angeles" label="Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594874" start="74193" end="74203" title="Grand Park" label="Grand Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q776483" start="74311" end="74329" title="projection mapping" label="projection mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q368489" start="74350" end="74371" title="Los Angeles City Hall" label="Los Angeles City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="74463" end="74470" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228740" start="74656" end="74678" title="InterContinental Miami" label="InterContinental Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q812537" start="74702" end="74715" title="Bayfront Park" label="Bayfront Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="74770" end="74773" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q22024825" start="74781" end="74822" title="Pitbull&amp;#x27;s New Year&amp;#x27;s Revolution" label="Pitbull&amp;#x27;s New Year&amp;#x27;s Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="74853" end="74863" title="theme park" label="theme park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431781" start="74905" end="74911" title="Disney Experiences" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186857" start="74916" end="74925" title="Universal Destinations &amp;amp; Experiences" label="Universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q206859" start="74947" end="74971" title="Walt Disney World Resort" label="Walt Disney World Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q778011" start="74976" end="74993" title="Universal Orlando" label="Universal Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q49233" start="74997" end="75013" title="Orlando, Florida" label="Orlando, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q181185" start="75026" end="75036" title="Disneyland" label="Disneyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337576" start="75041" end="75068" title="Universal Studios Hollywood" label="Universal Studios Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="75072" end="75082" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="75224" end="75243" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q18165484" start="75406" end="75413" title="List of beaches in Australia" label="beaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660053" start="75516" end="75542" title="Sydney New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="Sydney New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q54504" start="75565" end="75579" title="Sydney Harbour" label="Sydney Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q54495" start="75754" end="75775" title="Sydney Harbour Bridge" label="Sydney Harbour Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328068" start="76016" end="76021" title="truss" label="truss"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="76125" end="76133" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560726" start="76196" end="76210" title="South Bank, Queensland" label="Brisbane River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="76216" end="76225" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811747" start="76288" end="76313" title="Melbourne central business district" label="central business district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="76366" end="76371" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449109" start="76373" end="76382" title="Semaphore, South Australia" label="Semaphore"/>
<link wikidata="Q40191" start="76388" end="76394" title="Hobart" label="Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q569073" start="76456" end="76463" title="outback" label="outback"/>
<link wikidata="Q953073" start="76475" end="76489" title="Cameron Corner, Queensland" label="Cameron Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q187180" start="76649" end="76659" title="Time in Australia" label="time zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q234796" start="76709" end="76721" title="Line Islands" label="Line Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="76735" end="76743" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q193331" start="76755" end="76765" title="Kiritimati" label="Kiritimati"/>
<link wikidata="Q127335" start="76767" end="76776" title="Tabuaeran" label="Tabuaeran"/>
<link wikidata="Q911037" start="76781" end="76788" title="Teraina" label="Teraina"/>
<link wikidata="" start="76891" end="76900" title="UTC+14:00" label="UTC+14:00"/>
<link wikidata="" start="76935" end="76944" title="UTC+13:00" label="UTC+13:00"/>
<link wikidata="" start="76949" end="76958" title="UTC+12:00" label="UTC+12:00"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="77094" end="77102" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q722125" start="77169" end="77178" title="Sky Tower (Auckland)" label="Sky Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="77183" end="77193" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q108672022" start="77195" end="77211" title="Frank Kitts Park" label="Frank Kitts Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q864194" start="77423" end="77439" title="SkyCity Hamilton" label="SkyCity Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q233467" start="77441" end="77449" title="Gisborne, New Zealand" label="Gisborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q917136" start="77575" end="77585" title="Whangamatā" label="Whangamatā"/>
<link wikidata="Q763064" start="77594" end="77614" title="Coromandel Peninsula" label="Coromandel Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="77711" end="77723" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="77728" end="77735" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134612" start="77831" end="77842" title="Hagley Park, Christchurch" label="Hagley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754671" start="77847" end="77858" title="The Octagon, Dunedin" label="The Octagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q613602" start="77915" end="77925" title="Queenstown, New Zealand" label="Queenstown"/>
<link wikidata="" start="78100" end="78109" title="UTC+14:00" label="UTC+14:00"/>
<link wikidata="Q234796" start="78186" end="78198" title="Line Islands" label="Line Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="78202" end="78210" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="78280" end="78289" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q941230" start="78353" end="78364" title="vitello tonnato" label="vitel tonné"/>
<link wikidata="Q720254" start="78378" end="78383" title="asado" label="asado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904894" start="78397" end="78415" title="sandwiches de miga" label="sandwiches de miga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196890" start="78429" end="78436" title="pionono" label="pionono"/>
<link wikidata="Q159304" start="78465" end="78471" title="turrón" label="turrón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053178" start="78485" end="78493" title="mantecol" label="mantecol"/>
<link wikidata="Q193478" start="78507" end="78512" title="budín" label="budín"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78529" end="78538" title="List of Mexican dishes#Desserts and sweets" label="pan dulce"/>
<link wikidata="Q44059" start="79020" end="79028" title="La Plata" label="La Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q52607" start="79367" end="79380" title="Mar del Plata" label="Mar del Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q991680" start="79382" end="79392" title="Mar de Ajó" label="Mar de Ajó"/>
<link wikidata="Q991574" start="79394" end="79406" title="Villa Gesell" label="Villa Gesell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152435" start="79408" end="79415" title="Miramar, Buenos Aires Province" label="Miramar"/>
<link wikidata="Q134862" start="79605" end="79614" title="Champagne (wine)" label="Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q202730" start="79967" end="79983" title="Copacabana, Rio de Janeiro" label="Copacabana Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="79987" end="80001" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587" start="80416" end="80424" title="TV Globo" label="TV Globo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844" start="80625" end="80633" title="Brasília" label="Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="Q565101" start="80668" end="80683" title="Monumental Axis" label="Monumental Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q336088" start="80687" end="80718" title="Estádio Nacional Mané Garrincha" label="Estádio Nacional Mané Garrincha"/>
<link wikidata="Q40236" start="80736" end="80742" title="Manaus" label="Manaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q205516" start="80788" end="80804" title="Rio Negro Bridge" label="Rio Negro Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q41068" start="80812" end="80827" title="Paulista Avenue" label="Paulista Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="80858" end="80867" title="São Paulo (city)" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135337" start="80964" end="80989" title="Saint Silvester Road Race" label="Saint Silvester Road Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q19767716" start="80993" end="81000" title="15K run" label="15K run"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236252" start="81025" end="81037" title="Central Zone of São Paulo" label="Central Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924455" start="81139" end="81153" title="Viaduto do Chá" label="Viaduto do Chá"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="81228" end="81233" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="81786" end="81794" title="Santiago, Chile" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421270" start="81832" end="81843" title="Entel Tower" label="Entel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q33986" start="82056" end="82066" title="Valparaiso" label="Valparaiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="82420" end="82428" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="82929" end="82936" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="83321" end="83329" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q720254" start="84391" end="84396" title="asado" label="asado"/>
<link wikidata="Q23015" start="84413" end="84419" title="lechon" label="lechon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159304" start="84462" end="84468" title="turrón" label="turrón"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059387" start="84485" end="84494" title="pan dulce" label="pan dulce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293380" start="84691" end="84704" title="Twelve Grapes" label="Twelve Grapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q56069" start="84832" end="84846" title="Punta del Este" label="Punta del Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007576" start="85026" end="85048" title="Ciudad Vieja, Montevideo" label="Old City of Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533" start="85700" end="85707" title="Caracas" label="Caracas"/>
<link wikidata="Q535328" start="85958" end="85963" title="Gaita Zuliana" label="Gaita"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754546" start="85970" end="85982" title="Maracaibo 15" label="Maracaibo 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q10750565" start="86153" end="86180" title="José Luis Rodríguez El Puma" label="José Luis Rodríguez El Puma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11697503" start="86457" end="86469" title="Pan de jamón" label="Pan de jamón"/>
<link wikidata="Q745484" start="86590" end="86600" title="Venevisión" label="Venevisión"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475831" start="86605" end="86629" title="Venezolana de Televisión" label="Venezolana de Televisión"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973180" start="86790" end="86808" title="watchnight service" label="watchnight service"/>
<link wikidata="Q867780" start="86862" end="86875" title="Christmastide" label="Christmastide"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="87033" end="87042" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravians"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="87047" end="87056" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922295" start="87161" end="87187" title="Black church" label="African American community"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="87442" end="87453" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="87513" end="87530" title="Moravian Brethren" label="Moravian Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q391358" start="87812" end="87837" title="Emancipation Proclamation" label="Emancipation Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="87883" end="87904" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="87906" end="87929" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="87931" end="87946" title="Lutheran Church" label="Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="87958" end="87976" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307024" start="88007" end="88042" title="Feast of the Circumcision of Christ" label="Feast of the Circumcision of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q600889" start="88094" end="88126" title="Solemnity of Mary, Mother of God" label="Solemnity of Mary, Mother of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497116" start="88136" end="88158" title="Holy Day of Obligation" label="Holy Day of Obligation"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="88178" end="88187" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="88295" end="88299" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q12525597" start="88537" end="88546" title="Silvester" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q47149" start="88556" end="88572" title="Pope Sylvester I" label="Pope Sylvester I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12525597" start="88605" end="88631" title="Saint Sylvester&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Saint Sylvester&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q743376" start="88735" end="88742" title="Te Deum" label="Te Deum"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="88836" end="88848" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="88870" end="88874" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="88954" end="88979" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q83425" start="89043" end="89066" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Square" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443316" start="89249" end="89263" title="Christmas music" label="Christmas song"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517772" start="89310" end="89338" title="Christmas and holiday season" label="Christmas and holiday season"/>
<link wikidata="Q211939" start="89347" end="89361" title="Auld Lang Syne" label="Auld Lang Syne"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="89371" end="89383" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="89386" end="89407" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030219" start="89422" end="89435" title="Orgelbüchlein" label="Orgelbüchlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q571722" start="89897" end="89911" title="Happy New Year (song)" label="Happy New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="89921" end="89925" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16879705" start="89933" end="89975" title="It&amp;#x27;s Just Another New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="It&amp;#x27;s Just Another New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q302762" start="89985" end="89998" title="Barry Manilow" label="Barry Manilow"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="90051" end="90062" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237444" start="90070" end="90089" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day (U2 song)" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="90099" end="90101" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409203" start="90109" end="90127" title="Same Old Lang Syne" label="Same Old Lang Syne"/>
<link wikidata="Q201047" start="90137" end="90150" title="Dan Fogelberg" label="Dan Fogelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q154454" start="90270" end="90282" title="&amp;#x27;N Sync" label="&amp;#x27;N Sync"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990050" start="90311" end="90327" title="The Winter Album (N Sync album)" label="The Winter Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q15136158" start="90371" end="90388" title="A Great Big World" label="A Great Big World"/>
<link wikidata="Q47034767" start="90396" end="90415" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day (Taylor Swift song)" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="90425" end="90437" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q208837" start="90445" end="90449" title="1999 (Prince song)" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="90459" end="90465" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405855" start="90473" end="90480" title="Willennium" label="Will 2K"/>
<link wikidata="Q40096" start="90490" end="90500" title="Will Smith" label="Will Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q587683" start="90508" end="90518" title="Millennium (song)" label="Millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q47875" start="90528" end="90543" title="Robbie Williams" label="Robbie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091675" start="90551" end="90561" title="Disco 2000 (song)" label="Disco 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q504464" start="90571" end="90575" title="Pulp (band)" label="Pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374926" start="90612" end="90622" title="Pentatonix" label="Pentatonix"/>
<link wikidata="Q109546526" start="90638" end="90658" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s food" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s food"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348704" start="90660" end="90693" title="List of films set around New Year" label="List of films set around New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631543" start="90695" end="90741" title="List of objects dropped on New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="List of objects dropped on New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277923" wikidata="Q3045309" url="?curid=277923" title="Symphony Hall, Boston">
<text>Symphony Hall is a concert hall that is home to the Boston Symphony Orchestra, located at 301 Massachusetts Avenue in Boston, Massachusetts. BSO founder Henry Lee Higginson commissioned architectural firm McKim, Mead and White to create a new, permanent home for the orchestra. Symphony Hall can accommodate an audience of 2,625. The hall was designated a U.S. National Historic Landmark in 1999 and is a pending Boston Landmark. It was then noted that &quot;Symphony Hall remains, acoustically, among the top three concert halls in the world (sharing this distinction with the Amsterdam Concertgebouw and Vienna&#x27;s Musikvereinsaal), and is considered the finest in the United States.&quot; Symphony Hall, located one block from Berklee College of Music to the north and one block from the New England Conservatory to the south, also serves as home to the Boston Pops as well as the site of many concerts of the Handel and Haydn Society.

==History and architecture==

On June 12, 1899, ground was broken and construction began on Symphony Hall after the Orchestra&#x27;s original home (the Old Boston Music Hall) was threatened by road-building and subway construction. The building was completed 17 months later at a cost of $771,000. The hall was inaugurated on October 15, 1900, Architects McKim, Mead and White engaged Wallace Clement Sabine, a young assistant professor of physics at Harvard University, as their acoustical consultant, and Symphony Hall became one of the first auditoria designed in accordance with scientifically derived acoustical principles. Admired for its lively acoustics from the time of its opening, the hall is often cited as one of the best sounding classical concert venues in the world.

The hall is modeled on the second Gewandhaus concert hall in Leipzig, which was later destroyed in World War II. The Hall is relatively long, narrow, and high, in a rectangular &quot;shoebox&quot; shape like Amsterdam&#x27;s Concertgebouw and Vienna&#x27;s Musikverein. It is high, wide, and long from the lower back wall to the front of the stage. Stage walls slope inward to help focus the sound. With the exception of its wooden floors, the Hall is built of brick, steel, and plaster, with modest decoration. Side balconies are very shallow to avoid trapping or muffling sound, and the coffered ceiling and statue-filled niches along three sides help provide excellent acoustics to essentially every seat. Conductor Herbert von Karajan, in comparing it to the Musikverein, stated that &quot;for much music, it is even better... because of its slightly lower reverberation time.&quot;

In 2006, due to years of wear and tear, the original concert stage floor was replaced at a cost of $250,000. In order to avoid any change to the sound of the hall, the new floor was built using same methods and materials as the original. These included tongue-in-groove, three-quarter inch, hard maple boards, a compressed wool underlayment and hardened steel cut nails, hammered in by hand. The vertical grain fir subfloor from 1899 was in excellent shape and was left in place. The nails used in the new floor were hand cut using the same size and construction as the originals and the back channeling on the original maple top boards was replicated as well.

Beethoven&#x27;s name is inscribed over the stage, the only musician&#x27;s name that appears in the hall since the original directors could agree on no other name but his. The hall&#x27;s leather seats are the originals installed in 1900. The hall seats 2,625 people during Symphony season and 2,371 during the Pops season, including 800 seats at tables on the main floor.

==Statues==
Sixteen casts of notable Greek and Roman statues line the upper level of the hall&#x27;s walls. Ten are of mythical subjects, and six of historical figures. All were produced by P. P. Caproni and Brother. The casts, as one faces the stage are:

On the right, starting near the stage:
Faun carrying the boy Bacchus (Roman copy of an original from the Hellenistic Period. Naples); Apollo Citharoedus (Roman artist. Excavated from Cassius&#x27; Villa near Tivoli in 1774. Vatican); Young Woman of (Excavated from Herculaneum in 1711. Dresden); Dancing Faun (Rome); Demosthenes (Rome); Seated Anacreon (Copenhagen); Statue of a tragic poet with the head of Euripides (Vatican); Diana of Versailles (Paris);

On the left, starting near the stage:
Resting Satyr (Praxiteles, Rome); Wounded Amazon (Polycleitus, Berlin); Hermes Logios (Paris); Lemnian Athena (Dresden, with head in Bologna); The Lateran Sophocles (Vatican); Standing Anacreon (Copenhagen); Aeschines (Naples); Apollo Belvedere (Rome).

==Organ==
The Symphony Hall organ, a 4,800-pipe Aeolian-Skinner (Opus 1134) was designed by G. Donald Harrison, installed in 1949, and autographed by Albert Schweitzer. It replaced the hall&#x27;s first organ, built in 1900 by George S. Hutchings of Boston, which was electrically keyed, with 62 ranks of nearly 4,000 pipes set in a chamber deep and high. The Hutchings organ had fallen out of fashion by the 1940s when lighter, clearer tones became preferred. E. Power Biggs, often a featured organist for the orchestra, lobbied hard for a thinner bass sound and accentuated treble.

The 1949 Aeolian-Skinner reused and modified more than 60% of the existing Hutchings pipes and added 600 new pipes in a Positive division. The original diapason pipes, in length, were reportedly sawed into manageable pieces for disposal in 1948.

In 2003, the organ was thoroughly overhauled by Foley-Baker Inc., reusing its chassis and many pipes, but enclosing the Bombarde and adding to it the long-desired Principal (diapason) pipes, adding a new Solo division, and reworking its chamber for better sound projection. The original 1949 four-manual console was replaced with a low-profile three-manual console, to allow a better line of sight between the organist and the conductor when the organ and orchestra play together.

==See also==
* List of concert halls
* List of National Historic Landmarks in Boston
* National Register of Historic Places listings in southern Boston, Massachusetts

==References==
=== Citations ===
=== General bibliography ===
* Boston Symphony Orchestra, &quot;Symphony Hall: The First 100 Years&quot;, January 2000. .
* Boston Symphony Orchestra, &quot;Program Notes&quot;, October 1, 2005
* Boston Symphony Orchestra, &quot;Program Notes&quot;, April 8, 2006
* Leo Beranek, &quot;Concert Halls and Opera Houses: Music, Acoustics, and Architecture&quot; (2003), .

==External links==

* Symphony Hall</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3045309" start="0" end="13" title="Symphony Hall, Boston" label="Symphony Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11302994" start="19" end="31" title="concert hall" label="concert hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q864369" start="52" end="77" title="Boston Symphony Orchestra" label="Boston Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907324" start="94" end="114" title="Massachusetts Avenue (Boston)" label="Massachusetts Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="118" end="124" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="126" end="139" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13533500" start="153" end="172" title="Henry Lee Higginson" label="Henry Lee Higginson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915267" start="205" end="226" title="McKim, Mead and White" label="McKim, Mead and White"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="361" end="387" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228264" start="413" end="428" title="Boston Landmark" label="Boston Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q849957" start="588" end="601" title="Concertgebouw, Amsterdam" label="Concertgebouw"/>
<link wikidata="Q686720" start="620" end="631" title="Musikverein" label="Musikverein"/>
<link wikidata="Q248970" start="733" end="757" title="Berklee College of Music" label="Berklee College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347162" start="794" end="818" title="New England Conservatory" label="New England Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263983" start="860" end="871" title="Boston Pops" label="Boston Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558637" start="916" end="940" title="Handel and Haydn Society" label="Handel and Haydn Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715412" start="1099" end="1116" title="Boston Music Hall" label="Boston Music Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915267" start="1298" end="1319" title="McKim, Mead and White" label="McKim, Mead and White"/>
<link wikidata="Q709821" start="1328" end="1350" title="Wallace Clement Sabine" label="Wallace Clement Sabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1394" end="1412" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q519613" start="1761" end="1771" title="Gewandhaus" label="Gewandhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="1788" end="1795" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1826" end="1838" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="1935" end="1944" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q849957" start="1952" end="1965" title="Concertgebouw, Amsterdam" label="Concertgebouw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="1970" end="1976" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q686720" start="1984" end="1995" title="Musikverein" label="Musikverein"/>
<link wikidata="Q154895" start="2446" end="2465" title="Herbert von Karajan" label="Herbert von Karajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q686720" start="2490" end="2501" title="Musikverein" label="Musikverein"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="3277" end="3286" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192952" start="3842" end="3867" title="Pietro Caproni" label="P. P. Caproni and Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q223194" start="3948" end="3952" title="Faun" label="Faun"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="3970" end="3977" title="Dionysus" label="Bacchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780294" start="4043" end="4061" title="Apollo Citharoedus" label="Apollo Citharoedus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178813" start="4174" end="4185" title="Herculaneum" label="Herculaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q223194" start="4213" end="4217" title="Faun" label="Faun"/>
<link wikidata="Q117253" start="4226" end="4237" title="Demosthenes" label="Demosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q213484" start="4253" end="4261" title="Anacreon" label="Anacreon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="4317" end="4326" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584518" start="4338" end="4357" title="Diana of Versailles" label="Diana of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q163709" start="4414" end="4419" title="Satyr" label="Satyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q105290" start="4421" end="4431" title="Praxiteles" label="Praxiteles"/>
<link wikidata="Q134154" start="4448" end="4454" title="Amazons" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193422" start="4456" end="4467" title="Polykleitos" label="Polycleitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5741412" start="4478" end="4491" title="Hermes Logios (sculpture)" label="Hermes Logios"/>
<link wikidata="Q950701" start="4501" end="4515" title="Lemnian Athena" label="Lemnian Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="4561" end="4570" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213484" start="4591" end="4599" title="Anacreon" label="Anacreon"/>
<link wikidata="Q317089" start="4614" end="4623" title="Aeschines" label="Aeschines"/>
<link wikidata="Q619135" start="4634" end="4650" title="Apollo Belvedere" label="Apollo Belvedere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605945" start="4708" end="4723" title="Aeolian-Skinner" label="Aeolian-Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512206" start="4752" end="4770" title="G. Donald Harrison" label="G. Donald Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q49325" start="4810" end="4827" title="Albert Schweitzer" label="Albert Schweitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369302" start="5121" end="5135" title="E. Power Biggs" label="E. Power Biggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11302994" start="5989" end="6010" title="List of concert halls" label="List of concert halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591413" start="6013" end="6058" title="List of National Historic Landmarks in Boston" label="List of National Historic Landmarks in Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977984" start="6061" end="6140" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in southern Boston, Massachusetts" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in southern Boston, Massachusetts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277924" wikidata="Q3140659" url="?curid=277924" title="Charlotte Hornets (disambiguation)">
<text>The Charlotte Hornets are a National Basketball Association team.

Charlotte Hornets may also refer to:
* Charlotte Hornets (baseball), a minor league baseball team from 1901 to 1973
* Charlotte Hornets (WFL), a World Football League team from 1974 to 1975</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q163480" start="4" end="21" title="Charlotte Hornets" label="Charlotte Hornets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086012" start="106" end="134" title="Charlotte Hornets (baseball)" label="Charlotte Hornets (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086011" start="185" end="208" title="Charlotte Hornets (WFL)" label="Charlotte Hornets (WFL)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277925" wikidata="Q1063571" url="?curid=277925" title="Undisputed Attitude">
<text>Undisputed Attitude is the seventh studio album by American thrash metal band Slayer, released on May 28, 1996, by American Recordings. The album consists almost entirely of covers of punk rock and hardcore punk songs, and also includes two tracks written by guitarist Jeff Hanneman in 1984 and 1985 for a side project called Pap Smear; its closing track, &quot;Gemini&quot;, is the only original track. The cover songs on the album were originally recorded by the bands the Stooges, Minor Threat, T.S.O.L., D.R.I., D.I., Dr. Know, and Verbal Abuse, whose work was prominently featured with the inclusion of cover versions of three of their songs.

&quot;Undisputed Attitude&quot; peaked at number 34 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200.

==Recording==
&quot;Undisputed Attitude&quot; was recorded at Capitol Studios in Los Angeles with Dave Sardy as producer and &quot;Reign in Blood&quot; producer Rick Rubin as executive producer. Recorded in three to four weeks, the album was largely the brainchild of guitarist Kerry King, who stated that the songs chosen were from highly influential bands who &quot;made Slayer what it is&quot;. The album was initially to feature material from classic heavy metal artists such as Judas Priest, UFO and Deep Purple. However, after several rehearsals &quot;things didn&#x27;t pan out&quot; according to King, so the band instead elected to cover punk songs.

Slayer considered covering 1960s psychedelic rock band the Doors as they were an influence to vocalist and bassist Tom Araya. When asked which track they considered recording, Araya responded, &quot;Maybe &#x27;When the Music&#x27;s Over&#x27;, &#x27;Five to One&#x27;, something like that.&quot; A cover of Black Flag&#x27;s &quot;Rise Above&quot; was suggested by Rubin, although was shelved after the band was not sure how to arrange it musically.

Guitarist Jeff Hanneman had written four unreleased songs in 1984–1985 while in the side project Pap Smear with Slayer drummer Dave Lombardo and Suicidal Tendencies guitarist Rocky George. The band chose the best two, namely &quot;Ddamm (Drunk Drivers Against Mad Mothers)&quot; and &quot;Can&#x27;t Stand You&quot;. &quot;Gemini&quot; was written by King and Araya several months before entering the recording studio. King asserts it is the only Slayer song on the album. The song begins as a sludge/doom number, before becoming a more typical Slayer song.

The band&#x27;s cover of Minor Threat&#x27;s &quot;Guilty of Being White&quot; raised questions about a possible message of white supremacy. The controversy involved the changing of the refrain &quot;guilty of being white&quot; to &quot;guilty of being right&quot;, at the song&#x27;s ending. This incensed Minor Threat frontman Ian MacKaye, who stated &quot;that is so offensive to me&quot;. King said the lyric was altered for &quot;tongue-in-cheek&quot; humor, saying that the band thought racism was &quot;ridiculous&quot; at the time.

==Reception==

&quot;Undisputed Attitude&quot; was released on May 28, 1996, and peaked at number 34 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 album chart. Paul Kott of AllMusic commented that &quot;&quot;Undisputed Attitude&quot;, while not perfect, is a fitting tribute to the bands that inspired Slayer to break from the traditional metal mould.&quot; Sandy Masuo of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; reasoned: &quot;some punk purists will undoubtedly cry foul, but when the dust settles it&#x27;s hard to argue with Slayer&#x27;s mettle.&quot; &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; Chuck Eddy dubbed Slayer&#x27;s cover interpretations &quot;generic hardcore-punk&quot;, and observed that the group &quot;seem to think that playing as fast and rigidly as possible makes for harder rock -- but it&#x27;s just lazy shtick.&quot;

Reviewing 2003 Slayer box set &quot;Soundtrack to the Apocalypse&quot;, Adrien Begrand of PopMatters dismissed the effort as &quot;easily the weakest album in the Slayer catalogue&quot;, while &quot;Westword Online&quot; Michael Roberts dubbed the record their &quot;biggest mistake.&quot; Araya has since stated that he &quot;knew it wouldn&#x27;t do very well, people want to hear Slayer! The real die-hards picked up on it and that was expected.&quot;

==Track listing==


==Personnel==
===Slayer===
* Tom Araya – bass, vocals
* Kerry King – guitars
* Jeff Hanneman – guitars
* Paul Bostaph – drums

===Production and artwork===
* Dave Sardy – producer, mixing
* Rick Rubin – executive producer
* Greg Gordon – engineer
* Ralph Cacciurri; Bryan Davis; Jim Giddens; Bill Smith – assistant engineers
* Stephen Marcussen – mastering
* Wes Benscoter – artwork, illustrations
* Dennis Keeley – photography
* Michael Lavine – front cover photo, photography
* Dirk Walter – art direction, design

==Charts==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="35" end="47" title="studio album" label="studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="60" end="72" title="thrash metal" label="thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="78" end="84" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q466649" start="115" end="134" title="American Recordings (US)" label="American Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="184" end="193" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="198" end="211" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q299122" start="269" end="282" title="Jeff Hanneman" label="Jeff Hanneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q208767" start="471" end="482" title="the Stooges" label="the Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q81509" start="484" end="496" title="Minor Threat" label="Minor Threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003617" start="498" end="506" title="T.S.O.L." label="T.S.O.L."/>
<link wikidata="Q500350" start="508" end="514" title="Dirty Rotten Imbeciles" label="D.R.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q3700210" start="516" end="520" title="D.I. (band)" label="D.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q3714849" start="522" end="530" title="Dr. Know (band)" label="Dr. Know"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103808" start="536" end="548" title="Verbal Abuse" label="Verbal Abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="708" end="736" title="Billboard 200" label="US &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818623" start="801" end="816" title="Capitol Studios" label="Capitol Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="820" end="831" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q326604" start="837" end="847" title="Dave Sardy" label="Dave Sardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q474960" start="870" end="884" title="Reign in Blood" label="Reign in Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q587361" start="900" end="910" title="Rick Rubin" label="Rick Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q297210" start="1017" end="1027" title="Kerry King" label="Kerry King"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="1194" end="1205" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q83468" start="1222" end="1234" title="Judas Priest" label="Judas Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q251657" start="1236" end="1239" title="UFO (band)" label="UFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="1244" end="1255" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="1432" end="1448" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q45354" start="1454" end="1463" title="the Doors" label="the Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q312292" start="1514" end="1523" title="Tom Araya" label="Tom Araya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703159" start="1610" end="1636" title="When the Music&amp;#x27;s Over" label="When the Music&amp;#x27;s Over"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407555" start="1650" end="1661" title="Five to One" label="Five to One"/>
<link wikidata="Q464476" start="1707" end="1717" title="Black Flag (band)" label="Black Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q299122" start="1861" end="1874" title="Jeff Hanneman" label="Jeff Hanneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q312336" start="1978" end="1991" title="Dave Lombardo" label="Dave Lombardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q899341" start="1996" end="2015" title="Suicidal Tendencies" label="Suicidal Tendencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3939831" start="2026" end="2038" title="Rocky George" label="Rocky George"/>
<link wikidata="Q720959" start="2345" end="2351" title="sludge metal" label="sludge"/>
<link wikidata="Q186170" start="2352" end="2356" title="doom metal" label="doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q81509" start="2435" end="2447" title="Minor Threat" label="Minor Threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="2534" end="2549" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q455545" start="2739" end="2750" title="Ian MacKaye" label="Ian MacKaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993049" start="2845" end="2860" title="tongue-in-cheek" label="tongue-in-cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="3059" end="3084" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="3111" end="3119" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="3318" end="3331" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="3488" end="3508" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q302353" start="3797" end="3825" title="Soundtrack to the Apocalypse" label="Soundtrack to the Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322364" start="3851" end="3861" title="PopMatters" label="PopMatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q312292" start="4266" end="4275" title="Tom Araya" label="Tom Araya"/>
<link wikidata="Q297210" start="4293" end="4303" title="Kerry King" label="Kerry King"/>
<link wikidata="Q299122" start="4316" end="4329" title="Jeff Hanneman" label="Jeff Hanneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q202022" start="4342" end="4354" title="Paul Bostaph" label="Paul Bostaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="4408" end="4416" title="Record producer" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="4418" end="4424" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q587361" start="4427" end="4437" title="Rick Rubin" label="Rick Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053574" start="4440" end="4458" title="executive producer" label="executive producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="4475" end="4483" title="Audio engineering" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="4584" end="4593" title="Audio mastering" label="mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983640" start="4596" end="4609" title="Wes Benscoter" label="Wes Benscoter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277929" wikidata="Q953945" url="?curid=277929" title="Slang (album)">
<text>Slang is the sixth studio album by English rock band Def Leppard, released on 14 May 1996. The album marked a musical departure from their signature sound; it was produced by the band with Pete Woodroffe and was their first album since 1980 without involvement by Robert John &quot;Mutt&quot; Lange. &quot;Slang&quot; is the first album with new material to feature new guitarist Vivian Campbell (Campbell had previously played on the B-side collection &quot;Retro Active&quot; in 1993 and on the new song on &quot;&quot; a year earlier). It charted at number 14 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and number 5 on the UK Albums Chart. It is also the only Def Leppard album that does not feature their recognisable font logo on the album cover, though all its singles still bore the classic logo.

==Overview==
Between the releases of &quot;Retro Active&quot; and &quot;Slang&quot;, Def Leppard endured hardships including guitarist Phil Collen&#x27;s divorce from actress Jacqueline Collen, bassist Rick Savage&#x27;s battle with Bell&#x27;s palsy and the death of his father, and the arrests of both drummer Rick Allen and lead singer Joe Elliott for spousal abuse and assault, respectively. Though the band says &quot;Adrenalize&quot; was recorded during a bleaker time, the absence of Mutt Lange (for the first time on a Def Leppard album since 1980) made it possible for the band to show what they were really feeling. Said Elliott, &quot;There was a period with Mutt where if you came out with anything slightly negative, it was &#x27;Fuck it!&#x27; and it was gone!&quot; Collen continued: &quot;We&#x27;ve all got personal things that have happened during the recording of &quot;Slang&quot;, and we&#x27;ve just ploughed on and some of it has come out on the record.&quot;

Doing without Lange&#x27;s services, the band changed another habit by recording together, in a townhouse in Marbella, Spain. &quot;Slang&quot; would feature less production in favour of a more organic sound, catalysed by Allen&#x27;s reversion to a semi-acoustic drum kit. &quot;We&#x27;d got so sick of recording the old way. We didn&#x27;t want to do it any more. We wanted the music to be more personalised and let the character of the individuals to come out,&quot; explained Savage.

&quot;We knew we couldn&#x27;t make a typical Def Leppard album in the mid-1990s,&quot; said Vivian Campbell. &quot;Grunge was very much happening and our stuff was anathema at the time… Personally, I think we could have bolstered the songs with a little more of that Def Lep fairy dust… but instead we went, &#x27;No, let&#x27;s keep it raw: no backing vocals; let&#x27;s not do that part because it&#x27;s too melodic; let&#x27;s be more monotone… At least it gave us the chance to grow up a little. We live in a state of arrested development in this band, singing songs like &#x27;Let&#x27;s Get Rocked&#x27;. So we did get to write some grown-up lyrics. And we were going through a lot of shit at that time: Sav&#x27;s dad died on the eve of the first recording day; both Joe and Phil were going through divorces… So it gave us an opportunity to write lyrics that reflected the reality of our lives.&quot;

Songs such as &quot;Turn to Dust&quot; introduced sarangi and other instrumentation atypical for the band. The lyrical content featured a darker and more introspective turn for the most part, with lighter fare restricted to the Prince-influenced &quot;Slang&quot;.

&quot;Slang&quot; was the first Leppard album to fail to achieve platinum sales in the US. Elsewhere, it performed better: it placed four singles on the UK charts, and went platinum in Canada. On the supporting tour the band performed for the first time in Southeast Asia, South Africa and South America. Only the album&#x27;s title track has been played live after the Slang World Tour of 1996 to 1997 with it being performed regularly in the early 2000&#x27;s and occasionally after, mostly recently during their 2023 performance at The Leadmill in Sheffield.

A limited edition release included a six-track bonus disc, &quot;Acoustic in Singapore&quot;, recorded live in October 1995.

===Deluxe edition===
On 22 November 2011, Collen revealed in an interview with the &quot;Birmingham Express And Star&quot; newspaper that the band would plan to reissue &quot;Slang&quot; with extra tracks. He stated the band &quot;...did have a lot of songs when we recorded, different versions, songs that never quite got finished.&quot; On 26 December 2011, Campbell gave an update on the reissue while speaking on his Facebook page in response to fan questions about Christmas songs. &quot;We did once record a song called &quot;Heavy Metal Christmas&quot; during the &quot;Slang&quot; sessions - tongues very firmly in cheeks! It was actually a proper (and rather good!) song but was lacking lyrics - hence the goof-off title. It&#x27;ll likely see the light of day when we re-release &quot;Slang&quot; soon. Some unheard stuff, too, as far as I know.&quot;

On 18 January 2012, Campbell mentioned on his Facebook that &quot;Ownership of &quot;Slang&quot; masters (and all out-takes) revert to us later this year, so there&#x27;s a good chance that we&#x27;ll re-release with bonus material.&quot;

Elliott confirmed on his 25 August 2012 Planet Rock radio show that &quot;...in a few months time we are re-releasing &quot;Slang&quot; as a double vinyl, a double CD with loads and loads of different mixes, bonus tracks and all sorts of stuff.&quot; This was followed by Elliott playing the band&#x27;s 1999 &quot;Euphoria&quot; b-side &#x27;Burnout&#x27; (first released on the &quot;Goodbye&quot; CD single) at the end of the show and revealing it had been recorded during the 1995/1996 &quot;Slang&quot; sessions. The singer described it as &quot;...a little teaser&quot;, implying that the song may be included on the re-issue.

On 21 January 2014, it was announced on Def Leppard&#x27;s Twitter page that &quot;Slang&quot; will be reissued on 11 February 2014. The album included 19 additional tracks, made up of various early versions of songs on the original, as well as previously unreleased material.

As of 2023, Slang remains the only album in Def Leppard&#x27;s discography to not receive a re-release on vinyl outside of its inclusion in the &quot;Volume 2&quot; boxset in 2019, even after other albums from the 1990s such as &quot;Adrenalize&quot;, &quot;Retro Active&quot; and &quot;Euphoria&quot; were reissued in the preceding year.

==Reception==

&quot;Slang&quot; received mixed reviews. Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic rated the album three out of five, writing that the band&#x27;s change in their approach with &quot;Slang&quot; was &quot;apparent and welcome -- Def Leppard hasn&#x27;t sounded so immediate since &quot;Pyromania&quot;.&quot; He further adds that the band &quot;expand their musical vocabulary slightly, working elements of R&amp;B and funk into the rhythms.&quot; Erlewine concludes that &quot;&quot;Slang&quot; would have been even better if they had come up with a set of hooks that sounded as alive as their performance, but the album is a much-needed return to form for the group.&quot;

Conversely, Sputnik Music was more critical of the album, rating it two and a half out of five. They criticized &quot;Slang&quot;&#x27;s seeming lack of direction and how &quot;the veteran Sheffield outfit (alongside new co-producer Pete Woodroffe) decide to throw absolutely everything at the wall to see what sticks.&quot; They further added that &quot;in progressing outside of their comfort zone, their limitations have become a little too apparent.&quot; Sputnik Music was, however, more positive towards &quot;All I Want is Everything&quot;, &quot;Work It Out&quot;, &quot;Breath a Sigh&quot; and &quot;Deliver Me&quot;, deeming them to be &quot;a solid and workmanlike mid-album quartet of tracks which make the album passable.&quot; They concluded that &quot;Slang&quot; &quot;may be a passable release (if only just), but it leaves Def Leppard’s future very much up in the air.&quot;
&quot;The whole thing is potty,&quot; David Quantick wrote in &quot;Q&quot;, &quot;but in a supple and melodic way – even the ballads lack the usual Def Leppard sense of having been written for lead-lined hippos to sing. &quot;Slang&quot; is the sound of a band doing something fast and interesting, at the exact point in their lives when most bands are taking up golf and inhaling the contents of aquariums in country manors.&quot; &quot;Q&quot; later included the album among its &#x27;best of 1996&#x27;, describing it as &quot;the work of a huge band, aware that the straight-ahead rock they once plied so enthusiastically is dead and who have embraced the new breed with élan.&quot;

In rankings of the band&#x27;s albums, it was ranked sixth by Chad Childers of &quot;Loudwire&quot;, and eighth by Nick DeRiso of &quot;Ultimate Classic Rock&quot;. Childers called it one of the more polarising Def Leppard albums, in which &quot;[the] band pushed the boundaries of their sound further than ever, experimenting with more industrial and electronic sounds.&quot; He added that while &quot;Slang&quot; was largely overlooked upon release, it has &quot;aged quite well, with the catchy title track, the electronic &#x27;All I Want Is Everything&#x27; and the snappy ballad &#x27;Breathe a Sigh&#x27; among the standout tracks. The album showed the group willing to take risks and venture beyond the &quot;Mutt&quot;-mastered sound that had shot them to fame.&quot; DeRiso called it superior to how it was received in 1996, showcasing the group &quot;in an introspective, guitar-focused mood.&quot; He continued, &quot;Critics mocked them for &#x27;going grunge,&#x27; and fans clearly weren&#x27;t interested. (&quot;Slang&quot; became their first album not to go at least platinum.) But there&#x27;s a welcome industrial crunch to &#x27;Truth?,&#x27; and &#x27;Work It Out&#x27; sounds like a cool hat tip to Rush. Give them credit for trying something new.&quot;

==Track listing==



==Personnel==
===Def Leppard===
* Joe Elliott – lead vocals (additional guitar &amp; bass on &quot;Pearl of Euphoria&quot;)
* Phil Collen – guitars, mandolin, backing vocals
* Vivian Campbell – guitars, dulcimer, backing vocals
* Rick Savage – bass, acoustic guitars, synth bass, backing vocals
* Rick Allen – drums, percussion

===Additional musicians===
* Gloria Flores – Spanish voice on &quot;Slang&quot;
* Ram Narayan – intro sarangi sample on &quot;Turn to Dust&quot;
* Craig Pruess – string and percussion arranging and conducting on &quot;Turn to Dust&quot;
* Av Singh – dohl on &quot;Turn to Dust&quot;
* Shyam Vatish – outro sarangi sample on &quot;Turn to Dust&quot;
* Pete Woodroffe – piano on &quot;Blood Runs Cold&quot;, keyboard strings on &quot;Where Does Love Go When It Dies&quot;
* Gavyn Wright – string leader on &quot;Turn to Dust&quot;

===Production===
* Pete Woodroffe – producer, engineer, mixing
* Def Leppard – producer
* Ger McDonnell – engineer, programming on &quot;Truth?&quot;
* Matt Pakucko – mixing assistant
* Bob Ludwig – mastering
* Brad Buxer, Bobby Brooks – programming on &quot;Slang&quot; and &quot;Breathe a Sigh&quot;
* Hugh Drumm – programming on &quot;Truth?&quot;
* Jeff Murray – art direction
* Jager di Paola – design
* Cynthia Levine, Jeff Rooney – photography

==Charts==


== Certifications ==


==References==

==Notes==
*

==External links==
* (Deluxe Edition)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="43" end="47" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q182890" start="53" end="64" title="Def Leppard" label="Def Leppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q547660" start="264" end="298" title="Robert John &amp;quot;Mutt&amp;quot; Lange" label="Robert John &amp;quot;Mutt&amp;quot; Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q366758" start="380" end="395" title="Vivian Campbell" label="Vivian Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508003" start="459" end="471" title="Retro Active" label="Retro Active"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="570" end="595" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="616" end="631" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508003" start="838" end="850" title="Retro Active" label="Retro Active"/>
<link wikidata="Q511488" start="930" end="941" title="Phil Collen" label="Phil Collen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143956" start="997" end="1008" title="Rick Savage" label="Rick Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135338" start="1028" end="1045" title="Bell&amp;#x27;s palsy" label="Bell&amp;#x27;s palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q323356" start="1107" end="1117" title="Rick Allen (drummer)" label="Rick Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q541573" start="1134" end="1145" title="Joe Elliott" label="Joe Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q366830" start="1218" end="1228" title="Adrenalize" label="Adrenalize"/>
<link wikidata="Q484799" start="1888" end="1896" title="Marbella" label="Marbella"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1898" end="1903" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q366758" start="2362" end="2377" title="Vivian Campbell" label="Vivian Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="2385" end="2391" title="Grunge" label="Grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795924" start="2793" end="2813" title="arrested development" label="arrested development"/>
<link wikidata="Q194812" start="2853" end="2874" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Get Rocked" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Get Rocked"/>
<link wikidata="Q608650" start="3230" end="3237" title="sarangi" label="sarangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="3408" end="3414" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="4556" end="4564" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q964726" start="5553" end="5561" title="Euphoria (Def Leppard album)" label="Euphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583218" start="5624" end="5631" title="Goodbye (Def Leppard song)" label="Goodbye"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="5931" end="5938" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q366830" start="6384" end="6394" title="Adrenalize" label="Adrenalize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508003" start="6408" end="6420" title="Retro Active" label="Retro Active"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="6547" end="6570" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="6574" end="6582" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q845281" start="6786" end="6795" title="Pyromania (album)" label="Pyromania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238772" start="8107" end="8121" title="David Quantick" label="David Quantick"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="8137" end="8138" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="8508" end="8509" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686082" start="8843" end="8851" title="Loudwire" label="Loudwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830269" start="8894" end="8915" title="Ultimate Classic Rock" label="Ultimate Classic Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q487965" start="9095" end="9105" title="industrial music" label="industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="9110" end="9120" title="electronic music" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="9980" end="9984" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q541573" start="10091" end="10102" title="Joe Elliott" label="Joe Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045845" start="10105" end="10116" title="lead vocalist" label="lead vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="10142" end="10146" title="bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q511488" start="10183" end="10194" title="Phil Collen" label="Phil Collen"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="10206" end="10214" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q366758" start="10233" end="10248" title="Vivian Campbell" label="Vivian Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145031" start="10260" end="10268" title="Appalachian dulcimer" label="dulcimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143956" start="10287" end="10298" title="Rick Savage" label="Rick Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q323356" start="10354" end="10364" title="Rick Allen (drummer)" label="Rick Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="10367" end="10372" title="Drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="10374" end="10384" title="percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41074" start="10468" end="10479" title="Ram Narayan" label="Ram Narayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q608650" start="10488" end="10495" title="sarangi" label="sarangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181344" start="10533" end="10545" title="Craig Pruess" label="Craig Pruess"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277931" wikidata="Q226351" url="?curid=277931" title="Buchanan County">
<text>Buchanan County is the name of three current counties in the United States of America, each named for American statesman James Buchanan during his lifetime:

*Buchanan County, Iowa 
*Buchanan County, Missouri 
*Buchanan County, Virginia 

It is also the name of one disestablished county, also named for him, Buchanan County, Minnesota.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="121" end="135" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q115396" start="159" end="180" title="Buchanan County, Iowa" label="Buchanan County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q484629" start="183" end="208" title="Buchanan County, Missouri" label="Buchanan County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q495181" start="211" end="236" title="Buchanan County, Virginia" label="Buchanan County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982569" start="309" end="335" title="Buchanan County, Minnesota" label="Buchanan County, Minnesota"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277932" wikidata="Q231193" url="?curid=277932" title="Buchanan">
<text>Buchanan may refer to:
==People==
* Buchanan (surname)

== Places ==
===Antarctica===
* Buchanan Point, Laurie Island

===Australia===
* Buchanan, New South Wales
* Buchanan, Northern Territory, a locality
* Buchanan, South Australia, a locality

===Canada===
* Buchanan, Saskatchewan
* Rural Municipality of Buchanan No. 304, Saskatchewan

=== Liberia ===
* Buchanan, Liberia, a large coastal town

===United Kingdom===
* Buchanan, Stirling, Scotland

===United States===
*Buchanan, Tuolumne County, California, unincorporated community
* Fort Buchanan, Kansas, a former town and pioneer fort
* Buchanan, Georgia, city 
* Buchanan, Iowa, unincorporated community 
* Buchanan, Michigan, city
* Buchanan, New York, village
* Buchanan, North Dakota, city
* Buchanan, Oregon, unincorporated community
* Fort Buchanan, Puerto Rico, a US Army installation
* Buchanan, Tennessee
* Buchanan, Texas, former community
* Buchanan, Virginia, town
* Buchanan, Wisconsin, town
* Buchanan Township, Michigan
* Fort Buchanan, Arizona, former US Army base

== Music ==

* Buchanan (band), an Australian alternative rock band

== Other uses ==

* Clan Buchanan
* Buchanan (car), an Australian carmaker
* Buchanan (horse), an American Thoroughbred racehorse, the winner of the 1884 Kentucky Derby
* Buchanan High School (Clovis, California), a high school in Clovis, California, USA
* Buchanan High School, North Lanarkshire, a high school in Coatbridge, North Lanarkshire, Scotland
* Buchanan&#x27;s, a brand of Scotch whisky
* &quot;Buchanan v. Warley&quot;, a 1917 United States Supreme Court case.

== See also ==

* Buchanan County (disambiguation)
* Buchanan Valley (disambiguation)
* Buchannon (disambiguation)
* Buckhannon
* Justice Buchanan (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q231193" start="0" end="8" title="Buchanan" label="Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15616677" start="36" end="54" title="Buchanan (surname)" label="Buchanan (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q375906" start="88" end="102" title="Buchanan Point" label="Buchanan Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982548" start="137" end="162" title="Buchanan, New South Wales" label="Buchanan, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q31238380" start="165" end="193" title="Buchanan, Northern Territory" label="Buchanan, Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q28428463" start="208" end="233" title="Buchanan, South Australia" label="Buchanan, South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999402" start="262" end="284" title="Buchanan, Saskatchewan" label="Buchanan, Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982582" start="287" end="325" title="Rural Municipality of Buchanan No. 304" label="Rural Municipality of Buchanan No. 304"/>
<link wikidata="Q269222" start="359" end="376" title="Buchanan, Liberia" label="Buchanan, Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982551" start="423" end="441" title="Buchanan, Stirling" label="Buchanan, Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150248" start="540" end="561" title="Fort Buchanan, Kansas" label="Fort Buchanan, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2854542" start="596" end="613" title="Buchanan, Georgia" label="Buchanan, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959486" start="623" end="637" title="Buchanan, Iowa" label="Buchanan, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516125" start="667" end="685" title="Buchanan, Michigan" label="Buchanan, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q997860" start="694" end="712" title="Buchanan, New York" label="Buchanan, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442483" start="724" end="746" title="Buchanan, North Dakota" label="Buchanan, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982550" start="755" end="771" title="Buchanan, Oregon" label="Buchanan, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470861" start="800" end="826" title="Fort Buchanan, Puerto Rico" label="Fort Buchanan, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982559" start="853" end="872" title="Buchanan, Tennessee" label="Buchanan, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="875" end="890" title="Buchanan, Texas" label="Buchanan, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376110" start="911" end="929" title="Buchanan, Virginia" label="Buchanan, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657661" start="938" end="957" title="Buchanan, Wisconsin" label="Buchanan, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982598" start="966" end="993" title="Buchanan Township, Michigan" label="Buchanan Township, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q376168" start="996" end="1018" title="Fort Buchanan, Arizona" label="Fort Buchanan, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982557" start="1056" end="1071" title="Buchanan (band)" label="Buchanan (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q913027" start="1130" end="1143" title="Clan Buchanan" label="Clan Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q997884" start="1146" end="1160" title="Buchanan (car)" label="Buchanan (car)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982561" start="1187" end="1203" title="Buchanan (horse)" label="Buchanan (horse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982578" start="1281" end="1322" title="Buchanan High School (Clovis, California)" label="Buchanan High School (Clovis, California)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731646" start="1367" end="1406" title="Buchanan High School, North Lanarkshire" label="Buchanan High School, North Lanarkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982543" start="1467" end="1482" title="Buchanan&amp;#x27;s" label="Buchanan&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982600" start="1517" end="1535" title="Buchanan v. Warley" label="Buchanan v. Warley"/>
<link wikidata="Q226351" start="1603" end="1635" title="Buchanan County (disambiguation)" label="Buchanan County (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982591" start="1638" end="1670" title="Buchanan Valley (disambiguation)" label="Buchanan Valley (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131921077" start="1673" end="1699" title="Buchannon (disambiguation)" label="Buchannon (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q600504" start="1702" end="1712" title="Buckhannon" label="Buckhannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30253270" start="1715" end="1748" title="Justice Buchanan (disambiguation)" label="Justice Buchanan (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277933" wikidata="Q686720" url="?curid=277933" title="Musikverein">
<text>The &#x27; ( or ; ), commonly shortened to &#x27;, is a concert hall in Vienna, Austria, which is located in the Innere Stadt district. The building opened in 1870 and is the home of the Vienna Philharmonic orchestra.

The acoustics of the building&#x27;s &#x27;Great Hall&#x27; () have earned it recognition alongside other prominent concert halls, such as the Konzerthaus in Berlin, the Concertgebouw in Amsterdam and Symphony Hall in Boston. With the exception of Boston&#x27;s Symphony Hall, none of these halls was built in the modern era with the application of architectural acoustics, and all share a long, tall and narrow shoebox shape.

==Building==

The &#x27;s main entrance is situated on Musikvereinsplatz, between Karlsplatz and . The building is located behind the Hotel Imperial that fronts on Kärntner Ring, which is part of the Vienna Ring Road (Ringstraße). It was erected as the new concert hall run by the Society of Friends of Music in Vienna, on a piece of land provided by Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria in 1863.

The plans were designed by Danish architect Theophil Hansen in the Neoclassical style of an ancient Greek temple, including a concert hall and a smaller chamber music hall. The building was inaugurated on 6 January 1870. A major donor was Nikolaus Dumba, an industrialist and liberal politician of Aromanian Greek - Albanian (Voskopoja) descent, whose name was given by the Austrian government to a small street () near the .

==The Golden Hall==

The Great Hall (&quot;Großer Musikvereinssaal&quot;), also called the Golden Hall (&quot;Goldener Saal&quot;), is about long, wide, and high. It has 1,744 seats and standing room for 300. The Scandal Concert of 1913 was given there, and it is the venue for the annual Vienna New Year&#x27;s Concert.

The Great Hall&#x27;s lively acoustics are primarily based on Hansen&#x27;s intuition, as he could not rely on any studies on architectural acoustics. The room&#x27;s rectangular shape and proportions, its boxes and sculptures allow early and numerous sound reflections.

The Great Hall originally included a historic pipe organ built by Friedrich Ladegast. Its first organ recital was held by Anton Bruckner in 1872. The present-day instrument was originally installed in 1907 by the Austrian firm of Rieger Orgelbau, highly esteemed by musicians such as Franz Schmidt or Marcel Dupré, and rebuilt in 2011.

In 2001, a renovation program began. Several new rehearsal halls were installed in the basement.
===Gallery===
==Halls==

The names of the six halls refer to gold, Johannes Brahms, glass, metal, stone and wood respectively.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11302994" start="56" end="68" title="concert hall" label="concert hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="72" end="78" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q267329" start="113" end="125" title="Innere Stadt" label="Innere Stadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q154685" start="187" end="206" title="Vienna Philharmonic" label="Vienna Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q702548" start="362" end="373" title="Konzerthaus Berlin" label="Konzerthaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q849957" start="389" end="402" title="Concertgebouw, Amsterdam" label="Concertgebouw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045309" start="420" end="433" title="Symphony Hall, Boston" label="Symphony Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500024" start="631" end="638" title="Shoebox style" label="shoebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q700753" start="729" end="739" title="Karlsplatz" label="Karlsplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630919" start="781" end="795" title="Hotel Imperial" label="Hotel Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q46232" start="847" end="863" title="Vienna Ring Road" label="Vienna Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q694323" start="928" end="965" title="Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde" label="Society of Friends of Music in Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="1006" end="1031" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Joseph I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q78638" start="1086" end="1101" title="Theophil Hansen" label="Theophil Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="1109" end="1121" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q267596" start="1134" end="1154" title="ancient Greek temple" label="ancient Greek temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="1195" end="1208" title="chamber music" label="chamber music"/>
<link wikidata="Q113818" start="1281" end="1295" title="Nikolaus Dumba" label="Nikolaus Dumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q11916330" start="1340" end="1378" title="Aromanians in Greece" label="Aromanian Greek - Albanian (Voskopoja)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291501" start="1682" end="1697" title="Skandalkonzert" label="Scandal Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q339152" start="1758" end="1788" title="Vienna New Year&amp;#x27;s Concert" label="Vienna New Year&amp;#x27;s Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305951" start="1917" end="1940" title="architectural acoustics" label="architectural acoustics"/>
<link wikidata="Q165939" start="2049" end="2060" title="Reflection (physics)" label="reflections"/>
<link wikidata="Q281460" start="2109" end="2119" title="pipe organ" label="pipe organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q71482" start="2129" end="2147" title="Friedrich Ladegast" label="Friedrich Ladegast"/>
<link wikidata="Q81752" start="2185" end="2199" title="Anton Bruckner" label="Anton Bruckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360672" start="2293" end="2308" title="Rieger Orgelbau" label="Rieger Orgelbau"/>
<link wikidata="Q434601" start="2347" end="2360" title="Franz Schmidt (composer)" label="Franz Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q315879" start="2364" end="2376" title="Marcel Dupré" label="Marcel Dupré"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="2564" end="2579" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Johannes Brahms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277934" wikidata="Q5295821" url="?curid=277934" title="Dongas road protest group">
<text>The Dongas Tribe was a collection of road protesters and travellers in England, noted for their occupation of Twyford Down outside Winchester, Hampshire. The name &quot;Dongas&quot; comes from the Matabele word for &quot;gully&quot;, given by Winchester locals to the deep drovers&#x27; tracks on Twyford Down.

John Vidal, writing in &quot;The Guardian&quot; in 2012, said of The Dongas that &quot;the 15-20 urban youths who camped out to try to defend Twyford Down in 1992 are recognised to have fired up British environmental protest and kickstarted a major shift in green attitudes in both government and the public.&quot;

==History==
The Twyford Down protest was a protest against the M3 motorway extension which destroyed some rich ecological sites, one of the very few habitats of the Chalkhill Blue butterfly and six species of rare orchid, and ancient monuments there (SSSI and Scheduled Ancient Monument). The Conservative government was planning to construct a new roadway through the area.

Following &quot;Yellow Wednesday&quot;, when hordes of police and security guards invaded the camp to bulldoze the area, the Dongas Tribe left Twyford Down for Bramdean Common. Earth First!, who had been heavily involved in the setting up and support of the camp and actions, continued the protests and restarted a camp in Plague Pits Valley.

They constituted about twenty people. Of them, seven were sent to prison in 1993 for breaking an injunction. In one incident, around fifty protesters chained themselves to a bridge, leading to the arrest of some. At least one protester (Paul Kingsnorth) subsequently sued the police and received a $5000 settlement.

Some of the &#x27;original Dongas&#x27; (as they became called) of the mid-1990s were musicians who made a living by busking, sometimes using traditional music from Brittany.

The first child born in the Dongas tribe, to Rosie Lambert, was named May Brigit &quot;Donga&quot; Lambert and was born on 1 May 1994.

In late 2012, original members of the Dongas, as well as hundreds of others, returned to the hillside on the protest&#x27;s 20th anniversary. They expressed warnings about the government&#x27;s more than forty new road plans.

== Influence ==
The Dongas road protests inspired a major change in green attitudes among both the public and the government, radicalizing a generation of British youth. Among them, Paul Kingsnorth of The Dark Mountain Project credits his arrest at Twyford Down as his impetus for engaging in further protests.

==See also==
*Direct Action
*Rebecca Lush

==References==
==Further reading==
* Alun Howkins (2002), &quot;From Diggers to Dongas: the Land in English Radicalism, 1649–2000.&quot; &quot;History Workshop Journal&quot; 54(1), pp. 1–23.

==External links==
*Dongas Tribe musical field recordings</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5295821" start="4" end="16" title="Dongas road protest group" label="Dongas Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339498" start="37" end="52" title="Road protest in the United Kingdom" label="road protesters"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="71" end="78" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859527" start="110" end="122" title="Twyford Down" label="Twyford Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="131" end="141" title="Winchester, England" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="143" end="152" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q35613" start="197" end="205" title="Northern Ndebele language" label="Matabele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785279" start="691" end="702" title="M3 motorway (Great Britain)" label="M3 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q15768393" start="793" end="817" title="Chalkhill Blue" label="Chalkhill Blue butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="879" end="883" title="Site of Special Scientific Interest" label="SSSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q219538" start="888" end="914" title="Scheduled monument" label="Scheduled Ancient Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527859" start="1059" end="1065" title="Policing in the United Kingdom" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q15204153" start="1164" end="1179" title="Bramdean Common" label="Bramdean Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277639" start="1181" end="1193" title="Earth First!" label="Earth First!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151792" start="1585" end="1600" title="Paul Kingsnorth" label="Paul Kingsnorth"/>
<link wikidata="Q823571" start="1782" end="1789" title="busking" label="busking"/>
<link wikidata="Q910606" start="1807" end="1838" title="Music of Brittany" label="traditional music from Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151792" start="2386" end="2401" title="Paul Kingsnorth" label="Paul Kingsnorth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151792" start="2405" end="2430" title="The Dark Mountain Project" label="The Dark Mountain Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q506259" start="2530" end="2543" title="Direct Action" label="Direct Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301819" start="2545" end="2557" title="Rebecca Lush" label="Rebecca Lush"/>
<link wikidata="Q59132481" start="2596" end="2608" title="Alun Howkins" label="Alun Howkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774776" start="2702" end="2726" title="History Workshop Journal" label="History Workshop Journal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277935" wikidata="Q521145" url="?curid=277935" title="Mario Cuomo">
<text>Mario Matthew Cuomo ( , ; June 15, 1932 – January 1, 2015) was an American lawyer and politician who served as the 52nd governor of New York for three terms, from 1983 to 1994. A member of the Democratic Party, Cuomo previously served as the lieutenant governor of New York from 1979 to 1982 and the secretary of state of New York from 1975 to 1978. He was the father of former New York governor Andrew Cuomo and NewsNation anchor Christopher Cuomo.

Cuomo was known for his liberal views and public speeches, particularly his keynote speech address at the 1984 Democratic National Convention in which he sharply criticized the policies of the Reagan administration, saying, &quot;Mr. President, you ought to know that this nation is more a ″&quot;Tale of Two Cities&quot;″ than it is just a shining &#x27;city on a hill.&#x27;&quot; He was widely considered a frontrunner for the Democratic nomination for president in both 1988 and 1992, but he ultimately declined to seek the nomination in both instances. His indecisiveness about entering the race led to his being dubbed &quot;Hamlet on the Hudson&quot;.

Cuomo was defeated for a fourth term as governor by George Pataki in the Republican Revolution of 1994. He subsequently retired from politics and joined the New York City law firm of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher.

== Early life and education ==
Cuomo was born in the Briarwood section of the New York City borough of Queens to a family of Italian origin. His grandfather Donato came to the US in 1896. Mario Cuomo&#x27;s father, Andrea Cuomo, was born in New York City in 1901 but in 1904, aged two or three, was taken back to a mountain village outside Salerno, Campania, returning to the United States on his US passport more than two decades later. Andrea Cuomo was from Nocera Superiore, Campania, and his mother—Immacolata Giordano—was from Tramonti, Campania. The family ran Kessler&#x27;s Grocery Store in South Jamaica, Queens. Cuomo attended New York City P.S. 50 and St. John&#x27;s Preparatory School.

Cuomo was a baseball player and while attending St. John&#x27;s University in 1952, he signed as an outfielder with the Pittsburgh Pirates for a $2,000 bonus, which he used to help purchase his wife Matilda&#x27;s engagement ring. Cuomo played for the Brunswick Pirates of the Class D Georgia–Florida League where his teammates included future major leaguer Fred Green; Cuomo attained a .244 batting average and played center field until he was struck in the back of the head by a pitch. Batting helmets were not yet required equipment, and Cuomo&#x27;s injury was severe enough that he was hospitalized for six days.

After his recovery, Cuomo gave up baseball and returned to St. John&#x27;s University, earning his bachelor&#x27;s degree &quot;summa cum laude&quot; in 1953. Deciding on a legal career, Cuomo attended St. John&#x27;s University School of Law and graduated tied for first in his class in 1956. Cuomo clerked for Judge Adrian P. Burke of the New York Court of Appeals. Despite having been a top student, the ethnic prejudice of the time led to his rejection by more than 50 law firms before he was hired by a small but established office in Brooklyn.

During his tenure at the law firm of Comer, Weisbrod, Froeb and Charles, Cuomo represented Fred Trump. Cuomo eventually became a partner at the firm, but stepped down in 1974 to become New York Secretary of State. In 1989, he settled a longstanding lawsuit against his former firm regarding $4 million in legal fees. In addition to practicing law, Cuomo worked as an adjunct professor at St. John&#x27;s University School of Law.

==Early political career==

Cuomo first became widely known in New York City in the late 1960s when he represented &quot;The Corona Fighting 69&quot;, a group of 69 home-owners from the Queens neighborhood of Corona, who were threatened with displacement by the city&#x27;s plan to build a new high school. He later represented another Queens residents group, the Kew Gardens–Forest Hills Committee on Urban Scale, who opposed Samuel J. LeFrak&#x27;s housing proposal adjacent to Willow Lake in Queens. In 1972, Cuomo became known beyond New York City when Mayor John Lindsay appointed him to conduct an inquiry and mediate a dispute over low-income public housing slated for the upper-middle-class neighborhood of Forest Hills. Cuomo described his experience in that dispute in the book &quot;Forest Hills Diary&quot;, and the story was retold by sociologist Richard Sennett in &quot;The Fall of Public Man&quot;.

===New York secretary of state===
In 1974, he ran for Lieutenant Governor of New York on a ticket headed by gubernatorial candidate Howard J. Samuels, and both won the nomination of the Democratic State Committee at the party convention. But their entire ticket, including the nominees for attorney general and U.S. senator was defeated in the Democratic primary election: Samuels by Rep. Hugh Carey of Brooklyn, and Cuomo by state senator Mary Anne Krupsak.

Governor-elect Carey chose to bring Cuomo into his new administration, naming him in December as his choice for Secretary of State of New York. Cuomo was followed as Secretary of State by Basil Paterson.

===New York City mayoral election===

Two years later, Cuomo ran for Mayor of New York City at Carey&#x27;s urging. Incumbent Mayor Abraham Beame was very unpopular and Cuomo was one of five major challengers to Beame in the Democratic primary. In a close and highly fractured election, U.S. Representative Ed Koch finished first with 19.81% of the vote and Cuomo came second with 18.74%. As no candidate cleared 40% of the vote, Koch and Cuomo advanced to a runoff. Koch emerged victorious with 54.94% of the vote to Cuomo&#x27;s 45.06%. Cuomo had received the nomination of the Liberal Party several months previously and was urged to drop out of the race but he contested the general election against Koch and token Republican opposition.

During the mayoral campaign, placards appeared saying: &quot;Vote for Cuomo, not the homo&quot; in reference to rumors about Koch&#x27;s sexuality. Cuomo denied responsibility for this but Koch never forgave him &quot;as he made clear with a pointedly disparaging reference to Mr. Cuomo in a recorded interview with &quot;The New York Times&quot; that was not to be made public until Mr. Koch&#x27;s death&quot;. Cuomo ran on his opposition to the death penalty, which backfired among New Yorkers as crime was very high. Cuomo then went negative with ads that likened Koch to unpopular former mayor John Lindsay. Meanwhile, Koch backers accused Cuomo of antisemitism and pelted Cuomo campaign cars with eggs. Cuomo was also defeated by Koch in the general election, taking 40.97% to Koch&#x27;s 49.99%. The race is discussed in Jonathan Mahler&#x27;s book &quot;Ladies and Gentlemen, the Bronx Is Burning&quot;.

=== New York lieutenant governor ===
In 1978, incumbent lieutenant governor Krupsak declined to seek re-election. She withdrew from the ticket and unsuccessfully challenged Carey in the gubernatorial primary, accusing him of incompetence. Cuomo won the primary for lieutenant governor and was elected alongside Carey in the general election.

== Governor of New York ==

=== Elections ===
In 1982, Carey declined to run for re-election and Cuomo declared his candidacy. He once again faced Ed Koch in the Democratic primary. This time, Koch&#x27;s support for the death penalty backfired and he alienated many voters from outside New York City when, in an interview with &quot;Playboy&quot; magazine, he described the lifestyle of both suburbia and upstate New York as &quot;sterile&quot; and lamented the thought of having to live in &quot;the small town&quot; of Albany as governor, saying it was &quot;a city without a good Chinese restaurant&quot;. Cuomo won the primary by ten points and faced Republican nominee businessman Lewis Lehrman in the general election. With the recession aiding Democratic candidates, Cuomo beat Lehrman 50.91% to 47.48%.

Cuomo actively campaigned for Walter Mondale in the 1984 presidential election, and was named on Mondale&#x27;s list of vice presidential candidates. Geraldine Ferraro was ultimately nominated as his running mate, but Cuomo was chosen to give the keynote speech at the 1984 Democratic National Convention in San Francisco. He vigorously attacked Ronald Reagan&#x27;s record and policies in his &quot;Tale of Two Cities&quot; speech that brought him to national attention, most memorably saying: &quot;There is despair, Mr. President, in the faces that you don&#x27;t see, in the places that you don&#x27;t visit, in your shining city.&quot; He was immediately considered one of the frontrunners for the Democratic nomination for president in 1988 and 1992.

Cuomo was re-elected in 1986 against Republican nominee Andrew P. O&#x27;Rourke by 64.3% to 31.77%. He ruled out the possibility of running in the 1988 presidential election, announcing on February 19, 1987, that he would not run, and then going on to publicly decline draft movements in the wake of Gary Hart&#x27;s withdrawal following the Donna Rice affair.

In the 1990 gubernatorial election, Cuomo was re-elected with 53.17% of the vote to Republican Pierre Andrew Rinfret&#x27;s 21.35% and Conservative Herbert London&#x27;s 20.40%.

When Cuomo was asked if he was planning to run for president in 1992, he said, &quot;I have no plans and no plans to make plans,&quot; but he refused to rule it out. In October 1991, news broke that he was interested in running and was taking advice from consultant Bob Shrum. At the same time, he began working on a budget with the New York State Legislature, and promised not to make any announcements about a presidential run until he had reached an agreement with the Republican-controlled State Senate and the Democratic-controlled State Assembly. Two polls taken in November of the New Hampshire Democratic primary showed him leading the field by at least twenty points, and a poll in December showed him trailing President George H. W. Bush 48% to 43%, having been behind by twenty-eight points two months earlier.

The filing deadline for the New Hampshire primary was on December 20, 1991, and candidates were required to submit a ballot application in person. Cuomo was not able to negotiate a budget agreement with Republicans in the Legislature and on deadline day, time ran out. In a scene later fictionalized in Joe Klein&#x27;s &quot;Primary Colors&quot;, he kept an airplane idling on the tarmac as he pondered abandoning the budget talks in order to fly to New Hampshire and enter the race. Democratic party leaders asked him to run and he prepared two statements, one in case he ran and one in case he did not. He tried to come to a final agreement over the budget, but as he could not, he made an announcement at 3:30 p.m. that day:

Cuomo&#x27;s supporters launched a draft movement and encouraged people to write in his name in the Democratic primary, which was held on February 18, 1992. Cuomo did not discourage it, which many saw as implicit endorsement of the campaign. Cuomo went on to receive 6,577 votes in the primary, 3.92% of the total cast and subsequently asked the draft committee to close down, saying, &quot;I am flattered by their support and impressed by their commitment, but I am also convinced that in fairness to themselves they ought now to end their effort.&quot; The group closed down, but Cuomo refused to rule out joining the primaries later in the year, stating, &quot;I have said more than once that the nomination should go to someone willing and able to campaign for it. I am willing, but because New York&#x27;s budget has not been settled I am not able to campaign for it.&quot; Ultimately, Cuomo did not enter the race and Bill Clinton went on to win the Democratic nomination and the general election. Because of Cuomo&#x27;s refusal to run for national office, despite his popularity, he was referred to as the &quot;Hamlet on the Hudson&quot;.

After Bill Clinton won the Democratic nomination for president in 1992, Cuomo was a candidate for vice president but he refused to be considered and did not make Clinton&#x27;s final shortlist. He was also spoken of as a candidate for nomination to the United States Supreme Court, but when President Clinton was considering nominees during his first term to replace the retiring Byron White, Cuomo stated he was not interested in the office. George Stephanopoulos wrote in 1999 that Clinton came within 15 minutes of nominating Cuomo before the latter pre-emptively rejected the post.

In 1994, Cuomo ran for a fourth term. In this election, Republicans attacked him for the weak economic recovery within the state since the early 1990s recession and the resulting high unemployment as well as his opposition to the death penalty by highlighting the case of Arthur Shawcross, a multiple murderer convicted of manslaughter who was paroled by the state in 1987 and while on release became a serial killer. Republicans were able to associate Shawcross with Cuomo much like William Horton with Michael Dukakis six years earlier. Cuomo was defeated by George Pataki in the 1994 Republican landslide, taking 45.4% of the vote to Pataki&#x27;s 48.8%. Cuomo lost mainly because his support outside of New York City all but vanished; he only carried one county outside the Five Boroughs, Albany County, while also failing to sweep the Five Boroughs unlike his previous three successful runs, losing Staten Island.

Cuomo and fellow Democrat Ann Richards, the governor of Texas who had been defeated in her re-election campaign by George W. Bush, appeared in a series of humorous Super Bowl XXIX television advertisements for the snack food Doritos shortly afterwards, in which they discussed the &quot;sweeping changes&quot; occurring. The changes they were discussing turned out to be the new Doritos packaging.

=== Accomplishments ===

In Cuomo&#x27;s first term as Governor of New York, he produced a balanced budget and earned the highest credit rating over the long term for the State in one decade. His philosophy in leading the state was one of &quot;progressive pragmatism&quot;. Cuomo and the Democratic-controlled House of Representatives (Democrats had over a 3:2 margin in House) was successful in stopping U.S. President Ronald Reagan&#x27;s administration from eliminating &quot;federal income tax deductibility of state, local and property taxes&quot;.

During his second term as governor, Cuomo successfully pushed for the enactment of sweeping fiscal reforms for the State. Comprehensive reform measures were also enacted in governmental ethics for New York State under Cuomo&#x27;s leadership. Cuomo extended New York State&#x27;s economic reach in business globally, contributing to both strengthening and developing it.

Cuomo is also known for beginning the &quot;Decade of the Child&quot; initiative, an effort that included multiple health care and educational strategies to better the lives of children in New York State. Further, in 1988, the &quot;Rebuild NY&quot; Transportation Bond Act was an initiative under Cuomo that was a continuance of efforts to rebuild bridges and roads throughout the State. Cuomo increased assistance to local law enforcement agencies in order to help reduce or eliminate crime; and prison expansion in the State was continued which he is said to have regretted. Under Cuomo, New York State was also the first in the nation to enact seat belt laws.

Cuomo established the Office of the MTA Inspector General (OIG) in 1983, as an independent watchdog for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority. The OIG provides oversight and monitors the activities of the MTA.

Governor Mario and his wife Matilda Cuomo presided over the First New York State Family Support Conference in 1988. His statewide initiatives in developing over 1,000 family support programs are today termed &quot;individual and family support&quot; nationwide and are cited by the National Council on Disability. He was the first governor to support an ecological approach to families which was represented by community integration and community development as the goal of deinstitutionalization.

Healthcare was also an area that Cuomo improved as governor, implementing initiatives that succeeded in reducing costs of prescription medications. This endeavor assisted senior citizens in making the medications more affordable. Under Cuomo&#x27;s leadership, a public health plan that tackled the AIDS epidemic was the most intense in the nation.

Overseeing programs for environmental preservation and conservation, Cuomo implemented aggressive initiatives in these areas. Under Cuomo&#x27;s leadership, New York State was the first in the United States to integrate both environmental protection and energy conservation goals.

Cuomo&#x27;s progressivism was also evident in his appointments of judges to the New York Court of Appeals. Cuomo appointed all of the judges to the State Appeals Court, including the first two female judges, as well as both the first African-American and Hispanic judges.

Cuomo eliminated the New York State Regents Scholarship given to all students who ranked high on a statewide special examination.

==Planned assassination==

Maurizio Avola, a former Sicilian Mafioso believed to have killed about 80 people, including journalists, lawyers, politicians and mobsters, before becoming a &quot;pentito&quot;, or informer, and serving life in prison, told &quot;The Guardian&quot; in 2016 that the Sicilian Mafia had planned to assassinate Governor Cuomo on a visit to Italy in November 1992. The plan was for about a dozen gunmen armed with Kalashnikov assault rifles and explosives to ambush Cuomo. Avola&#x27;s godfather, Aldo Ercolano, considered that Cuomo would be an &quot;excellent target&quot;. Avola stated, &quot;The aim was to target politicians or members of institutions in order to send out a clear message... Killing a prominent American was a warning to law enforcement agencies that had allowed several prominent mafia informants to live in the US under assumed identities.&quot; This was several months after the mafia had already assassinated antimafia judges Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino. The attack was to be carried out in the main square of Messina, Sicily during the day. However, after Cuomo arrived in Rome on November 19 with security consisting of many bodyguards and a bulletproof car, the attack was called off.

Cuomo&#x27;s son Chris later denied the occurrence of said assassination attempt while guest starring on an episode of &quot;The Adam Friedland Show&quot;.

== Political views ==
Cuomo was notable for his liberal political views, particularly his steadfast opposition to the death penalty, an opinion that was unpopular in New York during the high-crime era of the 1980s and early 1990s. While governor, he vetoed several bills that would have re-established capital punishment in New York State. The death penalty was reinstated by Pataki the year after he defeated Cuomo in the 1994 election, although it was never put into effect and the statute was declared unconstitutional by the New York Court of Appeals in 2004.

Cuomo, a Roman Catholic, was personally opposed to abortion, but he was pro-choice on the issue, believing that the State does not have the right to ban the procedure. In a speech at the University of Notre Dame on September 13, 1984, he used the statements of the American Catholic hierarchy to make an argument: &quot;What is ideally desirable isn&#x27;t always feasible, ... there can be different political approaches to abortion besides unyielding adherence to an absolute prohibition.&quot; For this position, Cardinal John Joseph O&#x27;Connor considered excommunicating him.

Cuomo was also outspoken on what he perceived to be the unfair stereotyping of Italian Americans as mobsters by the media, including denying the existence of the Mafia, and urging the media to stop using the word &quot;mafia&quot;. Joseph Pistone, an FBI agent widely known for his undercover operation as Donnie Brasco, wrote disparagingly of Cuomo in his book, &quot;Unfinished Business&quot;.

Cuomo opposed the move of the National Football League&#x27;s New York Giants and New York Jets to the Meadowlands in East Rutherford, New Jersey, choosing instead to attend the home games of the Buffalo Bills while serving as governor, referring to the Bills as &quot;New York State&#x27;s only team&quot;.

== Post-governorship ==
=== Legal work and board memberships ===
From 1995 until his death, Cuomo worked as counsel at the New York law firm, Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher. In 1996, Cuomo joined the board of Medallion Financial Corp., a lender to purchasers of taxi medallions in leading cities across the U.S. He was named to the board through his personal and business relationship with Andrew M. Murstein, president of Medallion. Cuomo also sat on the advisory council of the Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission.

=== Authorship ===

Cuomo&#x27;s first book, &quot;Forest Hills Diary: The Crisis of Low-income Housing&quot;, became an influential text in the fields of political science and housing policy, and it helped make his name with the public outside New York.

In 1996, Cuomo wrote &quot;Reason to Believe&quot;. He also wrote a narrative essay titled &quot;Achieving the American Dream&quot; about his parents&#x27; struggles in coming to America and how they prospered. Cuomo was the author of &quot;Why Lincoln Matters&quot;, published in 2004, and he co-edited &quot;Lincoln on Democracy&quot;, an anthology of Abraham Lincoln&#x27;s speeches.

Cuomo also wrote and delivered numerous speeches and remarks.

==== Selected works ====
* Cuomo, M. (2012). &quot;Greatest speeches of the 20th century: Keynote address for the Democratic Convention&quot;. Various artists. (MP3).
* Cuomo, M. (2011). &quot;Inspirational Speeches, Volume 3: Mario Cuomo – 1984&quot;. Orange Leisure. (MP3).
* Williams, F.J., &amp; Pederson, W.D. (Eds)., with Cuomo, M. (Contributor) and 14 other contributors (2009). &quot;Lincoln lessons: Reflections on America&#x27;s greatest leader.&quot; Southern Illinois University Press.
* Grodin, E.D., Cuomo, M., &amp; Ventura, M. (2008). &quot;C is for ciao: An Italy alphabet&quot;. Sleeping Bear Press.
* Bennett, T., Sullivan, R., Cuomo, M., &amp; Albom, M. (2007). &quot;Tony Bennett in the studio: A life of art &amp; music&quot;. Sterling.
* Heffner, R.D., Jaffe, M., &amp; Cuomo, M.M. (2004). &quot;As they saw it: A half-century of conversations from the open mind&quot;. Carrol &amp; Graf
* Forsythe, D.W., &amp; Cuomo, M. (2004). &quot;Memos to the governor: An introduction to state budgeting, 2nd edition&quot;. Georgetown University Press.
* Cuomo, M., &amp; Holzer, H. (Eds.) (2004). &quot;Lincoln on democracy&quot;. Fordham University Press.
* Cuomo, M.M. (2004). &quot;Why Lincoln matters: Today more than ever&quot;. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
* Cuomo, M. (1999). &quot;The Blue Spruce&quot;. Sleeping Bear Press.
* Hoobler, D., Hoobler, T., &amp; Cuomo, M.M. (1998). &quot;The Italian American family album&quot;. USA: Oxford University Press.
* Cuomo, M. (1996). &quot;Reason to believe: A keen assessment of who we are and an inspiring vision of what we could be&quot;. Touchstone.
* Cuomo, M.M. (1993). &quot;More than words: The speeches of Mario Cuomo&quot;. St. Martin&#x27;s Press.
* Thomas, C., Cuomo, M., &amp; Jorling (1992). &quot;New York State: A land of forests, people and trees, partners in time&quot;. New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
* Cuomo, M. (1984). &quot;Diaries of Mario M. Cuomo: The campaign for governor&quot;. Random House.
* Cuomo, M. (1975). &quot;Forest Hills Diary: The Crisis of Low-income Housing&quot;. Vantage

== Honors and awards ==
At its 1983 commencement ceremonies, Barnard College awarded Cuomo its highest honor, the Barnard Medal of Distinction. Also in 1983, Yeshiva University awarded him an honorary Doctor of Laws degree.

In 2017, Governor Andrew Cuomo signed legislation officially naming the Tappan Zee Bridge replacement the &quot;Governor Mario M. Cuomo Bridge&quot;. This has been met with significant opposition. A petition and several pieces of proposed legislation have sought to restore the bridge&#x27;s name to that of its predecessor.

== Family and personal life ==
Cuomo was married for 60 years to Matilda (née Raffa), from 1954 until his death in 2015. She is a graduate of St. John&#x27;s University&#x27;s Teachers College. They had five children, Margaret, Andrew, Maria, Madeline, and Christopher. In 2017, Matilda was inducted into the National Women&#x27;s Hall of Fame.

Cuomo&#x27;s older son Andrew married Kerry Kennedy, a daughter of Robert F. and Ethel Skakel Kennedy, on June 9, 1990. They had three daughters, twins Cara Ethel and Mariah Matilda Cuomo, born on January 11, 1995; and Michaela Andrea Cuomo, born on August 26, 1997. The couple divorced in 2005. Andrew served as Secretary of Housing and Urban Development under President Bill Clinton from 1997 to 2001. In his first attempt to succeed his father, he ran as Democratic candidate for New York governor in 2002, but withdrew before the primary. He withdrew after criticizing Republican incumbent George Pataki&#x27;s leadership following the terrorist attacks on the city on September 11 the previous year. In November 2006, Andrew was elected New York State Attorney General; and on November 2, 2010, he was elected Governor of New York, inaugurated on January 1, 2011, and was re-elected two more times, serving until he resigned in August 2021 due to sexual harassment allegations.

Cuomo&#x27;s younger son Chris was a journalist on the ABC Network news magazine &quot;Primetime&quot;. He anchored news segments and served as co-host on &quot;Good Morning America&quot;, before moving to CNN in 2013, where he co-hosted the morning news magazine &quot;New Day&quot;. He anchored his own prime time show &quot;Cuomo Prime Time&quot; until he was suspended and ultimately fired in 2021 for assisting his brother Andrew in navigating a sexual harassment scandal which had previously led to Andrew&#x27;s resignation as Governor of New York and after two accusations of sexual harassment against Chris were made. He was picked as one of &quot;People&quot; magazine&#x27;s 50 Most Beautiful People in 1997.

Cuomo&#x27;s daughter Maria is married to Kenneth Cole, the New York fashion designer. She is Chair of the Board of HELP USA, a charitable foundation that is also associated with the organization her mother founded, Mentoring USA.

His daughter Margaret is &quot;a board certified radiologist, teaching professional, and national advocate for the prevention of cancer, heart disease, and diabetes&quot;. She is the author of &quot;A World Without Cancer: The Making of a New World and the Real Promise of Prevention&quot; (2013), and she serves on the board of directors of the nonprofit organization, LessCancer. She has been featured on such TV shows as &quot;Good Morning America&quot;, &quot;Good Day New York&quot;, &quot;Morning Joe&quot;, and &quot;Inside Edition&quot;. In 2011, she was awarded the Commendation of the Order of the Star by the president and prime minister of Italy.

Cuomo remained a baseball fan after his athletic career ended, reportedly limiting his television watching to baseball games and C-SPAN. He was an avid player of fantasy baseball, always with an Italian-American player on his team, regardless of how many Italian-American players were available or how well they were doing. In 1994, he was featured several times on the Ken Burns PBS series &quot;Baseball&quot;, where he shared memories of his life in baseball before he entered politics.

Cuomo was the first guest on the long-running CNN talk show &quot;Larry King Live&quot; that began in 1985 and ended in 2010.

Neal Conan described the man as both the most intelligent and wittiest politician he has ever interviewed.

==Illness and death==
On November 30, 2014, it was announced that Cuomo had been hospitalized for a heart condition; he was described as being &quot;in good spirits&quot;.

On January 1, 2015, Andrew Cuomo was sworn in for his second term as governor. The elder Cuomo was not well enough to attend the inaugural ceremony, though his son remarked, &quot;He is in the heart and mind of every person who is here. He is here and his inspiration and his legacy and his experience is what has brought the state to this point.&quot; That afternoon Mario Cuomo died from heart failure at his home in Manhattan at 5:15 p.m. EST, at the age of 82.

Cuomo&#x27;s wake was held on January 5, 2015, and his funeral was held at Saint Ignatius Loyola Church in Manhattan on January 6. He is interred at St. John Cemetery, in Middle Village, Queens.

===Reactions===
Various elected officials praised Cuomo following his death. President Barack Obama stated: &quot;An Italian Catholic kid from Queens, born to immigrant parents, Mario paired his faith in God and faith in America to live a life of public service – and we are all better for it. He rose to be chief executive of the state he loved, a determined champion of progressive values, and an unflinching voice for tolerance, inclusiveness, fairness, dignity, and opportunity. His own story taught him that as Americans, we are bound together as one people, and our country&#x27;s success rests on the success of all of us, not just a fortunate few.&quot;

Then-Vice President Joe Biden described Cuomo as &quot;a forceful voice for civil rights, for equal rights, for economic opportunity and justice. He had the courage to stand by his convictions, even when it was unpopular.&quot; Former Governor of New York George Pataki called Cuomo &quot;a proud son of immigrants and a compassionate leader who possessed a soaring intellect&quot;. Former Mayor of New York City Rudy Giuliani stated: &quot;Mario was a giant political influence of his generation. His ability to make riveting political speeches was only exceeded by his ability to logically argue and defend his position.&quot;

== Legacy ==
Cuomo and Ed Koch are remembered as two New York politicians who dominated during the late 1970s and 1980s, as well for his public speaking ability.

The rebuilt Tappan Zee Bridge was renamed the Governor Mario M. Cuomo Bridge in his honor. However, this would be controversial as the old bridge was named after Malcolm Wilson.

His legacy also ran in his family, with the election of his son Andrew Cuomo in 2010. Andrew Cuomo would serve as governor for ten years, from 2011 until his resignation in 2021.

== See also ==
* Bill Clinton Supreme Court candidates

== References ==
==Further reading==
* Paterson, David (2020). &quot;Black, Blind, &amp; in Charge: A Story of Visionary Leadership and Overcoming Adversity&quot;. New York: Skyhorse Publishing.

== External links ==
* Obituary in &quot;The Independent&quot; by Marcus Williamson
* Governor Mario M. Cuomo biography – Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher LLP
* Text, Audio, Video Excerpt of Cuomo&#x27;s 1984 Democratic National Convention Keynote Address – &quot;A Tale of Two Cities&quot;
* Text of Cuomo&#x27;s Address at the University of Notre Dame– &quot;Religious Belief and Public Morality&quot;
* Video of debate/discussion with Mario Cuomo and Paul Krugman on Bloggingheads.tv
* 



|-




|-

|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q521145" start="0" end="19" title="Mario Cuomo" label="Mario Matthew Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347975" start="120" end="140" title="governor of New York" label="governor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="193" end="209" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544428" start="242" end="273" title="lieutenant governor of New York" label="lieutenant governor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148056" start="300" end="330" title="secretary of State of New York" label="secretary of state of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11673" start="396" end="408" title="Andrew Cuomo" label="Andrew Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949871" start="413" end="423" title="NewsNation" label="NewsNation"/>
<link wikidata="Q270389" start="424" end="430" title="News presenter" label="anchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112179" start="431" end="448" title="Christopher Cuomo" label="Christopher Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="475" end="482" title="Modern liberalism in the United States" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274622" start="523" end="549" title="A Tale of Two Cities (speech)" label="his keynote speech address"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581655" start="557" end="592" title="1984 Democratic National Convention" label="1984 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="644" end="650" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q308918" start="748" end="766" title="A Tale of Two Cities" label="Tale of Two Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q367202" start="806" end="820" title="city upon a hill" label="city on a hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255749" start="925" end="929" title="1988 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255750" start="934" end="938" title="1992 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="1082" end="1088" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="1096" end="1102" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014936" start="1121" end="1129" title="1994 New York gubernatorial election" label="defeated"/>
<link wikidata="Q11676" start="1163" end="1176" title="George Pataki" label="George Pataki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387981" start="1184" end="1205" title="Republican Revolution" label="Republican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1268" end="1281" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022168" start="1294" end="1322" title="Willkie Farr &amp;amp; Gallagher" label="Willkie Farr &amp;amp; Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925063" start="1378" end="1387" title="Briarwood, Queens" label="Briarwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="1428" end="1434" title="Queens, New York City" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="1450" end="1457" title="Italian American" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083" start="1665" end="1672" title="Salerno" label="Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="1674" end="1682" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q81141" start="1785" end="1801" title="Nocera Superiore" label="Nocera Superiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q81765" start="1857" end="1875" title="Tramonti, Campania" label="Tramonti, Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q62372" start="1924" end="1945" title="South Jamaica, Queens" label="South Jamaica, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q408230" start="1962" end="1983" title="New York City Department of Education" label="New York City P.S. 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588809" start="1988" end="2022" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Preparatory School (Queens)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138374" start="2073" end="2099" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s University (New York City)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142885" start="2125" end="2135" title="outfielder" label="outfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="2145" end="2163" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512989" start="2177" end="2182" title="signing bonus" label="bonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43900984" start="2224" end="2231" title="Matilda Cuomo" label="Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512457" start="2277" end="2294" title="Brunswick Pirates" label="Brunswick Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="2302" end="2309" title="Class D (baseball)" label="Class D"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547300" start="2310" end="2332" title="Georgia–Florida League" label="Georgia–Florida League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495302" start="2383" end="2393" title="Fred Green (baseball)" label="Fred Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="2417" end="2432" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588853" start="2846" end="2886" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s University School of Law" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s University School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685256" start="2962" end="2977" title="Adrian P. Burke" label="Adrian P. Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q11991268" start="2985" end="3010" title="New York Court of Appeals" label="New York Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="3184" end="3192" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752663" start="3286" end="3296" title="Fred Trump" label="Fred Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588853" start="3583" end="3623" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s University School of Law" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s University School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172108" start="3835" end="3841" title="Corona, Queens" label="Corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397898" start="3990" end="4001" title="Kew Gardens, Queens" label="Kew Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202211" start="4002" end="4014" title="Forest Hills, Queens" label="Forest Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411805" start="4053" end="4069" title="Samuel J. LeFrak" label="Samuel J. LeFrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q666931" start="4189" end="4201" title="John Lindsay" label="John Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q450412" start="4486" end="4501" title="Richard Sennett" label="Richard Sennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544428" start="4596" end="4627" title="Lieutenant Governor of New York" label="Lieutenant Governor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q12068139" start="4674" end="4691" title="Howard J. Samuels" label="Howard J. Samuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="4832" end="4848" title="attorney general" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="4853" end="4865" title="U.S. Senator" label="U.S. senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="4897" end="4913" title="Partisan primary" label="primary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q878798" start="4931" end="4941" title="Hugh Carey" label="Hugh Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906215" start="4982" end="4999" title="Mary Anne Krupsak" label="Mary Anne Krupsak"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148056" start="5114" end="5144" title="Secretary of State of New York" label="Secretary of State of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886807" start="5190" end="5204" title="Basil Paterson" label="Basil Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q785304" start="5276" end="5298" title="Mayor of New York City" label="Mayor of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q329910" start="5339" end="5352" title="Abraham Beame" label="Abraham Beame"/>
<link wikidata="Q467122" start="5514" end="5521" title="Ed Koch" label="Ed Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540770" start="5787" end="5800" title="Liberal Party of New York" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="6272" end="6290" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q666931" start="6549" end="6561" title="John Lindsay" label="John Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="6604" end="6616" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469549" start="6812" end="6854" title="Ladies and Gentlemen, the Bronx Is Burning" label="Ladies and Gentlemen, the Bronx Is Burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014931" start="7183" end="7203" title="1978 New York gubernatorial election" label="the general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014932" start="7255" end="7259" title="1982 New York gubernatorial election" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="7540" end="7547" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="7728" end="7734" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536786" start="7893" end="7906" title="Lewis Lehrman" label="Lewis Lehrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326572" start="7937" end="7950" title="Early 1980s recession in the United States" label="the recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="8049" end="8063" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q699744" start="8071" end="8097" title="1984 United States presidential election" label="1984 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q25046235" start="8139" end="8167" title="1984 Democratic Party vice presidential candidate selection" label="vice presidential candidates"/>
<link wikidata="Q229141" start="8169" end="8186" title="Geraldine Ferraro" label="Geraldine Ferraro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581655" start="8288" end="8323" title="1984 Democratic National Convention" label="1984 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="8365" end="8378" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274622" start="8413" end="8450" title="A Tale of Two Cities (speech)" label="&amp;quot;Tale of Two Cities&amp;quot; speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="8761" end="8765" title="1988 United States presidential election" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="8770" end="8774" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014933" start="8801" end="8805" title="1986 New York gubernatorial election" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758186" start="8833" end="8856" title="Andrew P. O&amp;#x27;Rourke" label="Andrew P. O&amp;#x27;Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038574" start="9046" end="9061" title="Draft (politics)" label="draft movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q919448" start="9077" end="9086" title="Gary Hart" label="Gary Hart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9119" end="9136" title="Gary Hart#1988 presidential campaign and the Donna Rice affair" label="Donna Rice affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153901" start="9146" end="9173" title="1990 New York gubernatorial election" label="1990 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192044" start="9234" end="9255" title="Pierre Andrew Rinfret" label="Pierre Andrew Rinfret"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734973" start="9287" end="9301" title="Herbert London" label="Herbert London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933980" start="9584" end="9593" title="Bob Shrum" label="Bob Shrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270268" start="9651" end="9677" title="New York State Legislature" label="New York State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722258" start="9812" end="9824" title="New York State Senate" label="State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="9855" end="9869" title="New York State Assembly" label="State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892934" start="9906" end="9938" title="United States presidential election in New Hampshire, 1992" label="New Hampshire Democratic primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="10048" end="10065" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10444" end="10453" title="Joe Klein" label="Joe Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975190" start="10467" end="10481" title="Primary Colors (novel)" label="Primary Colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="11795" end="11807" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="12273" end="12300" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q958904" start="12400" end="12411" title="Byron White" label="Byron White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655924" start="12463" end="12484" title="George Stephanopoulos" label="George Stephanopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014936" start="12610" end="12614" title="1994 New York gubernatorial election" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q607935" start="12879" end="12895" title="Arthur Shawcross" label="Arthur Shawcross"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021572" start="13091" end="13105" title="Willie Horton" label="William Horton"/>
<link wikidata="Q319099" start="13111" end="13126" title="Michael Dukakis" label="Michael Dukakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11676" start="13168" end="13181" title="George Pataki" label="George Pataki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387981" start="13189" end="13214" title="Republican Revolution" label="1994 Republican landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q108408" start="13400" end="13413" title="Albany County, New York" label="Albany County"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="13511" end="13524" title="Staten Island" label="Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q237918" start="13553" end="13565" title="Ann Richards" label="Ann Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589725" start="13571" end="13588" title="governor of Texas" label="governor of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="13642" end="13656" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064815" start="13691" end="13706" title="Super Bowl XXIX" label="Super Bowl XXIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q776795" start="13752" end="13759" title="Doritos" label="Doritos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441968" start="15502" end="15516" title="Seat belt legislation in the United States" label="seat belt laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843758" start="15541" end="15576" title="Office of the MTA Inspector General" label="Office of the MTA Inspector General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146109" start="15627" end="15664" title="Metropolitan Transportation Authority" label="Metropolitan Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433390" start="15901" end="15915" title="family support" label="family support"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154971" start="16145" end="16166" title="community integration" label="community integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11991268" start="16946" end="16971" title="New York Court of Appeals" label="New York Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="17322" end="17338" title="Sicilian Mafia" label="Sicilian Mafioso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032656" start="17462" end="17469" title="pentito" label="pentito"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="17529" end="17541" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6026802" start="17709" end="17735" title="Kalashnikov rifle" label="Kalashnikov assault rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947495" start="17781" end="17790" title="Crime boss" label="godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774913" start="18230" end="18239" title="Antimafia Pool" label="antimafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207073" start="18247" end="18263" title="Giovanni Falcone" label="Giovanni Falcone"/>
<link wikidata="Q312302" start="18268" end="18284" title="Paolo Borsellino" label="Paolo Borsellino"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="18341" end="18348" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="18405" end="18409" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q120135612" start="18645" end="18668" title="The Adam Friedland Show" label="The Adam Friedland Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="18725" end="18732" title="Modern liberalism in the United States" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11991268" start="19206" end="19231" title="New York Court of Appeals" label="New York Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="19251" end="19265" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="19314" end="19324" title="pro-choice" label="pro-choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q178848" start="19429" end="19453" title="University of Notre Dame" label="University of Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q959357" start="19767" end="19792" title="John O&amp;#x27;Connor (cardinal)" label="John Joseph O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053301" start="19804" end="19823" title="Excommunication of Catholic politicians who support abortion" label="excommunicating him"/>
<link wikidata="Q46961" start="19926" end="19933" title="mobster" label="mobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="19988" end="19993" title="American Mafia" label="Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q714304" start="20058" end="20072" title="Joseph Pistone" label="Joseph Pistone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="20077" end="20080" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546073" start="20108" end="20128" title="undercover operation" label="undercover operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q714304" start="20132" end="20145" title="Donnie Brasco" label="Donnie Brasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="20253" end="20277" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="20285" end="20300" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="20305" end="20318" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q225108" start="20326" end="20337" title="Meadowlands Sports Complex" label="Meadowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q746830" start="20341" end="20356" title="East Rutherford, New Jersey" label="East Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="20419" end="20432" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022168" start="20674" end="20702" title="Willkie Farr &amp;amp; Gallagher" label="Willkie Farr &amp;amp; Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757828" start="20920" end="20938" title="Andrew M. Murstein" label="Andrew M. Murstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669014" start="21010" end="21049" title="Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission" label="Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21335" end="21352" title="Reason to Believe (book)" label="Reason to Believe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997817" start="21549" end="21568" title="Why Lincoln Matters" label="Why Lincoln Matters"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="21662" end="21677" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q167733" start="23923" end="23938" title="Barnard College" label="Barnard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563410" start="23976" end="24004" title="List of Barnard College people" label="Barnard Medal of Distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048851" start="24020" end="24038" title="Yeshiva University" label="Yeshiva University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684759" start="24159" end="24188" title="Tappan Zee Bridge (2017–present)" label="Tappan Zee Bridge replacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q125841" start="24399" end="24410" title="Tappan Zee Bridge (1955-2017)" label="predecessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43900984" start="24478" end="24497" title="Matilda Cuomo" label="Matilda (née Raffa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728306" start="24631" end="24639" title="Margaret I. Cuomo" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q11673" start="24641" end="24647" title="Andrew Cuomo" label="Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112179" start="24670" end="24681" title="Chris Cuomo" label="Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967852" start="24722" end="24756" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Hall of Fame" label="National Women&amp;#x27;s Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q467912" start="24797" end="24810" title="Kerry Kennedy" label="Kerry Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="24826" end="24835" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F."/>
<link wikidata="Q258661" start="24840" end="24860" title="Ethel Kennedy" label="Ethel Skakel Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419581" start="25072" end="25114" title="United States Secretary of Housing and Urban Development" label="Secretary of Housing and Urban Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="25131" end="25143" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014937" start="25217" end="25267" title="2002 New York gubernatorial election" label="Democratic candidate for New York governor in 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="25293" end="25300" title="Partisan primary" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11676" start="25353" end="25366" title="George Pataki" label="George Pataki"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="25432" end="25444" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013056" start="25501" end="25532" title="New York State Attorney General" label="New York State Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q105871691" start="25711" end="25740" title="Andrew Cuomo sexual harassment allegations" label="sexual harassment allegations"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="25798" end="25809" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684600" start="25810" end="25823" title="news magazine" label="news magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022169" start="25830" end="25839" title="Primetime (U.S. TV program)" label="Primetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q825946" start="25904" end="25924" title="Good Morning America" label="Good Morning America"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995353" start="26013" end="26020" title="New Day (TV series)" label="New Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q55011785" start="26070" end="26086" title="Cuomo Prime Time" label="Cuomo Prime Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="26400" end="26406" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814580" start="26506" end="26518" title="Kenneth Cole (designer)" label="Kenneth Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q825946" start="27126" end="27146" title="Good Morning America" label="Good Morning America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582505" start="27160" end="27177" title="Good Day New York" label="Good Day New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324221" start="27191" end="27202" title="Morning Joe" label="Morning Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151548" start="27220" end="27234" title="Inside Edition" label="Inside Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="27485" end="27491" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364863" start="27518" end="27534" title="fantasy baseball" label="fantasy baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q616886" start="27726" end="27735" title="Ken Burns" label="Ken Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="27736" end="27739" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137787" start="27753" end="27761" title="Baseball (TV series)" label="Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="27893" end="27896" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423559" start="27913" end="27928" title="Larry King Live" label="Larry King Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q585993" start="27974" end="27984" title="Neal Conan" label="Neal Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10927936" start="28796" end="28824" title="Church of St. Ignatius Loyola (New York City)" label="Saint Ignatius Loyola Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3945111" start="28870" end="28887" title="St. John Cemetery (Queens)" label="St. John Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841642" start="28892" end="28914" title="Middle Village, Queens" label="Middle Village, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="29004" end="29016" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="29600" end="29609" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11676" start="29836" end="29849" title="George Pataki" label="George Pataki"/>
<link wikidata="Q212648" start="29993" end="30006" title="Rudy Giuliani" label="Rudy Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q467122" start="30233" end="30240" title="Ed Koch" label="Ed Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684759" start="30419" end="30449" title="Tappan Zee Bridge (2017–present)" label="Governor Mario M. Cuomo Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q880392" start="30535" end="30549" title="Malcolm Wilson (governor)" label="Malcolm Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11673" start="30616" end="30628" title="Andrew Cuomo" label="Andrew Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908497" start="30749" end="30786" title="Bill Clinton Supreme Court candidates" label="Bill Clinton Supreme Court candidates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11674" start="30827" end="30842" title="David Paterson" label="Paterson, David"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30857" end="30944" title="Black, Blind, &amp;amp; in Charge: A Story of Visionary Leadership and Overcoming Adversity" label="Black, Blind, &amp;amp; in Charge: A Story of Visionary Leadership and Overcoming Adversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="31025" end="31040" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196341" start="31050" end="31067" title="Marcus Williamson" label="Marcus Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022168" start="31106" end="31134" title="Willkie Farr &amp;amp; Gallagher" label="Willkie Farr &amp;amp; Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q131112" start="31434" end="31446" title="Paul Krugman" label="Paul Krugman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927377" start="31450" end="31466" title="Bloggingheads.tv" label="Bloggingheads.tv"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277939" wikidata="Q15204153" url="?curid=277939" title="Bramdean Common">
<text>Bramdean Common is situated in Bramdean, Hampshire, England. Bramdean Common is one of the many commons that served local parishioners and provided collectively owned lands which could be worked or used without the need to pay rent.

==The Church in the Wood==
The so called &quot;Church in the Wood&quot; was built by the Reverend Alfred Caesar Bishop in 1883 for the farm workers of Bramdean Common. The church later became used by Romany families, who camped on the Common, and practised charcoal burning on the land. It is built of corrugated iron and took five weeks to construct. The church is still in good condition and is used occasionally for religious ceremonies. An arrangement of Shepherds Crowns by the gate of the church also shows the date of construction.

It was here in 1993 that the Dongas road protest group moved after being driven from Twyford Down by bulldozers.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15204153" start="0" end="15" title="Bramdean Common" label="Bramdean Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956146" start="31" end="39" title="Bramdean" label="Bramdean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="41" end="50" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295821" start="803" end="828" title="Dongas road protest group" label="Dongas road protest group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859527" start="859" end="871" title="Twyford Down" label="Twyford Down"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277942" wikidata="Q7859527" url="?curid=277942" title="Twyford Down">
<text>Twyford Down is an area of chalk downland lying directly to the southeast of Winchester, Hampshire, England next to St. Catherine&#x27;s Hill and close to the South Downs National Park. It has been settled since pre-Roman times, and has housed a fort and a chapel, as well as being a 17th and 18th century coaching route.

In 1992, the down was the site of a major road protest against a section of the M3 motorway from London to the south coast of England. There had been plans since the 1970s to replace the 1930s Winchester bypass which was regularly congested due to design features that had become out of date. This was problematic owing to the lack of available land between Winchester College and St. Catherine&#x27;s Hill. After several public inquiries, particularly with using the water meadows near the college, a route was chosen that took the motorway over the down in a cutting. Although protests against the M3 had been ongoing since the early 1970s, the protest-action on top of the down, described in 1994 as the most controversial British motorway project ever to start construction, attracted a wider range of classes of people than had previously been the case, and caused a violent clash with onsite security officers.

The motorway was completed as planned and provides a link of continuous motorway between Greater London and the South Coast ports. Nevertheless, the protests attracted interest from the national media, and drew attention to this form of campaigning. Subsequent road schemes took greater account of the environment or were cancelled. Several protesters at Twyford Down subsequently formed campaign groups, or joined existing ones such as the Campaign for Better Transport.

==History==
Twyford Down sits to the southeast of Winchester and the northeast of Twyford, and is part of the Winchester-East Meon Anticline. The down&#x27;s summit, known as Deacon Hill, is towards the north-eastern edge of the area which is renowned for its dramatic rolling scenery and ecologically rich grassland. Its history can be traced back to pre-Roman times. Along it run a series of trackways known as &quot;dongas&quot;, which resulted from farmers herding animals to surrounding markets. St Catherine&#x27;s Hill, in the centre of the down has been identified as a human settlement more than 3,000 years ago and pre-dates the foundation of Winchester. In the 3rd century, a fort was constructed on the hill, while in the 12th, a Norman chapel was constructed on the site. During the Middle Ages, paths along the down formed part of the Pilgrim&#x27;s Trail from Winchester to Normandy via Portsmouth. This is commemorated by the modern Pilgrims&#x27; Trail which crosses the down.

In 1675, John Ogilby noted that the main coaching route from London to Southampton ran over the top of the down, going directly from Alresford to Twyford, avoiding Winchester. This remained the main coaching route until about 1800, when an alternative route via Winchester (now mostly the A31 and former A33) was formed. During this time, and up to the 19th century, the area was sometimes known as Morestead Down after the nearby village of Morestead.

Hockley Golf Club was established as a private members&#x27; club on the down in 1914.

==The M3 motorway extension==

===Background===

Outline strategic planning for the route of what was to be later known as the M3 motorway had begun in the late 1930s. The route was to link London to Basingstoke, in order to reduce the pressure on the A30. Detailed planning for the first phase of construction, a section, between Sunbury on Thames and Popham, began in 1962-3. The section, between Lightwater and Popham, where the A30 and the A303 separated, opened in June 1971; this was followed by the Sunbury to Lightwater section which opened in July 1974. The second phase was to extend the motorway southwards between Popham and Winchester, ending at Compton. Planning began with the first public inquiry which was held in 1971, to set the &quot;line of the motorway&quot;, and this second section was opened in 1985. The third and final phase was to extend the motorway from Winchester to Southampton and the M27 motorway, and the northern part of this section was to impact on Winchester&#x27;s bypass.

Winchester had been a traffic bottleneck for many years as several major routes passed through the historic city centre, including the A31, A33 and A34, as well as smaller routes like the A272. In the 1930s, a by-pass was planned to the east of the city, passing immediately west of St. Catherine&#x27;s Hill, opening to traffic on 1 February 1940. Construction of this had been controversial as it affected the Itchen Valley and offered only a partial solution to congestion, with some people calling instead for a by-pass to the north and west of Winchester.

As a 1930s road construction project, the bypass was built to then-contemporary standards, including at-grade crossings at Bar End and at Hockley. As time progressed, the bypass became more and more of a bottleneck as roads around it were improved to higher standards, particularly after the opening of the A33 Chandler&#x27;s Ford Bypass in 1968 and the A34 King&#x27;s Worthy Link the following year, which meant &quot;all&quot; long distance traffic, as opposed to merely that from London to Southampton, was using the bypass. Morgan Morgan-Giles described the bypass as &quot;utterly inadequate and dangerous, as everybody who lives in or near Winchester will agree. The accident figures are appalling. Therefore, a new motorway somewhere to relieve the traffic is urgently needed.&quot; The crossing at Bar End was grade separated in 1973, but the junction at Hockley remained a key point of congestion.

===Public inquiries===
At this point, the option of going over or through Twyford Down had not been considered, and the alignment of the proposed six-lane M3 motorway (three lines in each direction) was to run through the Itchen valley roughly west of the existing four-lane bypass. This would also require the realignment of the Itchen Navigation into the water meadows. However, there would be further screening of the motorway and pedestrian access to St. Catherine&#x27;s Hill from the city. These proposals had gone through two public inquiries in 1971 and 1976, respectively. The first in 1971, the line order inquiry, had considered the proposed route of the motorway; and in 1973 the government approved this route. The second inquiry, in 1976, was to consider both the stopping up of side roads and the compulsory purchase orders for the land needed to build the motorway. The latter inquiry in particular had drawn significant objection from protesters, including masters from Winchester College. Morgan-Giles argued in Parliament to support the scheme, pointing out that Winchester and the Down had been cut off since construction of the old bypass anyway, and growth of Southampton Docks meant that improved links from London and the Midlands would become increasingly essential. This scheme was eventually rejected due to intensifying local pollution and disturbance.

In 1981, Kenneth Clarke, then the Parliamentary Secretary for Transport, stated that, since the route of the M3 was then fixed as far as Bar End, to the north of St. Catherine&#x27;s Hill, that its route from there to Compton would undergo a fresh study, specifically stating that the Winchester Bypass should continue to be operational during construction of any new road, and that environmental matters were a key concern. By February 1983, consulting engineers Mott, Hay and Anderson had submitted a recommendation to complete the M3 through Twyford Down. Following the completion of the motorway to Bar End in the summer of 1985, the junction at Hockley was the only set of traffic lights between London and Southampton.
The Ministry of Transport (MoT) had problems purchasing the land required to complete the route past Winchester. The land required, east of the city on Twyford Down, was owned by Winchester College, which refused to sell the land to the government because part was a water meadow. The desired route, however, had been chosen to avoid St. Catherine&#x27;s Hill, and pass to the south. Proposals were made for a tunnel through Twyford Down, but the estimated cost for this was £75 million more than the estimated cost for a cutting, and the government dismissed the plans. The final route chosen ran to the south of St. Catherine&#x27;s Hill, taking (approximately 4.5%) of the Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), and went to a public inquiry in 1985, where the then Planning Officer of Winchester City Council described the route as &quot;bold&quot; and an &quot;imaginative solution&quot; In February 1992, the M3 was improved between Southampton and Compton, and soon afterwards work began on clearing the route across the down. Part of the contract stipulated that the old bypass would be removed and restored to nature, restoring direct access to St. Catherine&#x27;s Hill.

===Protests===

Protests against the completion of the M3 had been ongoing since 1973, with the formation of the M3 Joint Action Group by David Pare. The group gathered together a petition of 19,000, of which 11,227 were Winchester residents. The group was also active in distributing leaflets to the local community.

In March 1992, two travellers pitched a camp on the down, and discovered from local ramblers about the Bar End to Compton contract, meaning the land they were sitting on would soon be excavated. In response, noting that public inquiries had failed to stop construction, they decided to gather support. Environmental organisations attempted to take Department for Transport to the High Court, stating that the road was against the government&#x27;s own environmental protection laws. The European Commission dropped its objections that August. David Croker, who had become head of the protest group Twyford Down Association, said they &quot;had come to depend on the European Commission so we&#x27;re very disappointed.&quot;

The principal arguments of the protesters were their concern about making wildlife species, such as the Chalkhill Blue butterfly, extinct, putting a highly visible scar on the landscape, and that they believed the new motorway would not adequately resolve traffic problems.

Protesters demonstrated their opposition to the road&#x27;s construction by blocking the path of construction equipment. They were met by security officers from Group 4. In December 1992, in view of a film crew from &quot;The Observer&quot;, a protester was manhandled by five officers. Another protester, according to a report by local MP John Denham, was strangled by officers and left unconscious on top of the Down for 30 minutes. Maggie Lambert, then a mature photography student, took numerous photographs of the protest, and challenged an injunction which suggested she had been involved with direct action. While Lord Justice Mann admitted there was no evidence to suggest she had done anything more than take photographs, the injunction was upheld. Protester Rebecca Lush of the Donga Tribe, who had stayed on the down from September to the night of eviction, later claimed &quot;It was a horrific experience and very violent. We were dragged through thorns and we were being kicked and punched and someone pulled out a clump of my hair.&quot; In March 1993, Kenneth Carlisle, then Minister for Roads and Traffic, refused to order an inquiry into any wrongdoing or excessive force by security officers, stating it was a matter for the police.

The protest attracted different classes of people, the many of whom were peaceful. According to Denham, a popular phrase amongst those protesting was &quot;I never thought that I would find myself doing something like this.&quot; Stephen Ward, who had been involved in the original 1970s protest, decided in early 1993 that excessive force was being used against protesters, and started keeping a log of events. He used this log when defending other protesters in court. He visited those who had been imprisoned and helped establish a legal precedent of the right for protesters and demonstrators to have a witness while being questioned.

Several artists, such as Jill Bray (b.1936) marked their protest by creating work based on the Twyford Down landscape.

===Outcome===

In 1995, the motorway section through Twyford Down was opened, making the M3 a continuous motorway. The old A33 Winchester Bypass between Bar End and Compton was then closed and removed. The new cutting caused the loss of of SSSI land. To redress this, the old route of the A33 was planted with of species-rich grassland under the supervision and monitoring of the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology. Replacing the bypass also reduced traffic volumes from the village of Twyford and removed the road that separated St. Catherine&#x27;s Hill from the city. When interviewed for &quot;The Independent&quot;, local residents said the latter had transformed the place, one adding &quot;St. Catherine&#x27;s Hill used to be cut off from Winchester by the A33. Now there&#x27;s open, peaceful countryside. It&#x27;s wonderful.&quot;

Soon after the construction of the Twyford Down cutting, the pace of road construction in the United Kingdom slowed. In 1994, a government committee concluded that building more roads would only encourage more traffic, and that the way to ease congestion and pollution was to take measures to control car use rather than accommodate more. When Labour came to power in 1997, many road schemes were cancelled.

In 2000, campaigners mounted legal action to preserve an area of grassland created on the route of the old A33 Winchester bypass in mitigation of the land lost to the motorway which was threatened by a Park and Ride site. The legal action failed and the campaigners claimed that they had been betrayed for a second time. Land was provided elsewhere in mitigation.

In 2004, Winchester Cathedral received £86,000 from the Highways Agency in compensation for increased traffic noise from the M3. The Rev. Michael Till explained that &quot;the noise comes beaming straight across The Close. It does change life having a perpetual background noise&quot;. Also in that year, veterans of a Twyford Down protest threatened a new campaign of direct action in response to 200 new road-building proposals in the government&#x27;s recently unveiled ten-year transport plan. Rebecca Lush went on to found Road Block in 2005, which became part of the Campaign for Better Transport in 2007. Veteran road protester Chris Gillham believes that his efforts in protesting against Twyford Down, where he took an active role in confronting security officers and crawling under razor wire, helped later road schemes, such as the Hindhead Tunnel to be planned with greater consideration about the environment. In 2012, several of the original protesters returned to the down to hold a 20th anniversary celebration of the protest.

Twyford Down became part of the western extremity of the South Downs National Park in 2011, having previously been designated as part of the East Hampshire AONB (Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty).

==Cultural references==
The acid jazz band Galliano released a 1994 single &quot;Twyford Down&quot; in response to the M3 road building.

==See also==

* Environmental direct action in the United Kingdom
* M11 link road protest
* Newbury bypass
* Road protest in the United Kingdom

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* Photo gallery of mass trespass from Urban75
* BBC Hampshire webpage containing summary of Twyford Down&#x27;s historical and contemporary significance.
* British Library page with short relevant section under heading of Dreamers and Dissenters — Treehouse and Tunnels.
* SABRE – Winchester Bypass. Further history about the background to the road construction in the area, with maps.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7859527" start="0" end="12" title="Twyford Down" label="Twyford Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253315" start="33" end="41" title="downland" label="downland"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="77" end="87" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="89" end="98" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587432" start="116" end="141" title="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Hill, Hampshire" label="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695606" start="159" end="184" title="South Downs National Park" label="South Downs National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="216" end="221" title="Roman invasion of Britain" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339498" start="365" end="377" title="Road protest in the United Kingdom" label="road protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785279" start="403" end="414" title="M3 motorway (Great Britain)" label="M3 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059517" start="681" end="699" title="Winchester College" label="Winchester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413420" start="791" end="803" title="water meadow" label="water meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027785" start="1682" end="1711" title="Campaign for Better Transport (United Kingdom)" label="Campaign for Better Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066556" start="1824" end="1854" title="Winchester-East Meon Anticline" label="Winchester-East Meon Anticline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587432" start="2215" end="2239" title="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Hill, Hampshire" label="St Catherine&amp;#x27;s Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="2367" end="2377" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q136693" start="2456" end="2462" title="Norman architecture" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2510" end="2521" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="2603" end="2611" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="2616" end="2626" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193972" start="2663" end="2683" title="Pilgrims&amp;#x27; Trail" label="Pilgrims&amp;#x27; Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389271" start="2718" end="2729" title="John Ogilby" label="John Ogilby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655519" start="2750" end="2758" title="Coach (carriage)" label="coaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2770" end="2776" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="2780" end="2791" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227651" start="2842" end="2851" title="New Alresford" label="Alresford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685778" start="2855" end="2862" title="Twyford, Hampshire" label="Twyford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649126" start="2998" end="3001" title="A31 road (England)" label="A31"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649140" start="3013" end="3016" title="A33 road (England)" label="A33"/>
<link wikidata="Q11785507" start="3151" end="3160" title="Morestead" label="Morestead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785279" start="3378" end="3389" title="M3 motorway (Great Britain)" label="M3 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q810196" start="3451" end="3462" title="Basingstoke" label="Basingstoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q429589" start="3503" end="3506" title="A30 road" label="A30"/>
<link wikidata="Q2194010" start="3582" end="3599" title="Sunbury on Thames" label="Sunbury on Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229309" start="3604" end="3610" title="Popham, Hampshire" label="Popham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546593" start="3650" end="3660" title="Lightwater" label="Lightwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135895" start="3695" end="3699" title="A303 road" label="A303"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648901" start="3910" end="3917" title="Compton and Shawford" label="Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669447" start="3949" end="3963" title="public inquiry" label="public inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q505855" start="4169" end="4181" title="M27 motorway" label="M27 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649158" start="4413" end="4416" title="A34 road (England)" label="A34"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649076" start="4453" end="4457" title="A272 road" label="A272"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587432" start="4548" end="4573" title="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Hill, Hampshire" label="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094284" start="4677" end="4690" title="Itchen Valley" label="Itchen Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q285783" start="4928" end="4946" title="At-grade intersection" label="at-grade crossings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911776" start="5357" end="5376" title="Morgan Morgan-Giles" label="Morgan Morgan-Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643599" start="5647" end="5662" title="Grade separation" label="grade separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222002" start="5887" end="5891" title="lane" label="lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060817" start="6067" end="6084" title="Itchen Navigation" label="Itchen Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157252" start="6549" end="6574" title="compulsory purchase order" label="compulsory purchase order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059517" start="6724" end="6742" title="Winchester College" label="Winchester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231265" start="6919" end="6936" title="Southampton Docks" label="Southampton Docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q271889" start="7128" end="7142" title="Kenneth Clarke" label="Kenneth Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918608" start="7583" end="7605" title="Mott, Hay and Anderson" label="Mott, Hay and Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="7848" end="7869" title="Department for Transport" label="Ministry of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413420" start="8111" end="8123" title="water meadow" label="water meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="8319" end="8320" title="pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="8520" end="8555" title="Site of Special Scientific Interest" label="Site of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9168" end="9178" title="David Pare" label="David Pare"/>
<link wikidata="Q949318" start="9368" end="9378" title="New Age travellers" label="travellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14566957" start="9433" end="9441" title="ramblers" label="ramblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="9729" end="9739" title="High Court of Justice of England and Wales" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232677" start="9892" end="9904" title="David Croker" label="David Croker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15768393" start="10179" end="10193" title="Chalkhill Blue" label="Chalkhill Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322045" start="10511" end="10518" title="G4S" label="Group 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="10572" end="10584" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q300069" start="10690" end="10701" title="John Denham (politician)" label="John Denham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495575" start="10896" end="10906" title="injunction" label="injunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q506259" start="10950" end="10963" title="direct action" label="direct action"/>
<link wikidata="Q106855432" start="10971" end="10988" title="Michael Mann (judge)" label="Lord Justice Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301819" start="11118" end="11130" title="Rebecca Lush" label="Rebecca Lush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295821" start="11138" end="11149" title="Dongas road protest group" label="Donga Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389951" start="11418" end="11434" title="Kenneth Carlisle" label="Kenneth Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062417" start="12743" end="12775" title="Institute of Terrestrial Ecology" label="Institute of Terrestrial Ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="12959" end="12974" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q738031" start="13815" end="13828" title="Park and Ride" label="Park and Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q476529" start="13987" end="14007" title="Winchester Cathedral" label="Winchester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301819" start="14476" end="14488" title="Rebecca Lush" label="Rebecca Lush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027785" start="14506" end="14516" title="Road Block" label="Road Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027785" start="14551" end="14580" title="Campaign for Better Transport (UK)" label="Campaign for Better Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766000" start="14821" end="14836" title="Hindhead Tunnel" label="Hindhead Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695606" start="15079" end="15104" title="South Downs National Park" label="South Downs National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328533" start="15163" end="15182" title="East Hampshire AONB" label="East Hampshire AONB"/>
<link wikidata="Q221772" start="15250" end="15259" title="acid jazz" label="acid jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q286110" start="15265" end="15273" title="Galliano (band)" label="Galliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381213" start="15376" end="15425" title="Environmental direct action in the United Kingdom" label="Environmental direct action in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243259" start="15428" end="15449" title="M11 link road protest" label="M11 link road protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059310" start="15452" end="15466" title="Newbury bypass" label="Newbury bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339498" start="15469" end="15503" title="Road protest in the United Kingdom" label="Road protest in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249965" start="15598" end="15605" title="Urban75" label="Urban75"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277944" wikidata="Q1435706" url="?curid=277944" title="Black Madonna">
<text>The term Black Madonna or Black Virgin tends to refer to statues or paintings in Western Christendom of the Blessed Virgin Mary and the Infant Jesus, where both figures are depicted with dark skin. Examples of the Black Madonna can be found both in Catholic and Orthodox countries.

The paintings are usually icons, which are Byzantine in origin or style, some of which were produced in 13th or 14th-century Italy. Other examples from the Middle East, Caucasus or Africa, mainly Egypt and Ethiopia, are even older. Statues are often made of wood but are occasionally made of stone, painted, and up to tall. They fall into two main groups: free-standing upright figures or seated figures on a throne. About 400–500 Black Madonnas have been recorded in Europe, with the number related to how they are classified. There are at least 180 &quot;Vierges Noires&quot; in Southern France alone. There are hundreds of copies made since the medieval era. Some are displayed in museums, but most are in churches or shrines and are venerated by believers. Some are associated with miracles and attract substantial numbers of pilgrims.

Black Madonnas come in different forms. Speculations behind the basis of the dark hue of each individual icon or statue vary greatly and some have been controversial. Explanations range from the Madonnas being made from dark wood, Madonnas that have turned darker over time, due to factors such as aging or candle smoke, to a study by Jungian scholar Ean Begg into the potential pagan origins of the cult of the black Madonna and child or the intent to reflect the darker-skinned populations indigenous to certain parts of the world.
Another suggestion is that dark-skinned representations of pre-Christian deities were re-envisioned as the Madonna and child.

==Studies and research==
Research into the Black Madonna phenomenon is limited. Begg links the refrain from the Song of Solomon, “I am black, and I am beautiful” to the Queen of Sheba. Recently, however, interest in this subject has gathered more momentum.

Important early studies of dark-skinned holy images in France were by Camille Flammarion (1888), Marie Durand-Lefebvre (1937), Emile Saillens (1945), and Jacques Huynen (1972).

The first notable study in English of the origin and meaning of the Black Madonnas appears to have been presented by Leonard Moss at a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science on December 28, 1952. Moss divided the images into three categories: (1) dark brown or black Madonnas with physiognomy and skin pigmentation matching that of the indigenous population; (2) various art forms that have turned black as a result of certain physical factors such as deterioration of lead-based pigments, accumulated smoke from the use of votive candles, and accumulation of grime over the ages, and (3) miracle-worker Madonnas, the focus of the study, Black Madonnas found in areas of a Roman legion and, therefore, not a reflection of the current population&#x27;s skin colour.

In the cathedral at Chartres, there were two Black Madonnas: , a 1508 dark walnut copy of a 13th-century silver Madonna, standing atop a high pillar, surrounded by candles; and , a replica of an original destroyed during the French Revolution. Restoration work on the cathedral resulted in the painting in 2014 of , to reflect an earlier 19th-century painted style. The statue is no longer a &quot;Black Madonna&quot; and the restoration was severely criticized for wiping away the past.

Some scholars have chosen to explore the significance of the dark-skinned complexion to pilgrims and worshippers rather than focusing on whether this depiction was intentional. By virtue of their unusual presence, the Black Madonnas have sometimes acted to make their shrines revered pilgrimage sites. Monique Scheer attributes the importance of the dark-skinned depiction to its connection with authenticity. The reason for this connection is the perceived age of the figures.

==List of Black Madonnas==

===Africa===
* Algeria, Algiers: &quot;Our Lady of Africa&quot; 
* Côte d’Ivoire, Yamoussoukro: Madonna and child inside Basilica of Our Lady of Peace.
* Senegal, Popenguine: &quot;Notre-Dame de la Délivrance&quot;
* South Africa, Soweto: &quot;The Black Madonna&quot;

===Asia===

====Japan====

*Tsuruoka City, Yamagata Prefecture: the Tenshudō Catholic Church features a Black Madonna statue from France dating to the Meiji Era.

====The Philippines====


* Antipolo, Rizal: (Our Lady of Peace and Good Voyage of Antipolo) 
* Ermita, City of Manila: (Our Lady of Guidance)
* Santa Ana, City of Manila: (Our Lady of the Abandoned)
* Parañaque: (Our Lady of the Good Event)
* Lapu-Lapu City: (Our Lady of the Rule)
* Naga, Camarines Sur: (Our Lady of Peñafrancia)
* Piat, Cagayan: (Our Lady of Piat)
* Joroan, Tiwi, Albay: (Our Lady of Salvation)

====India====
* Dhori Mata
* Korvi Mata, Dediapada, Gujarat

====Turkey====
* Trabzon: Sümela Monastery

===Europe===

====Austria====
* Lavanttal, Carinthia, Austria: St. Andrä im Lavanttal Basilica Maria Loreto

====Belgium====
* Brugge, &quot;Our Lady of Regla&quot;
* Brussels: &quot;De Zwerte Lieve Vrouwe&quot;, St. Catherine Church
* Halle (Flemish Brabant) : Sint-Martinusbasiliek
* Liège: La Vierge Noire d&#x27;Outremeuse,
* Lier: Onze Lieve Vrouw ter Gratiën
* Scherpenheuvel-Zichem: Our Lady of Scherpenheuvel
* Tournai: Our Lady of Flanders in Tournai Cathedral
* Verviers: &quot;Black Virgin of the Recollects&quot;, Notre-Dame des Récollets Church, 
* Walcourt: (Notre-Dame de Walcourt)

====Croatia====
* Marija Bistrica: Our Lady of Bistrica, Queen of Croatia

====Czech Republic====
* Brno: Assumption of Virgin Mary Minor Basilica, St Thomas&#x27;s Abbey, Brno
* Prague: The Madonna of Breznice; The Black Madonna in The Church of Our Lady Under the Chain (Kostel Panny Marie pod řetězem) The Black Madonna on the House of the Black Madonna.
TROJA CHATEAU chapel- original &quot;Montserrat Madonna&quot; from Old Town Byzantine building (pg.100 of Martin Krummholz ISBN 978-80-7010-131-5)

====France====


* Aix-en-Provence, (Bouches-du-Rhône): Notre-Dame des Graces, Cathédrale Saint-Sauveur d&#x27;Aix
* Arconsat: (Notre-Dame des Champs)
* Aurillac, (Cantal): Notre-Dame des Neiges
* Beaune: Our Lady of Beaune
* Besançon: Our Lady de Gray
* Besse-et-Saint-Anastaise, (Puy-de-Dôme): Saint-André Church, Notre-Dame de Vassivière
* Bourg-en-Bresse, (Ain): 13th century
* Chartres, (Eure-et-Loir): crypt of the Cathedral of Chartres, Notre-Dame-de-Sous-Terre
* Clermont-Ferrand, (Puy-de-Dôme)
* Cusset: the Black Virgin of Cusset
* Dijon, (Côte-d&#x27;Or): Church of Notre-Dame of Dijon
* Douvres-la-Délivrande, Basilique Notre-Dame de la Délivrande, &quot;Notre-Dame de la Délivrande&quot;
* Dunkerque, (Nord) : Chapelle des Dunes
* Guingamp, (Côtes-d&#x27;Armor): Basilica of Notre Dame de Bon Secours.
* La Chapelle-Geneste, (Haute-Loire: Notre Dame de La Chapelle Geneste
* Laon, (Aisne): Notre-Dame Cathedral, statue of 1848
* Le Havre,(Seine-Maritime): statue near the Graville Abbey (Abbaye de Graville)
* Le Puy-en-Velay: In 1254 when passing through on his return from the Holy Land Saint Louis IX of France gave the cathedral an ebony image of the Blessed Virgin clothed in gold brocade (Notre-Dame du Puy). It was destroyed during the Revolution, but replaced at the Restoration with a copy that continues to be venerated.
* Liesse-Notre-Dame, (Aisne): Notre-Dame de Liesse, statue destroyed in 1793, copy of 1857
* Marseille, (Bouches-du-Rhône): Notre-Dame-de-Confession, Abbey of St. Victor; Notre-Dame d&#x27;Huveaune, Saint-Giniez Church
* Mauriac, Cantal: Notre Dame des Miracles
* Mende, (Lozère) : Cathedral (Basilique-cathédrale Notre-Dame-et-Saint-Privat de Mende)
* Menton, (Alpes-Maritimes): St. Michel Church
* Meymac, (Corrèze): Meymac Abbey
* Molompize: Notre-Dame de Vauclair
* Mont-Saint-Michel: Notre-Dame du Mont-Tombe
* Myans, (Savoie): Sanctuaire Notre-Dame de Myans
* Paris, (Neuilly-sur-Seine): Notre-Dame de Bonne Délivrance, in the motherhouse of the Sisters of St. Thomas of Villanova 
* Quimper, (Finistère): Eglise de Guéodet, nommée encore Notre-Dame-de-la-Cité
* Riom, (Puy-de-Dôme): Notre-Dame du Marthuret
* Rocamadour, (Lot): Our Lady of Rocamadour
* Sainte Marie (Réunion) : 
* Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer (Camargue) Avignon: Annual Roma pilgrimage and festival celebrating Sara, the patron saint of the Roma
* Soissons (Aisne): statue of the 12th century
* Tarascon, (Bouches-du-Rhône): Notre-Dame du Château
* Thuret, (Puy-de-Dôme)
* Toulouse: The basilica Notre-Dame de la Daurade in Toulouse, France had housed the shrine of a Black Madonna. The original icon was stolen in the fifteenth century, and its first replacement was burned by Revolutionaries in 1799 on the Place du Capitole. The icon presented today is an 1807 copy of the fifteenth century Madonna. Blackened by the hosts of candles, the second Madonna was known from the sixteenth century as Our Lady La Noire 
* Tournemire, Château d&#x27;Anjony, Our Lady of Anjony
* Vaison-la-Romaine, (Vaucluse): statue on a hill
* Vichy, (Allier): Saint-Blaise Church

====Germany====
* Altötting (Bavaria): Gnadenkapelle (Chapel of the Miraculous Image)
* Beilstein (Rhineland-Palatinate): Karmeliterkirche St. Joseph
* Bielefeld (North Rhine-Westphalia)
* Düsseldorf-Benrath (North Rhine-Westphalia): Pfarrkirche St. Cäcilia
* Hirschberg an der Bergstraße (Baden-Württemberg): Wallfahrtskirche St. Johannes Baptist
* Schloss Hohenstein, Upper Franconia (Bavaria)
* Köln (Nord Rhein Westfalen): St. Maria in der Kupfergasse
* Ludwigshafen-Oggersheim (Rhineland-Palatinate): Schloss- und Wallfahrtskirche Mariä Himmelfahrt (Ludwigshafen)
* Mainau (Baden-Württemberg): Schlosskirche St. Marien
* Munich (Bavaria): Theatine Church; St. Boniface&#x27;s Abbey
* Rastatt (Baden-Württemberg): Einsiedelner Kapelle
* Regensburg (Bavaria): Regensburg Cathedral
* Remagen (Rhineland-Palatinate): Kapelle Schwarze Madonna
* Spabrücken (Rhineland-Palatinate)
* Stetten ob Lontal, Niederstotzingen (Baden-Württemberg)
* Windhausen in Boppard-Herschwiesen (Rhineland-Palatinate)
* Wipperfürth (North Rhine-Westphalia): St. Johannes, Kreuzberg
* Wuppertal-Beyenburg (North Rhine-Westphalia)

====Greece====
* Hidden church of the Black Madonna, Vamos, Crete

====Hungary====

* Cathedral Basilica of Eger: Our Lady of the Immaculate Conception

====Ireland====
* Dublin (Leinster): Our Lady of Dublin in Whitefriar Street Carmelite Church

====Italy====
* Biella (Piedmont): Black Virgin of Oropa, sanctuary of Oropa
* Canneto Valley near Settefrati (Lazio): Madonna di Canneto
* Casale Monferrato (Piedmont): Our Lady of Crea. In the hillside Sanctuary at Crea (Santuario di Crea), a cedar-wood figure, said to be one of three Black Virgins brought to Italy from the Holy Land c. 345 by St. Eusebius.
* Castelmonte, Prepotto (Friuli-Venezia Giulia)
* Gubbio, Italy: The Niger-Regin square, discovered carved in the cave of Sibilla Eugubina on Mount Ingino, is considered to be a word square form of the &quot;Black Queen&quot;. Seemingly of neo-Templar origin, it is dated between 1600–1800 CE, was discovered in 2003, and destroyed by vandalism in 2012.
* Loreto (Marche): Basilica della Santa Casa
* Montevergine (Campania): &quot;Mamma Schiavona&quot; (lit. &quot;Slave Mamma&quot;) located at Sanctuary of Montevergine
* Naples (Campania): Santuario-Basilica SS Carmine Maggiore
* Pescasseroli (Abruzzo): Madonna di Monte Tranquillo 
* Positano (Campania): Located in the church of Santa Maria Assunta, the story of how it got there—sailors shouting &quot;Posa, posa!&quot; (&quot;Put it down, put it down!&quot;)—gave the town its name.
* San Severo (Apulia): &quot;La Madonna del Soccorso&quot; (The Madonna of Succor), St. Severinus Abbot and Saint Severus Bishop Faeto. Statue in gold garments, object of a major three-day festival that attracts over 350,000 people to this small town.
* Seminara (Calabria): Maria Santissima dei poveri
* Tindari (Sicily): Our Lady of Tindari
* Torre Annunziata (Campania): Madonna della Neve
* Venice (Veneto): Madonna della Salute, Santa Maria della Salute
* Viggiano (Basilicata): Santuario Madonna del Sacro Monte

====Kosovo====
* Vitina-: Church of the Black Madonna, where Mother Teresa is believed to have heard her calling.

====Lithuania====

* Aušros vartai: Our Lady of the Gate of Dawn
* Our Lady of Šiluva: Our Lady of the Pine Woods

====Luxembourg====
* Esch-sur-Sûre
* Luxembourg City: Grund
* Luxembourg City: St. John&#x27;s Church

====Macedonia====
* Kališta, Monastery: Madonna icon in the Nativity of Our Most Holy Mother of God church
* Ohrid, Church: Madonna with the child

====Malta====
* Ħamrun: Our Lady of Atoċja, a medieval painting brought to Malta by a merchant in the year 1630, depicting a statue found in Atocha, a parish in Madrid, Spain, and widely known as &quot;Il-Madonna tas-Samra&quot;. (This can mean &#x27;tanned Madonna&#x27;, &#x27;brown Madonna&#x27;, or &#x27;Madonna of Samaria&#x27;.)

====Poland====

* Częstochowa: Our Lady of Czestochowa
** In the United States, the National Shrine of Our Lady of Czestochowa, in Doylestown, Pennsylvania houses a reproduction of the Black Madonna of Częstochowa. A second shrine to Our Lady of Częstochowa is located near Eureka, Missouri.
** In Israel there are two reproductions of the Black Madonna of Częstochowa: One in St. Peter&#x27;s Church in Tel Aviv, and another in the Abbey of the Dormition in Jerusalem.
* Głogówek: Our Lady of Loretto

====Portugal====
* Nazaré (Oeste Subregion): Sanctuary of Our Lady of Nazaré; see: the legend of Nazaré

====Romania====
* : Maica Domnului Siriaca – 
* Cacica: Madona Neagra – Biserica Cacica
* Bucuresti: Madona Neagra – Biserica Dichiu
====Russia====
* Kostroma (Kostroma Oblast): Theotokos of St. Theodore also known as Our Lady of St. Theodore (Федоровская Богоматерь), in Theophany Monastery
* Our Lady of Wladimir, from the 12th century
* Black Virgin of Taganrog, Taganrog Old Cemetery

==== Serbia ====
* Apatin: Blessed Virgin Mary Catholic Church

====Slovenia====
* Koprivna, Črna na Koroškem: St. Anne&#x27;s Church, Koprivna – the altar of Black Madonna

====Spain====

* Andújar (Province of Jaén): (Our Lady of Cabeza), named after the mountain, or .
* Chipiona (Province of Cádiz): or (Our Lady of Regla or the Virgin of Regla), considered by some as the custodian of the Rule of Saint Augustine
* Coria (Province of Cáceres): (Our Lady of Argeme)
* El Puerto de Santa María (Province of Cádiz): (The Virgin of the Miracles)
* Guadalupe (Province of Cáceres): (Our Lady of Guadalupe, Extremadura)
* Jerez de la Frontera (Province of Cádiz): (Our Lady Of Mercy)
* Madrid (Community of Madrid): (Our Lady of Atocha)
* Lluc, Majorca (Balearic Islands): (Our Lady of Lluc), Lluc Monastery
* Monistrol de Montserrat (Catalonia): (Virgin of Montserrat) or &quot; in the Benedictine abbey of Santa Maria de Montserrat
* Ponferrada (Province of León): (Our Lady of the Holm Oak)
* Salamanca (Province of Salamanca): (The Virgin of France&#x27;s Rock, named after the local mountain called )
* Santiago de Compostela (Galicia): A replica of &quot;
* Rianxo (Galicia): Virgen de Guadalupe
* Tenerife (Canary Islands): (Virgin of Candelaria), or &quot;&quot;
* Toledo (Province of Toledo): (Dark Virgin), statue of in the Cathedral of Toledo () (The Enslavement of Our Lady of the Tabernacle)
* Torreciudad (Huesca): Our Lady of Torreciudad

====Sweden====
* Lund Cathedral Attached to a marble pillar in the crypt: Black madonna with child 
* Skee Kyrka, Skee, Bohuslän former Norwegian province. Black madonna with beheaded child 

====Switzerland====
* Einsiedeln (Canton of Schwyz): Our Lady of the Hermits
** In the United States, a reproduction of Our Lady of the Hermits was gifted to the St. Meinrad Archabbey located in St. Meinrad, Indiana
* Sonogno, Valle Verzasca (Canton of Ticino): Santa Maria Loretana
* Uetikon upon Lake (Canton of Zürich): Catholic Church Saint Francis of Assisi
* Metzerlen-Mariastein (Canton of Solothurn): Mariastein Abbey
* Ascona (Canton of Ticino): Black Chapel
* Lugano (Canton of Ticino): Chiesa di Santa Maria di Loreto

====Ukraine====
* Tsarytsya Karpat (Hoshiv Monastery): The Queen of the Carpathian Land

====United Kingdom====
* St. Mary Willesden (Our Lady of Willesden): The original Shrine of Our Lady of Willesden.
* Our Lady of Częstochowa (Church of Our Lady of Czestochowa, Nottingham)

===North America===

====Costa Rica====
* Cartago, Cartago Province: Basílica de Nuestra Señora de los Ángeles (Our Lady of the Angels Basilica)

====Cuba====
* Regla, Havana Province: Nuestra Señora de Regla (Spanish for &quot;Our Lady of Regla&quot;)

====Mexico====
* Tepeyac, Mexico City: Our Lady of Guadalupe

====Trinidad and Tobago====
* Siparia: La Divina Pastora
* Gran Couva: Our Lady of Montserrat

====United States====

* Pacific, Missouri: Black Madonna Shrine and Grottos
* Doylestown, Pennsylvania: National Shrine of Our Lady of Czestochowa
* Jersey City, New Jersey: Our Lady of Czestochowa
* New York City, New York: Cathedral of St. John the Divine
* New York City, New York: Church of St. Ignatius Loyola
* Detroit, Michigan: Shrine of the Black Madonna Church
* Chicago, Illinois: Monastery of the Holy Cross
* Westport, Connecticut: Church of the Assumption

==== Canada ====

* Windsor, Ontario -Black Madonna chapel located at Italian banquet hall Ciociaro club.

===South America===

====Brazil====

* Aparecida, São Paulo: Our Lady of Aparecida or Our Lady Appeared (Nossa Senhora Aparecida or Nossa Senhora da Conceição Aparecida) in the Basilica of the National Shrine of Our Lady of Aparecida

====Chile====
* Andacollo, Elqui Province: La Virgen Morena (Spanish for &quot;The Brunette Virgin&quot;)

==See also==
* Black Nazarene
* &quot;La virgen negra&quot;
* Mariology
* Sofia, Bulgaria

==References==
==Sources==
* Rozett, Ella. &quot;Index of Black Madonnas Worldwide&quot;, InterfaithMary.net 

==External links==

* List of Black Madonnas
* Montserrat
* by Canon Jim Irvine, New Brunswick, Canada
* The Black Madonna &quot;The work of God&quot;
* 
* Black Madonna photo collection on Flickr
* 
* Black Madonna in modern art - see Black Madonna by BystreetSky Artist https://web.archive.org/web/20180802193137/https://www.bystreetsky.com/bystreetsky-art?lightbox=dataItem-j74w6ola</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="89" end="100" title="Christendom" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="108" end="127" title="Blessed Virgin Mary" label="Blessed Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q942467" start="136" end="148" title="Infant Jesus" label="Infant Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="249" end="257" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="262" end="270" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="309" end="313" title="icon" label="icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="326" end="335" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="439" end="450" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="452" end="460" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="464" end="470" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="479" end="484" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="489" end="497" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="864" end="879" title="Southern France" label="Southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q170774" start="1069" end="1076" title="miracle" label="miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="1113" end="1120" title="pilgrim" label="pilgrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="1459" end="1466" title="CG Jung" label="Jungian"/>
<link wikidata="Q96694119" start="1475" end="1483" title="Ean Begg" label="Ean Begg"/>
<link wikidata="Q51670" start="1897" end="1912" title="Song of Songs" label="Song of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159888" start="1954" end="1968" title="Queen of Sheba" label="Queen of Sheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q295524" start="2113" end="2131" title="Camille Flammarion" label="Camille Flammarion"/>
<link wikidata="Q40358" start="2371" end="2422" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science" label="American Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="2922" end="2934" title="Roman legion" label="Roman legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q130272" start="3035" end="3043" title="Chartres" label="Chartres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="3240" end="3257" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q29572838" start="3806" end="3820" title="Monique Scheer" label="Monique Scheer"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="4026" end="4033" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="4035" end="4042" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088381" start="4050" end="4068" title="Notre-Dame d&amp;#x27;Afrique" label="Our Lady of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="4078" end="4091" title="Côte d’Ivoire" label="Côte d’Ivoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768" start="4093" end="4105" title="Yamoussoukro" label="Yamoussoukro"/>
<link wikidata="Q815584" start="4132" end="4161" title="Basilica of Our Lady of Peace" label="Basilica of Our Lady of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="4165" end="4172" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="4228" end="4240" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q217426" start="4242" end="4248" title="Soweto" label="Soweto"/>
<link wikidata="Q734416" start="4309" end="4322" title="Tsuruoka" label="Tsuruoka City"/>
<link wikidata="Q125863" start="4324" end="4343" title="Yamagata Prefecture" label="Yamagata Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="4432" end="4441" title="Meiji era" label="Meiji Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636" start="4472" end="4487" title="Antipolo, Rizal" label="Antipolo, Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110935" start="4490" end="4535" title="Our Lady of Peace and Good Voyage" label="Our Lady of Peace and Good Voyage of Antipolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111831" start="4540" end="4546" title="Ermita, Manila" label="Ermita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="4548" end="4562" title="City of Manila" label="City of Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q18216847" start="4565" end="4585" title="Our Lady of Guidance" label="Our Lady of Guidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419141" start="4589" end="4598" title="Santa Ana, Manila" label="Santa Ana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="4600" end="4614" title="City of Manila" label="City of Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182" start="4646" end="4655" title="Parañaque" label="Parañaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896001" start="4658" end="4684" title="Our Lady of the Good Event (Parañaque)" label="Our Lady of the Good Event"/>
<link wikidata="Q574903" start="4688" end="4702" title="Lapu-Lapu, Philippines" label="Lapu-Lapu City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527637" start="4705" end="4725" title="Our Lady of Regla" label="Our Lady of the Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207" start="4729" end="4748" title="Naga, Camarines Sur" label="Naga, Camarines Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323093" start="4751" end="4774" title="Our Lady of Peñafrancia" label="Our Lady of Peñafrancia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49331" start="4778" end="4791" title="Piat, Cagayan" label="Piat, Cagayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110947" start="4794" end="4810" title="Our Lady of Piat" label="Our Lady of Piat"/>
<link wikidata="Q493444" start="4822" end="4833" title="Tiwi, Albay" label="Tiwi, Albay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110961" start="4836" end="4857" title="Our Lady of Salvation" label="Our Lady of Salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q111950416" start="4876" end="4886" title="Dhori Mata Tirthalaya" label="Dhori Mata"/>
<link wikidata="Q26866040" start="4901" end="4910" title="Dediapada" label="Dediapada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808830" start="4997" end="5006" title="Lavanttal" label="Lavanttal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37985" start="5008" end="5017" title="Carinthia" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="5019" end="5026" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082987" start="5028" end="5050" title="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s Church, Sankt Andrä" label="St. Andrä im Lavanttal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5051" end="5072" title="Basilica Maria Loreto" label="Basilica Maria Loreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="5092" end="5098" title="Brugge" label="Brugge"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="5132" end="5140" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5148" end="5170" title="De Zwerte Lieve Vrouwe" label="De Zwerte Lieve Vrouwe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5178" end="5198" title="St. Catherine Church" label="St. Catherine Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q210003" start="5201" end="5206" title="Halle, Belgium" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5227" end="5248" title="Sint-Martinusbasiliek" label="Sint-Martinusbasiliek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="5251" end="5256" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5258" end="5291" title="La Vierge Noire d&amp;#x27;Outremeuse" label="La Vierge Noire d&amp;#x27;Outremeuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460" start="5295" end="5299" title="Lier, Belgium" label="Lier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5301" end="5329" title="Onze Lieve Vrouw ter Gratiën" label="Onze Lieve Vrouw ter Gratiën"/>
<link wikidata="Q932020" start="5332" end="5353" title="Scherpenheuvel-Zichem" label="Scherpenheuvel-Zichem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057311" start="5355" end="5381" title="Basilica of Our Lady of Scherpenheuvel" label="Our Lady of Scherpenheuvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q173219" start="5384" end="5391" title="Tournai" label="Tournai"/>
<link wikidata="Q391229" start="5393" end="5413" title="Our Lady of Flanders" label="Our Lady of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q391229" start="5417" end="5434" title="Tournai Cathedral" label="Tournai Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q202954" start="5437" end="5445" title="Verviers" label="Verviers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5453" end="5483" title="Black Virgin of the Recollects" label="Black Virgin of the Recollects"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5491" end="5522" title="Notre-Dame des Récollets Church" label="Notre-Dame des Récollets Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q497565" start="5527" end="5535" title="Walcourt" label="Walcourt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5538" end="5560" title="Notre-Dame de Walcourt" label="Notre-Dame de Walcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q921910" start="5581" end="5596" title="Marija Bistrica" label="Marija Bistrica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5598" end="5636" title="Our Lady of Bistrica, Queen of Croatia" label="Our Lady of Bistrica, Queen of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="5663" end="5667" title="Brno" label="Brno"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5669" end="5709" title="Assumption of Virgin Mary Minor Basilica" label="Assumption of Virgin Mary Minor Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q334311" start="5711" end="5739" title="St Thomas&amp;#x27;s Abbey, Brno" label="St Thomas&amp;#x27;s Abbey, Brno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="5742" end="5748" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5750" end="5773" title="The Madonna of Breznice" label="The Madonna of Breznice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5796" end="5834" title="The Church of Our Lady Under the Chain" label="The Church of Our Lady Under the Chain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5836" end="5866" title="Kostel Panny Marie pod řetězem" label="Kostel Panny Marie pod řetězem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717859" start="5893" end="5919" title="House of the Black Madonna" label="House of the Black Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q47465" start="6088" end="6103" title="Aix-en-Provence" label="Aix-en-Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240" start="6106" end="6122" title="Bouches-du-Rhône" label="Bouches-du-Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6125" end="6146" title="Notre-Dame des Graces" label="Notre-Dame des Graces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539168" start="6148" end="6183" title="Aix Cathedral" label="Cathédrale Saint-Sauveur d&amp;#x27;Aix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060041" start="6186" end="6194" title="Arconsat" label="Arconsat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6197" end="6218" title="Notre-Dame des Champs" label="Notre-Dame des Champs"/>
<link wikidata="Q174234" start="6222" end="6230" title="Aurillac" label="Aurillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259" start="6233" end="6239" title="Cantal" label="Cantal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6242" end="6263" title="Church of Notre-Dame aux Neiges, Aurillac" label="Notre-Dame des Neiges"/>
<link wikidata="Q16121" start="6266" end="6272" title="Beaune" label="Beaune"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6274" end="6292" title="Our Lady of Beaune" label="Our Lady of Beaune"/>
<link wikidata="Q37776" start="6295" end="6303" title="Besançon" label="Besançon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6305" end="6321" title="Our Lady de Gray" label="Our Lady de Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q326043" start="6324" end="6348" title="Besse-et-Saint-Anastaise" label="Besse-et-Saint-Anastaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q12694" start="6351" end="6362" title="Puy-de-Dôme" label="Puy-de-Dôme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6365" end="6383" title="Saint-André Church" label="Saint-André Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6385" end="6409" title="Notre-Dame de Vassivière" label="Notre-Dame de Vassivière"/>
<link wikidata="Q133069" start="6412" end="6427" title="Bourg-en-Bresse" label="Bourg-en-Bresse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083" start="6430" end="6433" title="Ain" label="Ain"/>
<link wikidata="Q130272" start="6451" end="6459" title="Chartres" label="Chartres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377" start="6462" end="6474" title="Eure-et-Loir" label="Eure-et-Loir"/>
<link wikidata="Q180274" start="6490" end="6511" title="Chartres Cathedral" label="Cathedral of Chartres"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6513" end="6537" title="Notre-Dame-de-Sous-Terre" label="Notre-Dame-de-Sous-Terre"/>
<link wikidata="Q42168" start="6540" end="6556" title="Clermont-Ferrand" label="Clermont-Ferrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q12694" start="6559" end="6570" title="Puy-de-Dôme" label="Puy-de-Dôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q321502" start="6574" end="6580" title="Cusset" label="Cusset"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6582" end="6608" title="the Black Virgin of Cusset" label="the Black Virgin of Cusset"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="6611" end="6616" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342" start="6619" end="6633" title="Côte-d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Côte-d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807058" start="6636" end="6665" title="Church of Notre-Dame of Dijon" label="Church of Notre-Dame of Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q839501" start="6668" end="6689" title="Douvres-la-Délivrande" label="Douvres-la-Délivrande"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="6772" end="6781" title="Dunkerque" label="Dunkerque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6792" end="6810" title="Chapelle des Dunes" label="Chapelle des Dunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193808" start="6813" end="6821" title="Guingamp" label="Guingamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349" start="6824" end="6842" title="Côtes-d&amp;#x27;Armor" label="Côtes-d&amp;#x27;Armor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6845" end="6882" title="Basilica of Notre Dame de Bon Secours" label="Basilica of Notre Dame de Bon Secours"/>
<link wikidata="Q955264" start="6886" end="6905" title="La Chapelle-Geneste" label="La Chapelle-Geneste"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6921" end="6954" title="Notre Dame de La Chapelle Geneste" label="Notre Dame de La Chapelle Geneste"/>
<link wikidata="Q167141" start="6957" end="6961" title="Laon" label="Laon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093" start="6964" end="6969" title="Aisne" label="Aisne"/>
<link wikidata="Q585947" start="6972" end="6992" title="Laon Cathedral" label="Notre-Dame Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="7011" end="7019" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7054" end="7068" title="Graville Abbey" label="Graville Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103770" start="7070" end="7088" title="Abbaye de Graville" label="Abbaye de Graville"/>
<link wikidata="Q184359" start="7092" end="7107" title="Le Puy-en-Velay" label="Le Puy-en-Velay"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="7177" end="7195" title="Louis IX of France" label="Louis IX of France"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7277" end="7294" title="Notre-Dame du Puy" label="Notre-Dame du Puy"/>
<link wikidata="Q846716" start="7415" end="7432" title="Liesse-Notre-Dame" label="Liesse-Notre-Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093" start="7435" end="7440" title="Aisne" label="Aisne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7443" end="7463" title="Notre-Dame de Liesse" label="Notre-Dame de Liesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="7506" end="7515" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240" start="7518" end="7534" title="Bouches-du-Rhône" label="Bouches-du-Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7537" end="7561" title="Notre-Dame-de-Confession" label="Notre-Dame-de-Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858504" start="7563" end="7582" title="Abbey of St. Victor, Marseille" label="Abbey of St. Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q454125" start="7634" end="7641" title="Mauriac, Cantal" label="Mauriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259" start="7643" end="7649" title="Cantal" label="Cantal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7651" end="7674" title="Notre Dame des Miracles" label="Notre Dame des Miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q191772" start="7677" end="7682" title="Mende, Lozère" label="Mende"/>
<link wikidata="Q12580" start="7685" end="7691" title="Lozère" label="Lozère"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942278" start="7695" end="7704" title="Mende Cathedral" label="Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q180083" start="7766" end="7772" title="Menton" label="Menton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139" start="7775" end="7790" title="Alpes-Maritimes" label="Alpes-Maritimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191784" start="7813" end="7819" title="Meymac" label="Meymac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326" start="7822" end="7829" title="Corrèze" label="Corrèze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820351" start="7832" end="7844" title="Meymac Abbey" label="Meymac Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q270116" start="7847" end="7856" title="Molompize" label="Molompize"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7858" end="7880" title="Notre-Dame de Vauclair" label="Notre-Dame de Vauclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q20892" start="7883" end="7900" title="Mont-Saint-Michel" label="Mont-Saint-Michel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7902" end="7926" title="Notre-Dame du Mont-Tombe" label="Notre-Dame du Mont-Tombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153898" start="7929" end="7934" title="Myans" label="Myans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12745" start="7937" end="7943" title="Savoie" label="Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7946" end="7976" title=":fr:Sanctuaire Notre-Dame de Myans" label="Sanctuaire Notre-Dame de Myans"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="7979" end="7984" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q48958" start="7987" end="8004" title="Neuilly-sur-Seine" label="Neuilly-sur-Seine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8007" end="8037" title="Notre-Dame de Bonne Délivrance" label="Notre-Dame de Bonne Délivrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q342" start="8103" end="8110" title="Quimper" label="Quimper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389" start="8113" end="8122" title="Finistère" label="Finistère"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8125" end="8142" title="Eglise de Guéodet" label="Eglise de Guéodet"/>
<link wikidata="Q207575" start="8182" end="8186" title="Riom" label="Riom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12694" start="8189" end="8200" title="Puy-de-Dôme" label="Puy-de-Dôme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8203" end="8226" title="Notre-Dame du Marthuret" label="Notre-Dame du Marthuret"/>
<link wikidata="Q382628" start="8229" end="8239" title="Rocamadour" label="Rocamadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q12576" start="8242" end="8245" title="Lot (department)" label="Lot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8248" end="8270" title="Our Lady of Rocamadour" label="Our Lady of Rocamadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q662942" start="8273" end="8285" title="Sainte-Marie, Réunion" label="Sainte Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="8287" end="8294" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q330920" start="8301" end="8325" title="Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer" label="Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q218151" start="8327" end="8335" title="Camargue" label="Camargue"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="8353" end="8357" title="Romani (people)" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="8358" end="8368" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q238261" start="8394" end="8398" title="Saint Sarah" label="Sara"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="8424" end="8428" title="Romani people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q167152" start="8431" end="8439" title="Soissons" label="Soissons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093" start="8441" end="8446" title="Aisne" label="Aisne"/>
<link wikidata="Q234924" start="8478" end="8486" title="Tarascon" label="Tarascon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240" start="8489" end="8505" title="Bouches-du-Rhône" label="Bouches-du-Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8508" end="8529" title="Notre-Dame du Château" label="Notre-Dame du Château"/>
<link wikidata="Q833402" start="8532" end="8538" title="Thuret, Puy-de-Dôme" label="Thuret"/>
<link wikidata="Q12694" start="8541" end="8552" title="Puy-de-Dôme" label="Puy-de-Dôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="8556" end="8564" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887166" start="8579" end="8603" title="Notre-Dame de la Daurade" label="Notre-Dame de la Daurade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="8607" end="8615" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351013" start="8792" end="8809" title="Place du Capitole" label="Place du Capitole"/>
<link wikidata="Q350167" start="9001" end="9011" title="Tournemire, Cantal" label="Tournemire"/>
<link wikidata="Q637019" start="9013" end="9034" title="Château d&amp;#x27;Anjony" label="Château d&amp;#x27;Anjony"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9036" end="9054" title="Our Lady of Anjony" label="Our Lady of Anjony"/>
<link wikidata="Q504887" start="9057" end="9074" title="Vaison-la-Romaine" label="Vaison-la-Romaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12792" start="9077" end="9085" title="Vaucluse" label="Vaucluse"/>
<link wikidata="Q93351" start="9107" end="9112" title="Vichy" label="Vichy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113" start="9115" end="9121" title="Allier" label="Allier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9124" end="9143" title="Saint-Blaise Church" label="Saint-Blaise Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q256669" start="9163" end="9172" title="Altötting" label="Altötting"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="9174" end="9181" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9199" end="9229" title="Chapel of the Miraculous Image" label="Chapel of the Miraculous Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q652238" start="9233" end="9242" title="Beilstein, Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Beilstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="9244" end="9264" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9267" end="9294" title="Karmeliterkirche St. Joseph" label="Karmeliterkirche St. Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112" start="9297" end="9306" title="Bielefeld" label="Bielefeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="9308" end="9330" title="North Rhine-Westphalia" label="North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q459769" start="9334" end="9352" title="Düsseldorf-Benrath" label="Düsseldorf-Benrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="9354" end="9376" title="North Rhine-Westphalia" label="North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9379" end="9402" title="Pfarrkirche St. Cäcilia" label="Pfarrkirche St. Cäcilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82922" start="9405" end="9433" title="Hirschberg an der Bergstraße" label="Hirschberg an der Bergstraße"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="9435" end="9452" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9455" end="9492" title="Wallfahrtskirche St. Johannes Baptist" label="Wallfahrtskirche St. Johannes Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9495" end="9513" title="Schloss Hohenstein" label="Schloss Hohenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q10554" start="9515" end="9530" title="Upper Franconia" label="Upper Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="9532" end="9539" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="9543" end="9547" title="Köln" label="Köln"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9549" end="9569" title="Nord Rhein Westfalen" label="Nord Rhein Westfalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320737" start="9572" end="9600" title="St. Maria in der Kupfergasse" label="St. Maria in der Kupfergasse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9603" end="9626" title="Ludwigshafen-Oggersheim" label="Ludwigshafen-Oggersheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="9628" end="9648" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9651" end="9698" title=":de:Wallfahrtskirche Mariä Himmelfahrt (Ludwigshafen)" label="Schloss- und Wallfahrtskirche Mariä Himmelfahrt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910" start="9700" end="9712" title="Ludwigshafen" label="Ludwigshafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q165401" start="9716" end="9722" title="Mainau" label="Mainau"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="9724" end="9741" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9744" end="9768" title="Schlosskirche St. Marien" label="Schlosskirche St. Marien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="9771" end="9777" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="9779" end="9786" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q259799" start="9789" end="9804" title="Theatine Church, Munich" label="Theatine Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q279303" start="9806" end="9831" title="St. Boniface&amp;#x27;s Abbey, Munich" label="St. Boniface&amp;#x27;s Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6874" start="9834" end="9841" title="Rastatt" label="Rastatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="9843" end="9860" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978" start="9886" end="9896" title="Regensburg" label="Regensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="9898" end="9905" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q280268" start="9908" end="9928" title="Regensburg Cathedral" label="Regensburg Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q486548" start="9931" end="9938" title="Remagen" label="Remagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="9940" end="9960" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9963" end="9987" title="Kapelle Schwarze Madonna" label="Kapelle Schwarze Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q614964" start="9990" end="10000" title="Spabrücken" label="Spabrücken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="10002" end="10022" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10026" end="10043" title="Stetten ob Lontal" label="Stetten ob Lontal"/>
<link wikidata="Q584682" start="10045" end="10061" title="Niederstotzingen" label="Niederstotzingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="10063" end="10080" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q668499" start="10084" end="10094" title="Windhausen" label="Windhausen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10098" end="10118" title="Boppard-Herschwiesen" label="Boppard-Herschwiesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="10120" end="10140" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11045" start="10144" end="10155" title="Wipperfürth" label="Wipperfürth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="10157" end="10179" title="North Rhine-Westphalia" label="North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10182" end="10205" title="St. Johannes, Kreuzberg" label="St. Johannes, Kreuzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107" start="10208" end="10227" title="Wuppertal-Beyenburg" label="Wuppertal-Beyenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="10229" end="10251" title="North Rhine-Westphalia" label="North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10271" end="10305" title="Hidden church of the Black Madonna" label="Hidden church of the Black Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q605562" start="10307" end="10312" title="Vamos" label="Vamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="10314" end="10319" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q735805" start="10340" end="10366" title="Cathedral Basilica of Eger" label="Cathedral Basilica of Eger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="10425" end="10431" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q159736" start="10433" end="10441" title="Leinster" label="Leinster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110780" start="10444" end="10462" title="Our Lady of Dublin" label="Our Lady of Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722778" start="10466" end="10500" title="Whitefriar Street Carmelite Church" label="Whitefriar Street Carmelite Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q18021" start="10518" end="10524" title="Biella" label="Biella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="10526" end="10534" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915491" start="10537" end="10558" title="Black Virgin of Oropa" label="Black Virgin of Oropa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915491" start="10560" end="10578" title="sanctuary of Oropa" label="sanctuary of Oropa"/>
<link wikidata="Q117362" start="10601" end="10611" title="Settefrati" label="Settefrati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282" start="10613" end="10618" title="Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10621" end="10639" title="Madonna di Canneto" label="Madonna di Canneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16333" start="10642" end="10659" title="Casale Monferrato" label="Casale Monferrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="10661" end="10669" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="10830" end="10839" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061108" start="10850" end="10862" title="Eusebius of Alexandria" label="St. Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10866" end="10877" title="Castelmonte" label="Castelmonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q53320" start="10879" end="10887" title="Prepotto" label="Prepotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250" start="10889" end="10910" title="Friuli-Venezia Giulia" label="Friuli-Venezia Giulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20458" start="10914" end="10920" title="Gubbio" label="Gubbio"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="10922" end="10927" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10974" end="11002" title=":it:Grotta della Sibilla" label="the cave of Sibilla Eugubina"/>
<link wikidata="Q330406" start="11006" end="11018" title="Mount Ingino" label="Mount Ingino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940408" start="11042" end="11053" title="word square" label="word square"/>
<link wikidata="Q124110" start="11220" end="11226" title="Loreto, Marche" label="Loreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279" start="11228" end="11234" title="Marche" label="Marche"/>
<link wikidata="Q654996" start="11237" end="11262" title="Basilica della Santa Casa" label="Basilica della Santa Casa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157122" start="11265" end="11277" title="Montevergine" label="Montevergine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="11279" end="11287" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q11155087" start="11360" end="11385" title="Sanctuary of Montevergine" label="Sanctuary of Montevergine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="11388" end="11394" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="11396" end="11404" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q717930" start="11407" end="11445" title="Santa Maria del Carmine, Naples" label="Santuario-Basilica SS Carmine Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q50121" start="11448" end="11460" title="Pescasseroli" label="Pescasseroli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284" start="11462" end="11469" title="Abruzzo" label="Abruzzo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11472" end="11499" title="Madonna di Monte Tranquillo" label="Madonna di Monte Tranquillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q81345" start="11503" end="11511" title="Positano" label="Positano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="11513" end="11521" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11539" end="11568" title="Church of Santa Maria Assunta (Positano)" label="church of Santa Maria Assunta"/>
<link wikidata="Q19275" start="11707" end="11717" title="San Severo" label="San Severo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="11719" end="11725" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11728" end="11757" title="&amp;quot;La Madonna del Soccorso" label="&amp;quot;La Madonna del Soccorso"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11765" end="11786" title="The Madonna of Succor" label="The Madonna of Succor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11789" end="11808" title="St. Severinus Abbot" label="St. Severinus Abbot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11813" end="11839" title="Saint Severus Bishop Faeto" label="Saint Severus Bishop Faeto"/>
<link wikidata="Q54667" start="11959" end="11967" title="Seminara" label="Seminara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="11969" end="11977" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11980" end="12007" title="Maria Santissima dei poveri" label="Maria Santissima dei poveri"/>
<link wikidata="Q671481" start="12010" end="12017" title="Tindari" label="Tindari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="12019" end="12025" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12028" end="12047" title="Our Lady of Tindari" label="Our Lady of Tindari"/>
<link wikidata="Q72712" start="12050" end="12066" title="Torre Annunziata" label="Torre Annunziata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="12068" end="12076" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q263827" start="12079" end="12097" title="Madonna della Neve" label="Madonna della Neve"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="12100" end="12106" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="12108" end="12114" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q52531" start="12117" end="12137" title="Madonna della Salute" label="Madonna della Salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q52531" start="12139" end="12163" title="Santa Maria della Salute" label="Santa Maria della Salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q52695" start="12166" end="12174" title="Viggiano" label="Viggiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452" start="12176" end="12186" title="Basilicata" label="Basilicata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12189" end="12222" title="Santuario Madonna del Sacro Monte" label="Santuario Madonna del Sacro Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021775" start="12241" end="12247" title="Vitina (town)" label="Vitina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12250" end="12277" title="Church of the Black Madonna" label="Church of the Black Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q30547" start="12285" end="12298" title="Mother Teresa" label="Mother Teresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q937212" start="12360" end="12373" title="Gate of Dawn" label="Aušros vartai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721080" start="12375" end="12403" title="Our Lady of the Gate of Dawn" label="Our Lady of the Gate of Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111052" start="12406" end="12424" title="Our Lady of Šiluva" label="Our Lady of Šiluva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12426" end="12452" title="Our Lady of the Pine Woods" label="Our Lady of the Pine Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q986392" start="12475" end="12488" title="Esch-sur-Sûre" label="Esch-sur-Sûre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="12491" end="12506" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016205" start="12508" end="12513" title="Grund (Luxembourg)" label="Grund"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12533" end="12555" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Church, Luxembourg" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q367964" start="12577" end="12584" title="Kališta" label="Kališta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12617" end="12663" title="Nativity of Our Most Holy Mother of God church" label="Nativity of Our Most Holy Mother of God church"/>
<link wikidata="Q343001" start="12721" end="12727" title="Ħamrun" label="Ħamrun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12729" end="12747" title="Our Lady of Atoċja" label="Our Lady of Atoċja"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="12780" end="12785" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6856" start="12812" end="12816" title="1630" label="1630"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402038" start="12846" end="12852" title="Basilica of Nuestra Señora de Atocha" label="Atocha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="12866" end="12872" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="12874" end="12879" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12907" end="12927" title="Il-Madonna tas-Samra" label="Il-Madonna tas-Samra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294629" start="13025" end="13032" title="Samaria" label="Samaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q573619" start="13073" end="13096" title="Black Madonna of Częstochowa" label="Our Lady of Czestochowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978431" start="13126" end="13168" title="National Shrine of Our Lady of Czestochowa" label="National Shrine of Our Lady of Czestochowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010232" start="13173" end="13197" title="Doylestown, Pennsylvania" label="Doylestown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q103217" start="13244" end="13255" title="Częstochowa" label="Częstochowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921208" start="13266" end="13272" title="Black Madonna Shrine, Missouri" label="shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q961919" start="13316" end="13332" title="Eureka, Missouri" label="Eureka, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="13340" end="13346" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919884" start="13419" end="13442" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Church, Jaffa" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="13446" end="13454" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245538" start="13475" end="13497" title="Abbey of the Dormition" label="Abbey of the Dormition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="13501" end="13510" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q954748" start="13514" end="13522" title="Głogówek" label="Głogówek"/>
<link wikidata="Q654996" start="13524" end="13543" title="Our Lady of Loretto" label="Our Lady of Loretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q497179" start="13564" end="13570" title="Nazaré (Portugal)" label="Nazaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q10340327" start="13572" end="13587" title="Oeste Subregion" label="Oeste Subregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116937" start="13590" end="13621" title="Sanctuary of Our Lady of Nazaré" label="Sanctuary of Our Lady of Nazaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q10317187" start="13628" end="13648" title="the legend of Nazaré" label="the legend of Nazaré"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13670" end="13692" title="Maica Domnului Siriaca" label="Maica Domnului Siriaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084113" start="13698" end="13704" title="Cacica" label="Cacica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13722" end="13737" title="Biserica Cacica" label="Biserica Cacica"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="13740" end="13749" title="Bucuresti" label="Bucuresti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13767" end="13782" title="Biserica Dichiu" label="Biserica Dichiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592" start="13800" end="13808" title="Kostroma" label="Kostroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596" start="13810" end="13825" title="Kostroma Oblast" label="Kostroma Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661742" start="13828" end="13853" title="Theotokos of St. Theodore" label="Theotokos of St. Theodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089836" start="13922" end="13941" title="Theophany Monastery, Kostroma" label="Theophany Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13944" end="13964" title="Our Lady of Wladimir" label="Our Lady of Wladimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061" start="13975" end="13987" title="12th century" label="12th century"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13990" end="14014" title="Black Virgin of Taganrog" label="Black Virgin of Taganrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972494" start="14016" end="14037" title="Taganrog Old Cemetery" label="Taganrog Old Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q372110" start="14058" end="14064" title="Apatin" label="Apatin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14066" end="14101" title="Blessed Virgin Mary Catholic Church" label="Blessed Virgin Mary Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625656" start="14122" end="14148" title="Koprivna, Črna na Koroškem" label="Koprivna, Črna na Koroškem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586997" start="14150" end="14182" title="St. Anne&amp;#x27;s Church, Koprivna" label="St. Anne&amp;#x27;s Church, Koprivna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14185" end="14211" title="the altar of Black Madonna" label="the altar of Black Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q528530" start="14230" end="14237" title="Andújar" label="Andújar"/>
<link wikidata="Q95025" start="14239" end="14255" title="Province of Jaén (Spain)" label="Province of Jaén"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163464" start="14259" end="14277" title="Our Lady of Cabeza" label="Our Lady of Cabeza"/>
<link wikidata="Q741749" start="14313" end="14321" title="Chipiona" label="Chipiona"/>
<link wikidata="Q81978" start="14323" end="14340" title="Province of Cádiz" label="Province of Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14347" end="14387" title="Our Lady of Regla or the Virgin of Regla" label="Our Lady of Regla or the Virgin of Regla"/>
<link wikidata="Q644892" start="14433" end="14456" title="Rule of Saint Augustine" label="Rule of Saint Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q142778" start="14459" end="14464" title="Coria, Cáceres" label="Coria"/>
<link wikidata="Q81977" start="14466" end="14485" title="Province of Cáceres" label="Province of Cáceres"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14489" end="14507" title="Our Lady of Argeme" label="Our Lady of Argeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q203040" start="14511" end="14535" title="El Puerto de Santa María" label="El Puerto de Santa María"/>
<link wikidata="Q81978" start="14537" end="14554" title="Province of Cádiz" label="Province of Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14558" end="14584" title="The Virgin of the Miracles" label="The Virgin of the Miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q695504" start="14588" end="14597" title="Guadalupe, Cáceres" label="Guadalupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81977" start="14599" end="14618" title="Province of Cáceres" label="Province of Cáceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055160" start="14622" end="14656" title="Our Lady of Guadalupe, Extremadura" label="Our Lady of Guadalupe, Extremadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q12303" start="14660" end="14680" title="Jerez de la Frontera" label="Jerez de la Frontera"/>
<link wikidata="Q81978" start="14682" end="14699" title="Province of Cádiz" label="Province of Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14703" end="14720" title="Our Lady Of Mercy" label="Our Lady Of Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="14724" end="14730" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756" start="14732" end="14751" title="Community of Madrid" label="Community of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402038" start="14755" end="14773" title="Basilica of Nuestra Señora de Atocha" label="Our Lady of Atocha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478640" start="14777" end="14781" title="Lluc" label="Lluc"/>
<link wikidata="Q8828" start="14783" end="14790" title="Majorca" label="Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="14792" end="14808" title="Balearic Islands" label="Balearic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478640" start="14831" end="14845" title="Santuari de Lluc" label="Lluc Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16704" start="14848" end="14871" title="Monistrol de Montserrat" label="Monistrol de Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="14873" end="14882" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q301779" start="14886" end="14906" title="Virgin of Montserrat" label="Virgin of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q771935" start="14946" end="14971" title="Santa Maria de Montserrat" label="Santa Maria de Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12164" start="14974" end="14984" title="Ponferrada" label="Ponferrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q71140" start="14986" end="15002" title="León (province)" label="Province of León"/>
<link wikidata="Q220715" start="15022" end="15030" title="Quercus rotundifolia" label="Holm Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695" start="15034" end="15043" title="Salamanca" label="Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q71080" start="15045" end="15066" title="Province of Salamanca" label="Province of Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15070" end="15102" title="The Virgin of France&amp;#x27;s Rock" label="The Virgin of France&amp;#x27;s Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q14314" start="15146" end="15168" title="Santiago de Compostela" label="Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908" start="15170" end="15177" title="Galicia (Spain)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40846" start="15242" end="15250" title="Tenerife" label="Tenerife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="15252" end="15266" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q15544905" start="15270" end="15290" title="Virgin of Candelaria" label="Virgin of Candelaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="15311" end="15317" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q54929" start="15319" end="15337" title="Province of Toledo" label="Province of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15341" end="15352" title="Dark Virgin" label="Dark Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123180" start="15372" end="15391" title="Cathedral of Toledo" label="Cathedral of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15396" end="15441" title="The Enslavement of Our Lady of the Tabernacle" label="The Enslavement of Our Lady of the Tabernacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125177" start="15445" end="15456" title="Torreciudad" label="Torreciudad"/>
<link wikidata="Q55182" start="15458" end="15464" title="Huesca (province)" label="Huesca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15467" end="15490" title="Our Lady of Torreciudad" label="Our Lady of Torreciudad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236689" start="15509" end="15523" title="Lund Cathedral" label="Lund Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15594" end="15604" title="Skee Kyrka" label="Skee Kyrka"/>
<link wikidata="Q933760" start="15606" end="15610" title="Skee, Sweden" label="Skee"/>
<link wikidata="Q209523" start="15612" end="15620" title="Bohuslän" label="Bohuslän"/>
<link wikidata="Q125072234" start="15706" end="15716" title="Einsiedeln Abbey" label="Einsiedeln"/>
<link wikidata="Q12433" start="15718" end="15734" title="Canton of Schwyz" label="Canton of Schwyz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15737" end="15760" title="Our Lady of the Hermits" label="Our Lady of the Hermits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356394" start="15846" end="15867" title="St. Meinrad Archabbey" label="St. Meinrad Archabbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q70699" start="15902" end="15909" title="Sonogno" label="Sonogno"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724" start="15927" end="15943" title="Ticino" label="Canton of Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15946" end="15966" title="Santa Maria Loretana" label="Santa Maria Loretana"/>
<link wikidata="Q67058" start="15969" end="15986" title="Uetikon" label="Uetikon upon Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q11943" start="15988" end="16004" title="Canton of Zürich" label="Canton of Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16007" end="16046" title="Catholic Church Saint Francis of Assisi" label="Catholic Church Saint Francis of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q70025" start="16049" end="16069" title="Metzerlen-Mariastein" label="Metzerlen-Mariastein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11929" start="16071" end="16090" title="Canton of Solothurn" label="Canton of Solothurn"/>
<link wikidata="Q359617" start="16093" end="16109" title="Mariastein Abbey" label="Mariastein Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q63992" start="16112" end="16118" title="Ascona" label="Ascona"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724" start="16120" end="16136" title="Ticino" label="Canton of Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16139" end="16151" title="Black Chapel" label="Black Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024" start="16154" end="16160" title="Lugano" label="Lugano"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724" start="16162" end="16178" title="Ticino" label="Canton of Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16181" end="16212" title="Chiesa di Santa Maria di Loreto" label="Chiesa di Santa Maria di Loreto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16232" end="16248" title="Tsarytsya Karpat" label="Tsarytsya Karpat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16250" end="16266" title="Hoshiv Monastery" label="Hoshiv Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16269" end="16301" title="The Queen of the Carpathian Land" label="The Queen of the Carpathian Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q17541768" start="16328" end="16346" title="St. Mary Willesden" label="St. Mary Willesden"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063018" start="16348" end="16369" title="Our Lady of Willesden" label="Our Lady of Willesden"/>
<link wikidata="Q114290473" start="16385" end="16403" title="Shrines to the Virgin Mary" label="Shrine of Our Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q573619" start="16420" end="16443" title="Our Lady of Częstochowa" label="Our Lady of Częstochowa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16445" end="16490" title="Church of Our Lady of Czestochowa, Nottingham" label="Church of Our Lady of Czestochowa, Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q30617" start="16535" end="16542" title="Cartago, Costa Rica" label="Cartago"/>
<link wikidata="Q502181" start="16544" end="16560" title="Cartago Province" label="Cartago Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445644" start="16562" end="16603" title="Basílica de Nuestra Señora de los Ángeles (Cartago)" label="Basílica de Nuestra Señora de los Ángeles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16605" end="16636" title="Our Lady of the Angels Basilica" label="Our Lady of the Angels Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066278" start="16654" end="16659" title="Regla" label="Regla"/>
<link wikidata="Q12588" start="16661" end="16676" title="Havana Province" label="Havana Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527637" start="16721" end="16738" title="Our Lady of Regla" label="Our Lady of Regla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014974" start="16764" end="16771" title="Tepeyac" label="Tepeyac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="16773" end="16784" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q31877" start="16786" end="16807" title="Our Lady of Guadalupe" label="Our Lady of Guadalupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493381" start="16839" end="16846" title="Siparia" label="Siparia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16848" end="16865" title="La Divina Pastora" label="La Divina Pastora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16868" end="16878" title="Gran Couva" label="Gran Couva"/>
<link wikidata="Q301779" start="16880" end="16902" title="Our Lady of Montserrat" label="Our Lady of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q967048" start="16929" end="16946" title="Pacific, Missouri" label="Pacific, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921208" start="16948" end="16980" title="Black Madonna Shrine and Grottos" label="Black Madonna Shrine and Grottos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010232" start="16983" end="17007" title="Doylestown, Pennsylvania" label="Doylestown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978431" start="17009" end="17051" title="National Shrine of Our Lady of Czestochowa" label="National Shrine of Our Lady of Czestochowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="17054" end="17077" title="Jersey City, New Jersey" label="Jersey City, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="17105" end="17118" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q865655" start="17130" end="17162" title="Cathedral of St. John the Divine" label="Cathedral of St. John the Divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10927936" start="17190" end="17219" title="Church of St. Ignatius Loyola" label="Church of St. Ignatius Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="17222" end="17229" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="17278" end="17285" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q586762" start="17327" end="17348" title="Westport, Connecticut" label="Westport, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q617702" start="17522" end="17531" title="Aparecida" label="Aparecida"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="17533" end="17542" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469225" start="17544" end="17565" title="Our Lady of Aparecida" label="Our Lady of Aparecida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886950" start="17660" end="17716" title="Basilica of the National Shrine of Our Lady of Aparecida" label="Basilica of the National Shrine of Our Lady of Aparecida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3602" start="17734" end="17743" title="Andacollo" label="Andacollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q721224" start="17745" end="17759" title="Elqui Province" label="Elqui Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435706" start="17761" end="17777" title="La Virgen Morena" label="La Virgen Morena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408400" start="17840" end="17854" title="Black Nazarene" label="Black Nazarene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465840" start="17863" end="17878" title="La virgen negra" label="La virgen negra"/>
<link wikidata="Q650276" start="17887" end="17896" title="Mariology" label="Mariology"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="17899" end="17914" title="Sofia, Bulgaria" label="Sofia, Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104153" start="18090" end="18095" title="Canon (priest)" label="Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="18108" end="18129" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick, Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
