<doc id="274942" wikidata="Q1517192" url="?curid=274942" title="History of the United States Navy">
<text>The history of the United States Navy divides into two major periods: the &quot;Old Navy&quot;, a small but respected force of sailing ships that became notable for innovation in the use of ironclads during the American Civil War, and the &quot;New Navy&quot; the result of a modernization effort that began in the 1880s and made it the largest in the world by 1943.&lt;ref name=&quot;Crocker III 2006 https://archive.org/details/donttreadonme40000croc/page/302 302&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

The United States Navy claims October 13, 1775 as the date of its official establishment, when the Second Continental Congress passed a resolution creating the Continental Navy. With the end of the American Revolutionary War, the Continental Navy was disbanded. Under the Presidency of George Washington, merchant shipping came under threat while in the Mediterranean by Barbary pirates from four North African States. This led to the Naval Act of 1794, which created a permanent standing U.S. Navy. The original six frigates were authorized as part of the Act. Over the next 20 years, the Navy fought the French Republic Navy in the Quasi-War (1798–99), Barbary states in the First and Second Barbary Wars, and the British in the War of 1812. After the War of 1812, the U.S. Navy was at peace until the Mexican–American War in 1846, and served to combat piracy in the Mediterranean and Caribbean seas, as well as fighting the slave trade off the coast of West Africa. In 1845, the Naval Academy was founded at old Fort Severn at Annapolis, Maryland by the Chesapeake Bay. In 1861, the American Civil War began and the U.S. Navy fought the small Confederate States Navy with both sailing ships and new revolutionary ironclad ships while forming a blockade that shut down the Confederacy&#x27;s civilian coastal shipping. After the Civil War, most of its ships were laid up in reserve, and by 1878, the Navy was just 6,000 men.

In 1882, the U.S. Navy consisted of many outdated ship designs. Over the next decade, Congress approved building multiple modern steel-hulled armored cruisers and battleships, and by around the start of the 20th century had moved from twelfth place in 1870 to fifth place in terms of numbers of ships. Most sailors were foreigners. After winning two major battles during the 1898 Spanish–American War, the American Navy continued to build more ships, and by the end of World War I had more men and women in uniform than the British Royal Navy. The Washington Naval Conference of 1921 recognized the Navy as equal in capital ship size to the Royal Navy, and during the 1920s and 1930s, the Navy built several aircraft carriers and battleships. The Navy was drawn into World War II after the Japanese Attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, and over the next four years fought many historic battles including the Battle of the Coral Sea, the Battle of Midway, multiple naval battles during the Guadalcanal Campaign, and the largest naval battle in history, the Battle of Leyte Gulf. Much of the Navy&#x27;s activity concerned the support of landings, not only with the &quot;island-hopping&quot; campaign in the Pacific, but also with the European landings. When the Japanese surrendered, a large flotilla entered Tokyo Bay to witness the formal ceremony conducted on the battleship , on which officials from the Japanese government signed the Japanese Instrument of Surrender. By the end of the war, the Navy had over 1,600 warships.

After World War II ended, the U.S. Navy entered the 45 year long Cold War and participated in the Korean and Vietnam proxy wars. Nuclear power and ballistic and guided missile technology led to new ship propulsion and weapon systems, which were used in the s and s. By 1978, the number of ships had dwindled to less than 400, many of which were from World War II, which prompted Ronald Reagan to institute a program for a modern, 600-ship Navy. Following the 1990-91 collapse of the Soviet Union the Soviet Navy was divided among the former Soviet Republics and was left without funding, which made the United States the world&#x27;s undisputed naval superpower, with the ability to engage and project power in two simultaneous limited wars along separate fronts. This ability was demonstrated during the First and Second Persian Gulf Wars.
In March 2007, the U.S. Navy reached its smallest fleet size, with 274 ships, since World War I. Former U.S. Navy admirals who head the U.S. Naval Institute have raised concerns about what they see as the ability to respond to &#x27;aggressive moves by Iran and China.&#x27; The United States Navy was overtaken by the Chinese People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy in terms of raw number of ships in 2020.

==Foundations of the &quot;Old Navy&quot;==

===Continental Navy (1775–1785)===


The Navy was rooted in the American seafaring tradition, which produced a large community of sailors, captains and shipbuilders during the colonial era. During the Revolution, several states operated their own navies. On June 12, 1775, the Rhode Island General Assembly passed a resolution creating a navy for the colony of Rhode Island. The same day, Governor Nicholas Cooke signed orders addressed to Captain Abraham Whipple, commander of the sloop &quot;Katy&quot;, and commodore of the armed vessels employed by the government.

The first formal movement for the creation of the Continental Navy came from Rhode Island, because the widespread smuggling activities of Rhode Island merchants had been increasingly suppressed by the British Royal Navy. On August 26, 1775, Rhode Island passed a resolution that there be a single Continental fleet funded by the Continental Congress. The resolution was introduced in the Continental Congress on October 3, 1775, but was tabled. In the meantime, George Washington had begun to acquire ships, starting with the schooner that was paid for out of Washington&#x27;s own pocket. &quot;Hannah&quot; was commissioned and launched on September 5, 1775, under the command of Captain Nicholson Broughton, from the port of Marblehead, Massachusetts.

The US Navy recognizes October 13, 1775, as the date of its official establishment—the date of the passage of the resolution of the Continental Congress at Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, that created the Continental Navy. On this day, Congress authorized the purchase of two vessels to be armed for a privateering cruise against British merchant shipping. On December 13, 1775, Congress authorized the building of thirteen frigates within the next three months, five ships of 32 guns, five with 28 guns and three with 24 guns.

On Lake Champlain, Benedict Arnold ordered the construction of 12 naval vessels to slow down the progress of British forces which had entered New York from Canada. In the ensuing engagement, a Royal Navy fleet decisively defeated Arnold&#x27;s ships after two days of fighting, but the battle managed to slow down the progression of British ground forces in New York. By mid-1776, a number of ships, ranging up to and including the thirteen frigates approved by Congress, were under construction, but their effectiveness was limited; they were completely outmatched by the Royal Navy, and nearly all were captured or sunk by 1781.

American privateers had some success, with 1,697 letters of marque being issued by Congress. Individual states, American agents in Europe and in the Caribbean also issued commissions; taking duplications into account more than 2,000 commissions were issued by various sources. Over 2,200 British merchant ships were captured by American privateers during the war, amounting to almost $66 million, a significant sum at the time.

One particularly notable American naval officer of the Revolutionary War was John Paul Jones, who a voyage around the British Isles captured the Royal Navy frigate in the Battle of Flamborough Head. Partway through the battle, with the rigging of the two ships entangled, and several guns of Jones&#x27; ship out of action, the captain of &quot;Serapis&quot; asked Jones if he had struck his colors, to which Jones has been quoted as replying, &quot;I have not yet begun to fight!&quot;

France officially entered the war on June 17, 1778, and ships of the French Navy sent to the Western Hemisphere spent most of the year in the West Indies, and only sailed near the Thirteen Colonies during the Caribbean hurricane season from July until November. A French Navy fleet attempted landings in New York and Rhode Island in 1778, but ultimately failed to engage British forces. In 1779, a fleet commanded by Vice Admiral Charles Henri, comte d&#x27;Estaing assisted American forces attempting to recapture Savannah, Georgia.

In 1780, a fleet with 6,000 troops commanded by Lieutenant General Jean-Baptiste, comte de Rochambeau landed at Newport, Rhode Island, and shortly afterwards the fleet was blockaded by the Royal Navy. In early 1781, Washington and de Rochambeau planned an attack against the British in the Chesapeake Bay area to coordinate with the arrival of a large fleet commanded by Vice Admiral François, comte de Grasse. Successfully deceiving the British that an attack was planned in New York, Washington and de Rochambeau marched to Virginia, and de Grasse began landing forces near Yorktown, Virginia. On September 5, 1781 a major naval action was fought by de Grasse and the British at the Battle of the Virginia Capes, ending with the French fleet in control of the Chesapeake Bay. The Continental Navy continued to interdict British supply ships until peace was finally declared in late 1783.

===Disarmament (1785–1794)===
The Revolutionary War was ended by the Treaty of Paris in 1783, and by 1785 the Continental Navy was disbanded and the remaining ships were sold. The frigate , which had fired the last shots of the American Revolutionary War, was also the last ship in the Navy. A faction within Congress wanted to keep the ship, but the new nation did not have the funds to keep her in service. Other than a general lack of money, factors for the disarmament of the navy were the loose confederation of the states, a change of goals from war to peace, and more domestic and fewer foreign interests.

After the American Revolutionary War, the brand-new United States struggled to stay financially afloat. National income was desperately needed and most came from tariffs on imported goods. Because of rampant smuggling, the need was immediate for strong enforcement of tariff laws. On August 4, 1790, the United States Congress, urged on by Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton, created the Revenue-Marine, the forerunner for the United States Coast Guard, to enforce the tariff and all other maritime laws. Ten cutters were initially ordered. Between 1790 and 1797 when the Navy Department was created, the Revenue-Marine was the only armed maritime service for the United States.

American merchant shipping had been protected by the Royal Navy during the colonial era, but as a consequence of the Treaty of Paris and the disarmament of the Continental Navy, the United States no longer had any protection for its ships from pirates. The fledgling nation did not have the funds to pay annual tribute to the Barbary states, so their ships were vulnerable for capture after 1785. By 1789, the new Constitution of the United States authorized Congress to create a navy, but during George Washington&#x27;s first term (1787–1793) little was done to rearm the navy. In 1793, the French Revolutionary Wars between Great Britain and France began, and a truce negotiated between Portugal and Algiers ended Portugal&#x27;s blockade of the Strait of Gibraltar which had kept the Barbary pirates in the Mediterranean. Soon after, the pirates sailed into the Atlantic, and captured 11 American merchant ships and more than a hundred seamen.

In reaction to the seizure of the American vessels, Congress debated and approved the Naval Act of 1794, which authorized the building of six frigates, four of 44 guns and two of 36 guns. Supporters were mostly from the northern states and the coastal regions, who argued the Navy would result in savings in insurance and ransom payments, while opponents from southern states and inland regions thought a navy was not worth the expense and would drive the United States into more costly wars.

===Establishment (1794–1812)===

After the passage of the Naval Act of 1794, work began on the construction of the six frigates: , , , , , and . &quot;Constitution&quot;, launched in 1797 and the most famous of the six, was nicknamed &quot;Old Ironsides&quot; (like the earlier ) and, thanks to the efforts of Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr., is still in existence today, anchored in Boston harbor. Soon after the bill was passed, Congress authorized $800,000 to obtain a treaty with the Algerians and ransom the captives, triggering an amendment of the Act which would halt the construction of ships if peace was declared. After considerable debate, three of the six frigates were authorized to be completed: &quot;United States&quot;, &quot;Constitution&quot; and &quot;Constellation&quot;. However, the first naval vessel to sail was , on May 24, 1798.

At the same time, tensions between the U.S. and France developed into the Quasi-War, which originated from the Treaty of Alliance (1778) that had brought the French into the Revolutionary War. The United States preferred to take a position of neutrality in the conflicts between France and Britain, but this put the nation at odds with both the British and French. After the Jay Treaty was signed with Great Britain in 1794, France began to side against the United States and by 1797 they had seized over 300 American vessels. The newly inaugurated President John Adams took steps to deal with the crisis, working with Congress to finish the three almost-completed frigates, approving funds to build the other three, and attempting to negotiate an agreement similar to the Jay Treaty with France. The XYZ Affair originated with a report distributed by Adams where alleged French agents were identified by the letters X, Y, and Z who informed the delegation a bribe must be paid before the diplomats could meet with the foreign minister, and the resulting scandal increased popular support in the country for a war with France. Concerns about the War Department&#x27;s ability to manage a navy led to the creation of the Department of the Navy, which was established on April 30, 1798.

The war with France was fought almost entirely at sea, mostly between privateers and merchant ships. The first victory for the United States Navy was on July 7, 1798 when captured the French privateer &quot;Le Croyable&quot;, and the first victory over an enemy warship was on February 9, 1799 when the frigate &quot;Constellation&quot; captured the French frigate &quot;L&#x27;Insurgente&quot;. By the end of 1800, peace with France had been declared, and in 1801, to prevent a second disarmament of the Navy, the outgoing Federalist administration rushed through Congress an act authorizing a peacetime navy for the first time, which limited the navy to six active frigates and seven in ordinary, as well as 45 officers and 150 midshipmen. The remainder of the ships in service were sold and the dismissed officers were given four months pay.

The problems with the Barbary states had never gone away, and on May 10, 1801 the Tripolitans declared war on the United States by chopping down the flag in front of the American Embassy, which began the First Barbary War. was captured by the Moors, but then set on fire in an American raid led by Stephen Decatur. The Marines invaded the &quot;shores of Tripoli&quot; in 1805, capturing the city of Derna, the first time the U.S. flag ever flew over a foreign conquest. This act was enough to induce the Barbary rulers to sign peace treaties. Subsequently, the Navy was greatly reduced for reasons of economy, and instead of regular ships, many gunboats were built, intended for coastal use only. This policy proved completely ineffective within a decade.

President Thomas Jefferson and his Democratic-Republican party opposed a strong navy, arguing that the small gunboats stationed in the major Atlantic harbors, part of first Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton&#x27;s U.S. Revenue-Marine, were all the nation needed to defend itself. However, this small fleet of lightly armed revenue cutters, which Hamilton had proposed in Federalist Papers No. 11 &amp; 12, was insufficient as a wartime naval force for the needs of the new United States of America.

During the French Revolutionary Wars, the Royal Navy had begun to impress sailors from American ships who they alleged were British deserters; an estimated 10,000 sailors were impressed this way between 1799 and 1812. In 1807, in the &quot;Chesapeake&quot;-&quot;Leopard&quot; Affair, demanded that &quot;Chesapeake&quot; submit to an inspection for British deserters onboard, which was rejected. &quot;Leopard&quot; responded by opening fire on &quot;Chesapeake&quot;, and forcibly searched the ship, detaining a number of alleged British subjects. The most violent of many such encounters, the affair further fueled the tensions between the two nations and in June 1812 the U.S. declared war on Britain.

===War of 1812 (1812–1815)===


Much of the war was expected to be fought at sea; and within an hour of the announcement of war, the diminutive U.S. Navy set forth to do battle with an opponent outnumbering it 50-to-1. After two months, &quot;Constitution&quot; sank ; &quot;Guerriere&quot;″s crew were most dismayed to see their cannonballs bouncing off &quot;Constitution&quot;″s unusually strong live oak hull, giving her the enduring nickname of &quot;Old Ironsides&quot;. On December 29, 1812 &quot;Constitution&quot; defeated off the coast of Brazil and &quot;Java&quot; was burned after the Americans determined she could not be salvaged. On October 25, 1812, &quot;United States&quot; captured HMS &quot;Macedonian&quot;; after the battle &quot;Macedonian&quot; was captured and entered into American service. In 1813, commenced a very fruitful raiding venture into the South Pacific under the command of David Porter, preying upon the British merchant and whaling industry. &quot;Essex&quot; was already known for her capture of HMS &quot;Alert&quot; and a British transport the previous year, and gained further success capturing 15 British merchant ships. The British finally took action, dispatching and to stop the &quot;Essex&quot;. The two ships, under the command of Sir James Hillyar, blockaded &quot;Essex&quot; before Porter ordered his ship to attempt to escape; in the ensuing battle, &quot;Essex&quot; was captured by the British.

The capture of the three Royal Navy frigates led the British to deploy more vessels on the American seaboard to tighten their blockade of U.S. ports. On June 1, 1813, off Boston Harbor, the American frigate &quot;Chesapeake&quot;, commanded by Captain James Lawrence, was captured by the British frigate under Captain Sir Philip Broke. Lawrence was mortally wounded and famously cried out, &quot;Don&#x27;t give up the ship!&quot;. Despite their earlier successes, by 1814 many of the Navy&#x27;s best ships were blockaded in port and unable to prevent British incursions on land via the sea.

During the summer of 1814, the British fought the Chesapeake Campaign, which was climaxed by amphibious assaults against Washington and Baltimore. The capital fell to the British almost without a fight, and several American warships were burned at the Washington Navy Yard, including the 44-gun frigate USS &quot;Columbia&quot;. At Baltimore, the bombardment by Fort McHenry inspired Francis Scott Key to write &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot;, and the hulks blocking the channel prevented the fleet from entering the harbor; the army reembarked on the ships, ending the battle.

The American naval victories at the Battle of Lake Champlain and Battle of Lake Erie halted the final British offensive in the north and helped to deny the British exclusive rights to the Great Lakes in the Treaty of Ghent. Shortly before the treaty was signed, &quot;President&quot; was captured by four British frigates. Three days after the treaty was signed, &quot;Constitution&quot; captured and . The final naval action of the war occurred almost five months after the treaty on June 30, 1815 when the sloop captured the East India Company brig &quot;Nautilus&quot;, the last enemy ship captured by the U.S. Navy until World War II.

===Continental Expansion (1815–1861)===

After the war, the Navy&#x27;s accomplishments paid off in the form of better funding, and it embarked on the construction of many new ships. However, the expense of the larger ships was prohibitive, and many of them stayed in shipyards half-completed, in readiness for another war, until the Age of Sail had almost completely passed. The main force of the Navy continued to be large sailing frigates with a number of smaller sloops during the three decades of peace. By the 1840s, the Navy began to adopt steam power and shell guns, but they lagged behind the French and British in adopting the new technologies.

Enlisted sailors during this time included many foreign-born men, and native-born Americans were usually social outcasts who had few other employment options or they were trying to escape punishment for crimes. In 1835, almost 3,000 men sailed with merchant ships out of Boston harbor, but only 90 men were recruited by the Navy. It was unlawful for black men to serve in the Navy, but the shortage of men was so acute this law was frequently ignored.

Discipline followed the customs of the Royal Navy but punishment was much milder than typical in European navies. Sodomy was rarely prosecuted. The Army abolished flogging as a punishment in 1812, but the Navy kept it until 1850.
During the War of 1812, the Barbary states took advantage of the weakness of the United States Navy to again capture American merchant ships and sailors. After the Treaty of Ghent was signed, the United States looked at ending the piracy in the Mediterranean which had plagued American merchants for two decades. On March 3, 1815, Congress authorized deployment of naval power against Algiers, beginning the Second Barbary War. Two powerful squadrons under the command of Commodores Decatur and William Bainbridge, including the 74-gun ships of the line , , and , were dispatched to the Mediterranean. Shortly after departing Gibraltar en route to Algiers, Decatur&#x27;s squadron encountered the Algerian flagship &quot;Meshuda&quot;, and, in the Action of 17 June 1815, captured it. Not long afterward, the American squadron likewise captured the Algerian brig &quot;Estedio&quot; in the Battle off Cape Palos. By June, the squadrons had reached Algiers and peace was negotiated with the Dey, including a return of captured vessels and men, a guarantee of no further tributes and a right to trade in the region.

Piracy in the Caribbean sea was also a major problem, and between 1815 and 1822 an estimated 3,000 ships were captured by pirates. In 1819, Congress authorized President James Madison to deal with this threat, and since many of the pirates were privateers of the newly independent states of Latin America, he decided to embark on a strategy of diplomacy backed up by the guns of the Navy. An agreement with Venezuela was reached in 1819, but ships were still regularly captured until a military campaign by the West India Squadron, under the command of David Porter, used a combination of large frigates escorting merchant ships backed by many small craft searching small coves and islands, and capturing pirate vessels. During this campaign became the first steam-powered ship to see combat action. Although isolated instances of piracy continued into the 1830s, by 1826 the frequent attacks had ended and the region was declared free for commerce.

Another international problem was the slave trade, and the African squadron was formed in 1820 to deal with this threat. Politically, the suppression of the slave trade was unpopular, and the squadron was withdrawn in 1823 ostensibly to deal with piracy in the Caribbean, and did not return to the African coast until the passage of the Webster–Ashburton treaty with Britain in 1842. After the treaty was passed, the United States used fewer ships than the treaty required, ordered the ships based far from the coast of Africa, and used ships that were too large to operate close to shore. Between 1845 and 1850, the United States Navy captured only 10 slave vessels, while the British captured 423 vessels carrying 27,000 captives.

Congress formally authorized the establishment of the United States Military Academy in 1802, but it took almost 50 years to approve a similar school for naval officers. During the long period of peace between 1815 and 1846, midshipmen had few opportunities for promotion, and their warrants were often obtained via patronage. The poor quality of officer training in the U.S. Navy became visible after the Somers Affair, an alleged mutiny aboard the training ship in 1842, and the subsequent execution of midshipman Philip Spencer. George Bancroft, appointed Secretary of the Navy in 1845, decided to work outside of congressional approval and create a new academy for officers. He formed a council led by Commodore Matthew Perry to create a new system for training officers, and turned the old Fort Severn at Annapolis into a new institution in 1845 which would be designated as the United States Naval Academy by Congress in 1851.

Naval forces participated in the effort to forcibly move the Seminole Indians from Florida to a reservation west of the Mississippi. After a massacre of army soldiers near Tampa on December 28, 1835, marines and sailors were added to the forces which fought the Second Seminole War from 1836 until 1842. A &quot;mosquito fleet&quot; was formed in the Everglades out of various small craft to transport a mixture of army and navy personnel to pursue the Seminoles into the swamps. About 1,500 soldiers were killed during the conflict, some Seminoles agreed to move but a small group of Seminoles remained in control of the Everglades and the area around Lake Okeechobee.

The Navy played a role in two major operations of the Mexican–American War (1845–1848); during the Battle of Veracruz, it transported the invasion force that captured Veracruz by landing 12,000 troops and their equipment in one day, leading eventually to the capture of Mexico City, and the end of the war. Its Pacific Squadron&#x27;s ships facilitated the capture of California.

In 1853, Perry led the Perry Expedition, a squadron of four ships which sailed to Japan to establish normal relations with Japan. Perry&#x27;s two technologically advanced steam-powered ships and calm, firm diplomacy convinced Japan to end three centuries of isolation and sign the Treaty of Kanagawa with the U.S. in 1854. Nominally a treaty of friendship, the agreement soon paved the way for the opening of Japan and normal trade relations with the United States and Europe.
===American Civil War (1861–1865)===

Between the beginning of the war and the end of 1861, 373 commissioned officers, warrant officers, and midshipmen resigned or were dismissed from the United States Navy and went on to serve the Confederacy. On April 20, 1861, the Union burned its ships that were at the Norfolk Navy Yard to prevent their capture by the Confederates, but not all of the ships were completely destroyed. The screw frigate was so hastily scuttled that her hull and steam engine were basically intact, which gave the South&#x27;s Stephen Mallory the idea of raising her and then armoring the upper sides with iron plate. The resulting ship was named . Meanwhile, John Ericsson had similar ideas, and received funding to build .

Winfield Scott, the commanding general of the U.S. Army at the beginning of the war, devised the Anaconda Plan to win the war with as little bloodshed as possible. His idea was that a Union blockade of the main ports would weaken the Confederate economy; then the capture of the Mississippi River would split the South. Lincoln adopted the plan in terms of a blockade to squeeze to death the Confederate economy, but overruled Scott&#x27;s warnings that his new army was not ready for an offensive operation because public opinion demanded an immediate attack.

On March 8, 1862, the Confederate Navy initiated the first combat between ironclads when &quot;Virginia&quot; successfully attacked the blockade. The next day, &quot;Monitor&quot; engaged &quot;Virginia&quot; in the Battle of Hampton Roads. Their battle ended in a draw, and the Confederacy later lost &quot;Virginia&quot; when the ship was scuttled to prevent capture. &quot;Monitor&quot; was the prototype for the monitor warship and many more were built by the Union Navy. While the Confederacy built more ironclad ships during the war, they lacked the ability to build or purchase ships that could effectively counter the monitors.

Along with ironclad ships, the new technologies of naval mines, which were known as &quot;torpedoes&quot; after the torpedo eel, and submarine warfare were introduced during the war by the Confederacy. During the Battle of Mobile Bay, mines were used to protect the harbor and sank the Union monitor . After &quot;Tecumseh&quot; sank, Admiral David G. Farragut famously said, &quot;Damn the torpedoes, full speed ahead!&quot;. The forerunner of the modern submarine, , attacked using a spar torpedo. The Union ship was barely damaged and the resulting geyser of water put out the fires in the submarine&#x27;s boiler, rendering the submarine immobile. Another submarine, , was designed to dive and surface but ultimately did not work well and sank on five occasions during trials. In action against the submarine successfully sank its target but was lost by the same explosion.

The Confederates operated a number of commerce raiders and blockade runners, being the most famous, and British investors built small, fast blockade runners that traded arms and luxuries brought in from Bermuda, Cuba, and The Bahamas in return for high-priced cotton and tobacco. When the Union Navy seized a blockade runner, the ship and cargo were sold and the proceeds given to the Navy sailors; the captured crewmen were mostly British and they were simply released.

The blockade of the South caused the Southern economy to collapse during the war. Shortages of food and supplies were caused by the blockade, the failure of Southern railroads, the loss of control of the main rivers, and foraging by Union and Confederate armies. The standard of living fell even as large-scale printing of paper money caused inflation and distrust of the currency. By 1864 the internal food distribution had broken down, leaving cities without enough food and causing food riots across the Confederacy. The Union victory at the Second Battle of Fort Fisher in January 1865 closed the last useful Southern port, virtually ending blockade running and hastening the end of the war.

===Decline of the Navy (1865–1882)===
After the war, the Navy went into a period of decline. In 1864, the Navy had 51,500 men in uniform, and almost 700 ships and about 60 monitor-type coastal ironclads which made the U.S. Navy the second largest in the world after the Royal Navy. By 1880 the Navy only had 48 ships in commission, 6,000 men, and the ships and shore facilities were decrepit but Congress saw no need to spend money to improve them. The Navy was unprepared to fight a major maritime war before 1897.

In 1871, an expedition of five warships commanded by Rear Admiral John Rodgers was sent to Korea to obtain an apology for the murders of several shipwrecked American sailors and secure a treaty to protect shipwrecked foreigners in the future. After a small skirmish, Rodgers launched an amphibious assault of approximately 650 men on the forts protecting Seoul. Despite the capture of the forts, the Koreans refused to negotiate, and the expedition was forced to leave before the start of typhoon season. Nine sailors and six marines received Medals of Honor for their acts of heroism during the Korean campaign; the first for actions in a foreign conflict.

By the 1870s most of the ironclads from the Civil War were laid up in reserve, leaving the United States virtually without an ironclad fleet. When the Virginius Affair first broke out in 1873, a Spanish ironclad happened to be anchored in New York Harbor, leading to the uncomfortable realization on the part of the U.S. Navy that it had no ship capable of defeating such a vessel. The Navy hastily issued contracts for the construction of five new ironclads, and accelerated its existing repair program for several more.

By the time the Garfield administration assumed office in 1881, the Navy&#x27;s condition had deteriorated still further. A review conducted on behalf of the new Secretary of the Navy, William H. Hunt, found that of 140 vessels on the Navy&#x27;s active list, only 52 were in an operational state, of which a mere 17 were iron-hulled ships, including 14 aging Civil War era ironclads. Hunt recognized the necessity of modernizing the Navy, and set up an informal advisory board to make recommendations. Also to be expected, morale was considerably down; officers and sailors in foreign ports were all too aware that their old wooden ships would not survive long in the event of war. The limitations of the monitor type effectively prevented the United States from projecting power overseas, and until the 1890s the United States would have come off badly in a conflict with even Spain or the Latin American powers.

==&quot;New Navy&quot;==

===Rebuilding (1882–1898)===
In 1882, on the recommendation of an advisory panel, the Navy Secretary William H. Hunt requested funds from Congress to construct modern ships. The request was rejected initially, but in 1883 Congress authorized the construction of three protected cruisers, , , and , and the dispatch vessel , together known as the ABCD ships. In 1885, two more protected cruisers, and which was the last American cruiser to be fitted with a sail rig, were authorized. Congress also authorized the construction of the first battleships in the Navy, and . The ABCD ships proved to be excellent vessels, and the three cruisers were organized into the Squadron of Evolution, popularly known as the &quot;White Squadron&quot; because of the color of the hulls, which was used to train a generation of officers and men. Before 1910, when an apprenticeship system was established, most enlisted sailors were foreign mercenaries who spoke little English.

Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan&#x27;s book &quot;The Influence of Sea Power upon History, 1660–1783&quot;, published in 1890 had momentous impact on major navies around the globe. In the United States it justified Expansion to both the government and the general public. With the closing of the frontier, geographical expansionists had to look outwards, to the Caribbean, to Hawaii and the Pacific, and with the doctrine of Manifest Destiny as philosophical justification, many saw the Navy as an essential part of realizing that doctrine beyond the limits of the American continent.

In 1890, Mahan&#x27;s doctrine influenced Navy Secretary Benjamin F. Tracy to propose the United States start building no less than 200 ships of all types, but Congress rejected the proposal. Instead, the Navy Act of 1890 authorized building three battleships, , , and , followed by . By around the start of the 20th century, two s and three s were completed or under construction, which brought the U.S. Navy from twelfth place in 1870 to fifth place among the world&#x27;s navies.

Battle tactics, especially long-range gunnery, became a central concern. and the four &quot;Amphitrite&quot;-class monitors, originally ordered after the 1873 &quot;Virginius&quot; war scare, were completed in the 1880s and 1890s. They were followed by the and the &quot;Arkansas&quot;-class monitors. All of these vessels except the &quot;Arkansas&quot;-class would later take part in the Spanish–American War of 1898. The development of the modern torpedo in Europe between 1866 and 1890 would also lead the Navy to build 35 steam-powered torpedo boats between 1890 and 1901 for coastal defense.

===Spanish–American War (1898)===

The United States was interested in purchasing colonies from Spain, specifically Cuba, but Spain refused. Newspapers wrote stories, many which were fabricated, about atrocities committed in Spanish colonies which raised tensions between the two countries. A riot gave the United States an excuse to send &quot;Maine&quot; to Cuba, and the subsequent explosion of the ship in Havana Harbor increased popular support for war with Spain. The cause of the explosion was investigated by a board of inquiry, which in March 1898 came to the conclusion the explosion was caused by a sea mine, and there was pressure from the public to blame Spain for sinking the ship. However, later investigations pointed to an internal explosion in one of the magazines caused by heat from a fire in the adjacent coal bunker.

Assistant Navy secretary Theodore Roosevelt quietly positioned the Navy for attack before the Spanish–American War was declared in April 1898. The Asiatic Squadron, under the command of George Dewey, immediately left Hong Kong for the Philippines, attacking and decisively defeating the Spanish fleet in the Battle of Manila Bay. A few weeks later, the North Atlantic Squadron destroyed the majority of heavy Spanish naval units in the Caribbean in the Battle of Santiago de Cuba.

The Navy&#x27;s experience in this war was encouraging in that it had won but also cautionary in that the enemy had one of the weakest of the world&#x27;s modern fleets. Also, the Manila Bay attack was extremely risky in which the American ships could have incurred severe damage or run out of supplies, as they were 7,000 miles from the nearest American harbor. That would have a profound effect on Navy strategy and American foreign policy for next several decades.

===Rise of the Modern Navy (1898–1914)===

Fortunately for the New Navy, its most ardent political supporter, Theodore Roosevelt, became President in 1901. Under his administration, the Navy went from the sixth largest in the world to second only to the Royal Navy. Theodore Roosevelt&#x27;s administration became involved in the politics of the Caribbean and Central America, with interventions in 1901, 1902, 1903, and 1906. At a speech in 1901, Roosevelt said, &quot;Speak softly and carry a big stick, you will go far&quot;, which was a cornerstone of diplomacy during his presidency.

Roosevelt believed that a U.S.-controlled canal across Central America was a vital strategic interest to the U.S. Navy, because it would significantly shorten travel times for ships between the two coasts. Roosevelt was able to reverse a decision in favor of a Nicaraguan Canal and instead moved to purchase the failed French effort across the Isthmus of Panama. The isthmus was controlled by Colombia, and in early 1903, the Hay–Herrán Treaty was signed by both nations to give control of the canal to the United States. After the Colombian Senate failed to ratify the treaty, Roosevelt implied to Panamanian rebels that if they revolted, the US Navy would assist their cause for independence. Panama proceeded to proclaim its independence on November 3, 1903, and impeded any interference from Colombia. The victorious Panamanians allowed the United States control of the Panama Canal Zone on February 23, 1904, for US$10 million. The naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba was built in 1905 to protect the canal.

The latest technological innovation of the time, submarines, were developed in the state of New Jersey by an Irish-American inventor, John Philip Holland. His submarine, was officially commissioned into U.S. Navy service in the fall of 1900. The Russo-Japanese War of 1905 and the launching of in the following year lent impetus to the construction program. At the end of 1907 Roosevelt had sixteen new pre-dreadnought battleships to make up his &quot;Great White Fleet&quot;, which he sent on a cruise around the world. While nominally peaceful, and a valuable training exercise for the rapidly expanding Navy, it was also useful politically as a demonstration of United States power and capabilities; at every port, the politicians and naval officers of both potential allies and enemies were welcomed on board and given tours. The cruise had the desired effect, and American power was subsequently taken more seriously.

The voyage taught the Navy more fueling stations were needed around the world, and the strategic potential of the Panama Canal, which was completed in 1914. The Great White Fleet required almost 50 coaling ships, and during the cruise most of the fleet&#x27;s coal was purchased from the British, who could deny access to fuel during a military crisis as they did with Russia during the Russo-Japanese War.

===World War I (1914–1918)===

====Mexico====
When United States agents discovered that the German merchant ship &quot;Ypiranga&quot; was carrying illegal arms to Mexico, President Wilson ordered the Navy to stop the ship from docking at the port of Veracruz. On April 21, 1914, a naval infantry brigade of 2,500 seamen, alongside a 1,300 man Marine Corps brigade, occupied Veracruz. During the battle, the naval brigade—which used outdated massed infantry tactics—proved less adept at urban combat than the marine brigade, which had embraced small unit tactics. This, combined with the unacceptability of risking increasingly valuable naval technical specialists in ground combat, resulted in Veracruz being the last large-scale use of U.S. sailors as landing infantry, leaving the Marine Corps to conduct amphibious assaults.

A total of 55 Medals of Honor were awarded for acts of heroism at Veracruz, the largest number ever granted for a single action.

====Preparing for war 1914–1917====
Despite U.S. declarations of neutrality and German accountability for its unrestricted submarine warfare, in 1915 the British passenger liner &quot;Lusitania&quot; was sunk, leading to calls for war. President Wilson forced the Germans to suspend unrestricted submarine warfare and after long debate Congress passed the Naval Act of 1916 that authorized a $500 million construction program over three years for 10 battleships, 6 battlecruisers, 10 scout cruisers, 50 destroyers and 67 submarines. The idea was a balanced fleet, but in the event destroyers were much more important, because they had to handle submarines and convoys. By the end of the war 273 destroyers had been ordered; most were finished after World War I ended but many served in World War II. There were few war plans beyond the defense of the main American harbors.

Navy Secretary Josephus Daniels, a pacifistic journalist, had built up the educational resources of the Navy and made its Naval War College an essential experience for would-be admirals. However, he alienated the officer corps with his moralistic reforms (no wine in the officers&#x27; mess, no hazing at Annapolis, more chaplains and YMCAs). Ignoring the nation&#x27;s strategic needs, and disdaining the advice of its experts, Daniels suspended meetings of the Joint Army and Navy Board for two years because it was giving unwelcome advice. He chopped in half the General Board&#x27;s recommendations for new ships, reduced the authority of officers in the Navy yards where ships were built and repaired, and ignored the administrative chaos in his department. Bradley Fiske, one of the most innovative admirals in American naval history, was Daniels&#x27; top aide in 1914; he recommended a reorganization that would prepare for war, but Daniels refused. Instead, he replaced Fiske in 1915 and brought in for the new post of Chief of Naval Operations an unknown captain, William S. Benson. Chosen for his compliance, Benson proved a wily bureaucrat who was more interested in preparing for an eventual showdown with Britain than an immediate one with Germany.

In 1915 Daniels set up the Naval Consulting Board headed by Thomas Edison to obtain the advice and expertise of leading scientists, engineers, and industrialists. It popularized technology, naval expansion, and military preparedness, and was well covered in the media. Daniels and Benson rejected proposals to send
observers to Europe, leaving the Navy in the dark about the success of the German submarine campaign. Admiral William Sims charged after the war that in April 1917, only ten percent of the Navy&#x27;s warships were fully manned; the rest lacked 43% of their seamen. Only a third of the ships were fully ready. Light antisubmarine ships were few in number, as if no one had noticed the U-boat factor that had been the focus of foreign policy for two years. The Navy&#x27;s only warfighting plan, the &quot;Black Plan&quot; assumed the Royal Navy did not exist and that German battleships were moving freely about the Atlantic and the Caribbean and threatening the Panama Canal. His most recent biographer concludes that, &quot;it is true that Daniels had not prepared the navy for the war it would have to fight.&quot;

====Fighting a world war, 1917–18====
President Wilson ordered the United States Marine Corps enlisted strength increased on March 26; and the United States Naval Academy class of 1917 graduated three months early on March 29 before America entered the war in April 1917. Retired officers were recalled to active duty at shore station billets freeing younger officers for sea duty. The Navy was given control of the Coast Guard and of the Naval Militia of 584 officers and 7,933 men who were assigned to coast patrol service and the Naval Reserve Flying Corps. The Navy took possession of all United States wireless (radio) stations and dismantled those in less useful locations to salvage equipment for military use. The Navy&#x27;s role was mostly limited to convoy escort and troop transport and laying the North Sea Mine Barrage. The first United States military unit sent to Europe was the First Aeronautic Detachment of seven naval officers and 122 enlisted men who arrived in France on June 5, 1917 to form the Northern Bombing Group. The United States Navy sent a battleship group to Scapa Flow to join with the British Grand Fleet, destroyers to Queenstown, Ireland and submarines to help guard convoys. Several regiments of Marines were also dispatched to France. The first victory for the Navy in the war occurred on November 17, 1917 when and sank the German U-boat &quot;U-58&quot;. During World War I, the Navy was the first branch of the United States armed forces to allow enlistment by women in a non-nursing capacity, as Yeoman (F). The first woman to enlist in the U.S. Navy was Loretta Perfectus Walsh on March 17, 1917.

The Navy&#x27;s vast wartime expansion was overseen by civilian officials, especially Assistant Secretary Franklin D. Roosevelt. In peacetime, the Navy confined all munitions that lacked civilian uses, including warships, naval guns, and shells to Navy yards. The Navy yards expanded enormously, and subcontracted the shells and explosives to chemical companies like DuPont and Hercules. Items available on the civilian market, such as food and uniforms were always purchased from civilian contractors. Armor plate and airplanes were purchased on the market.

===Inter-war entrenchment and expansion (1918–1941)===
At the end of World War I, the United States Navy had almost 500,000 officers and enlisted men and women and in terms of personnel was the largest in the world. Younger officers were enthusiastic about the potential of land-based naval aviation as well as the potential roles of aircraft carriers. Chief of Naval Operations Benson was not among them. He tried to abolish aviation in 1919 because he could not &quot;conceive of any use the fleet will ever have for aviation.&quot; However Roosevelt listened to the visionaries and reversed Benson&#x27;s decision.

After a short period of demobilization, the major naval nations of the globe began programmes for increasing the size and number of their capital ships. Wilson&#x27;s plan for a world-leading set of capital ships led to a Japanese counter-programme, and a plan by the British to build sufficient ships to maintain a navy superior to either. American isolationist feeling and the economic concerns of the others led to the Washington Naval Conference of 1921. The outcome of the conference included the Washington Naval Treaty (also known as the Five-Power treaty), and limitations on the use of submarines. The Treaty prescribed a ratio of 5:5:3:1:1 for capital ships between treaty nations. The treaty recognized the U.S. Navy as being equal to the Royal Navy with 525,000 tons of capital ships and 135,000 tons of aircraft carriers, and the Japanese as the third power. Many older ships were scrapped by the five nations to meet the treaty limitations, and new building of capital ships limited.

One consequence was to encourage the development of light cruisers and aircraft carriers. The United States&#x27;s first carrier, a converted collier named was commissioned in 1922, and soon joined by and , which had been designed as battlecruisers until the treaty forbade it. Organizationally, the Bureau of Aeronautics was formed in 1921; naval aviators would become referred to as members of the United States Naval Air Corps.

Army airman Billy Mitchell challenged the Navy by trying to demonstrate that warships could be destroyed by land-based bombers. He destroyed his career in 1925 by publicly attacking senior leaders in the Army and Navy for incompetence for their &quot;almost treasonable administration of the national defense.&quot;

Chief of Naval Operations William V. Pratt (1930-1933) agreed with President Hoovers&#x27;s emphasis on disarmament and went along with postponement of new construction and cutting the fleet. Other naval officers disagreed sharply with Hoover&#x27;s policies.

President Franklin Roosevelt (1933-1945) had been in effect in civilian control of the Navy during World War I, knew many senior officers, and strongly supported naval expansion. The Vinson-Trammell Act of 1934 set up a regular program of ship building and modernization to bring the Navy to the maximum size allowed by treaty. The Navy&#x27;s preparation was helped along by another Navy assistant secretary turned president, Franklin D. Roosevelt. The naval limitation treaties also applied to bases, but Congress only approved building seaplane bases on Wake Island, Midway Island and Dutch Harbor and rejected any additional funds for bases on Guam and the Philippines. Navy ships were designed with greater endurance and range which allowed them to operate further from bases and between refits.

The Navy had a presence in the Far East with a naval base in the US-owned Philippines and river gunboats in China on the Yangtze River. The gunboat was bombed and machine-gunned by Japanese airplanes. Washington quickly accepted Japan&#x27;s apologies and compensation.

African-Americans were enlisted during World War I, but this was halted in 1919 and they were mustered out of the Navy. Starting in the 1930s a few were recruited to serve as stewards in the officers mess. African-Americans were recruited in larger numbers only after Roosevelt insisted in 1942.

The Naval Act of 1936 authorized the first new battleship since 1921, and , was laid down in October 1937. The Second Vinson Act authorized a 20% increase in the size of the Navy, and in June 1940 the Two-Ocean Navy Act authorized an 11% expansion in the Navy. Chief of Naval Operations Harold Rainsford Stark asked for another 70% increase, amounting to about 200 additional ships, which was authorized by Congress in less than a month. In September 1940, the Destroyers for Bases Agreement gave Britain much-needed destroyers—of WWI vintage—in exchange for United States use of British bases.

In 1941, the Atlantic Fleet was reactivated. The Navy&#x27;s first shot in anger came on April 9, when the destroyer dropped depth charges on a U-boat detected while &quot;Niblack&quot; was rescuing survivors from a torpedoed Dutch freighter. In October, the destroyers and were torpedoed, and &quot;Reuben James&quot; was lost.

====Submarines====
Submarines were the &quot;silent service&quot;—in terms of operating characteristics and the closed-mouth preferences of the submariners. Strategists had, however, been looking into this new type of warship, influenced in large part by Germany&#x27;s nearly successful U-boat campaign. As early as 1912, Lieutenant Chester Nimitz had argued for long-range submarines to accompany the fleet to scout the enemy&#x27;s location. The new head of the Submarine Section in 1919 was Captain Thomas Hart, who argued that submarines could win the next war: &quot;There is no quicker or more effective method of defeating Japan than the cutting of her sea communications.&quot; However Hart was astonished to discover how backward American submarines were compared to captured German U-boats, and how unready they were for their mission. 

The public supported submarines for their coastal protection mission; they would presumably intercept enemy fleets approaching San Francisco or New York. The Navy realized it was a mission that isolationists in Congress would fund, but it was not actually serious. Old-line admirals said the mission of the subs ought to be as eyes of the battle fleet, and as assistants in battle. That was unfeasible since even on the surface submarines could not move faster than 20 knots, far slower than the 30 knot main warships. The young commanders were organized into a &quot;Submarine Officers&#x27; Conference&quot; in 1926. They argued they were best suited for the commerce raiding that had been the forte of the U-boats. They therefore redesigned their new boats along German lines, and added the new requirement that they be capable of sailing alone for 7,500 miles on a 75-day mission. Unrestricted submarine warfare had led to war with Germany in 1917, and was still vigorously condemned both by public opinion and by treaties, including the London Treaty of 1930. Nevertheless, the submariners planned a role in unrestricted warfare against Japanese merchant ships, transports and oil tankers. The Navy kept its plans secret from civilians. It was an admiral, not President Roosevelt, who within hours of the Pearl Harbor attack, ordered unrestricted warfare against any enemy ship anywhere in the Pacific.

The submariners had won over Navy strategists, but their equipment was not yet capable of handling their secret mission. The challenge of designing appropriate new boats became a high priority by 1934, and was solved in 1936 as the first new long-range, all welded submarines were launched. Even better were the S-class &quot;Salmon&quot; class (launched in 1937), and its successors the T-class or &quot;Tambor&quot; submarines of 1939 and the &quot;Gato&quot; class of 1940. The new models cost about $5–6 million each. At 300 feet in length and 1500 tons, they were twice as big as the German U-boats, but still highly maneuverable. In only 35 seconds they could crash dive to 60 feet. The superb Mark 3 TDC Torpedo Data Computer (an analog computer) took data from periscope or sonar readings on the target&#x27;s bearing, range and angle on the bow, and continuously set the course and proper gyroscope angle for a salvo of torpedoes until the moment of firing. Six forward tubes and 4 aft were ready for the 24 Mk-14 &quot;fish&quot; the subs carried. Cruising on the surface at 20 knots (using 4 diesel engines) or maneuvering underwater at 8-10 knots (using battery-powered electric motors) they could circle around slow-moving merchant ships. New steels and welding techniques strengthened the hull, enabling the subs to dive as deep as 400 feet in order to avoid depth charges. Expecting long cruises the 65 crewmen enjoyed good living conditions, complete with frozen steaks and air conditioning to handle the hot waters of the Pacific. The new subs could remain at sea for 75 days, and cover 10,000 miles, without resupply. The submariners thought they were ready—but they had two hidden flaws. The penny-pinching atmosphere of the 1930s produced hypercautious commanders and defective torpedoes. Both would have to be replaced in World War II.

==Worldwide expansion==

===World War II (1941–1945)===

====Command structure====
After the disaster at Pearl Harbor, Roosevelt turned to the most aggressive sailor available, Admiral Ernest J. King (1878–1956). Experienced in big guns, aviation and submarines, King had a broad knowledge and a total dedication to victory. He was perhaps the most dominating admiral in American naval history; he was hated but obeyed, for he made all the decisions from his command post in the Washington, and avoided telling anyone. The civilian Secretary of the Navy was a cipher whom King kept in the dark; that only changed when the Secretary died in 1944 and Roosevelt brought in his tough-minded aide James Forrestal. Despite the decision of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under Admiral William D. Leahy to concentrate first against Germany, King made the defeat of Japan his highest priority. For example, King insisted on fighting for Guadalcanal despite strong Army objections. His main strike force was built around carriers based at Pearl Harbor under the command of Chester Nimitz. Nimitz had one main battle fleet, with the same ships and sailors but two command systems that rotated every few months between Admiral Bull Halsey and Admiral Raymond A. Spruance. The Navy had a major advantage: it had broken the Japanese JN-25 code. It deduced that Hawaii was the target in June 1942, and that Yamamoto&#x27;s fleet would strike at Midway Island. King only had three carriers in operation; he sent them all to Midway where in a miraculous few minutes they sank the Japanese carriers. This gave the Americans the advantage in firepower that grew rapidly as new American warships came on line much faster than Japan could build them. King paid special attention to submarines to use against the overextended Japanese logistics system. They were built for long-range missions in tropical waters, and set out to sink the freighters, troop transports and oil tankers that held the Japanese domains together. The South West Pacific Area, based in Australia, was under the control of Army General Douglas MacArthur; King assigned him a fleet of his own under Admiral Thomas C. Kinkaid, without any big carriers.

====Carrier warfare====
On December 7, 1941, Japan&#x27;s carriers launched the Attack on Pearl Harbor, sinking or disabling the entire battleship fleet. The stupendous defeat forced Admiral King to develop a new strategy based on carriers. Although the sunken battleships were raised, and many new ones were built, battleships played a secondary role in the war, limited chiefly to bombardment of islands scheduled for amphibious landings. The &quot;Big Gun&quot; club that had dominated the Navy since the Civil War lost its clout.

The U.S. was helpless in the next six months as the Japanese swept through the Western Pacific and into the Indian Ocean, rolling up the Philippines as well as the main British base at Singapore. After reeling from these defeats the Navy stabilized its lines in summer 1942.
At the start of the war, the United States and Japan were well matched in aircraft carriers, in terms of numbers and quality, but the Mitsubishi A6M Zero carrier fighter plane was superior in terms of range and maneuverability to its American counterpart, the F4F Wildcat. By reverse engineering a captured Zero, the American engineers identified its weaknesses, such as inadequate protection for the pilot and the fuel tanks, and built the Hellcat as a superior weapon system. In late 1943 the Grumman F6F Hellcats entered combat. Powered by the same 2,000 horsepower Pratt and Whitney 18-cylinder radial engine as used by the F4U Corsair already in service with the Marine Corps and the UK&#x27;s allied Fleet Air Arm, the F6Fs were faster (at 400 mph) than the Zeros, quicker to climb (at 3,000 feet per minute), more nimble at high altitudes, better at diving, had more armor, more firepower (6 machine guns fired 120 bullets per second) than the Zero&#x27;s two machine guns and pair of 20 mm autocannon, carried more ammunition, and used a gunsight designed for deflection shooting at an angle. Although the Hellcat was heavier and had a shorter range than the Zero, on the whole it proved a far superior weapon. Japan&#x27;s carrier and pilot losses at Midway crippled its offensive capability, but America&#x27;s overwhelming offensive capability came from shipyards that increasingly out produced Japan&#x27;s, from the refineries that produced high-octane gasoline, and from the training fields that produced much better trained pilots. In 1942 Japan commissioned 6 new carriers but lost 6; in 1943 it commissioned 3 and lost 1. The turning point came in 1944 when it added 8 and lost 13. At war&#x27;s end Japan had 5 carriers tied up in port; all had been damaged, all lacked fuel and all lacked warplanes. Meanwhile, the US launched 13 small carriers in 1942 and one large one; and in 1943 added 15 large and 50 escort carriers, and more arrived in 1944 and 1945. The new American carriers were much better designed, with far more antiaircraft guns, and powerful radar.

Both sides were overextended in the exhaustive sea, air and land battles for Guadalcanal. The Japanese were better at night combat (because the American destroyers had only trained for attacks on battleships). However, the Japanese could not feed its soldiers so the Americans eventually won because of superior logistics. The Navy built up its forces in 1942–43, and developed a strategy of &quot;island-hopping, that is to skip over most of the heavily defended Japanese islands and instead go further on and select islands to seize for forward air bases.
In the Atlantic, the Allies waged a long battle with German submarines which was termed the Battle of the Atlantic. Navy aircraft flew from bases in Greenland and Iceland to hunt submarines, and hundreds of escort carriers and destroyer escorts were built which were specifically designed to protect merchant convoys. In the Pacific, in an ironic twist, the U.S. submarines fought against Japanese shipping in a mirror image of the Atlantic, with German submarines hunting U.S. merchant ships. At the end of the war the U.S. had 260 submarines in commission. It had lost 52 submarines during the war, 36 in actions in the Pacific. Submarines effectively destroyed the Japanese merchant fleet by January 1945 and choked off Japan&#x27;s oil supply.

In the summer of 1943, the U.S. began the Gilbert and Marshall Islands campaign to retake the Gilbert and Marshall Islands. After this success, the Americans went on to the Mariana and Palau Islands in summer 1944. Following their defeat at the Battle of Saipan, the Imperial Japanese Navy&#x27;s Combined Fleet, with 5 aircraft carriers, sortied to attack the Navy&#x27;s Fifth Fleet during the Battle of the Philippine Sea, which was the largest aircraft carrier battle in history. The battle was so one-sided that it became known as the &quot;Marianas turkey shoot&quot;; the U.S. lost 130 aircraft and no ships while the Japanese lost 411 planes and 3 carriers. Following victory in the Marianas, the U.S. began the reconquest of the Philippines at Leyte in October 1944. The Japanese fleet sortied to attack the invasion fleet, resulting in the four-day Battle of Leyte Gulf, one of the largest naval battles in history. The first kamikaze missions were flown during the battle, sinking and damaging several other U.S. ships; these attacks were the most effective anti-ship weapon of the war.

The Battle of Okinawa became the last major battle between U.S. and Japanese ground units. Okinawa was to become a staging area for the eventual invasion of Japan since it was just south of the Japanese mainland. Marines and soldiers landed unopposed on April 1, 1945, to begin an 82-day campaign which became the largest land-sea-air battle in history and was noted for the ferocity of the fighting and the high civilian casualties with over 150,000 Okinawans losing their lives. Japanese kamikaze pilots inflicted the largest loss of ships in U.S. naval history with the sinking of 36 and the damaging of another 243. Total U.S. casualties were over 12,500 dead and 38,000 wounded, while the Japanese lost over 110,000 men, making Okinawa one of the bloodiest battles in history.

The fierce fighting on Okinawa is said to have played a part in President Truman&#x27;s decision to use the atomic bomb and to forego an invasion of Japan. When the Japanese surrendered, a flotilla of 374 ships entered Tokyo Bay to witness the ceremony conducted on the battleship . By the end of the war the US Navy had over 1200 warships, surpassing the size of the Royal Navy.

===Cold War (1945–1991)===


The immediate postwar fate of the Navy was the scrapping and mothballing of ships on a large scale; by 1948 only 267 ships were active in the Navy. In 1948 the Women&#x27;s Armed Services Integration Act gave women permanent status in the Regular and Reserve forces of the Navy.

====Revolt of the Admirals====

The military services were unified in 1947 over the strong objections of Navy Secretary James Forrestal. President Truman appointed him Secretary of Defense, but the two disagreed over budgets and Truman fired him in 1949 when Forrestal took the Navy&#x27;s side in a public protest against White House policy known as the Revolt of the Admirals. A basic political problem was that the Secretary of Defense did not fully control the budgets of the three services. Each one worked with powerful Congressmen to enhance their budgets despite the White House determination to hold down spending. In 1948–49 the &quot;Revolt of the Admirals&quot; came when a number of retired and active-duty admirals publicly disagreed with President Truman and with his replacement for Forrestal Louis A. Johnson because they wanted less expensive strategic atomic bombs delivered by the Air Force. Forrestal had supported the Navy position and had obtained funding for an aircraft carrier from Congress. Truman fired Forrestal, and Johnson cancelled the carrier and announced plans to move Marine Corps aviation out of the Navy and into the Air Force. During Congressional hearings public opinion shifted strongly against the Navy. In the end the Navy kept Marine aviation and eventually got its carrier, but its revolting admirals were punished and it lost control over strategic bombing. The Truman administration essentially defeated the Revolt, and civilian control over the military was reaffirmed. Military budgets following the hearings prioritized the development of Air Force heavy bomber designs, accumulating a combat ready force of over 1,000 long-range strategic bombers capable of supporting nuclear mission scenarios.

The Navy gradually developed a reputation for having the most highly developed technology of all the U.S. services. The 1950s saw the development of nuclear power for ships, under the leadership of Admiral Hyman G. Rickover, the development of missiles and jet aircraft for Navy use and the construction of supercarriers. was the world&#x27;s first nuclear-powered aircraft carrier and was followed by the &quot;Nimitz&quot;-class supercarriers. Ballistic missile submarines grew ever more deadly and quiet, culminating in the &quot;Ohio&quot;-class submarines. Rickover had a strong base of support in Congress and in public opinion, and he forced nuclear power to be a high Navy priority, especially for submarines. Combined with missile technology, this gave the United States the assured second-strike capability that was the foundation of deterrence against the Soviet Union.

====Korean War and naval expansion====
Tension with the Soviet Union and China came to a head in the Korean War, and it became clear that the peacetime Navy would have to be much larger than ever imagined. Fleets were assigned to geographic areas around the world, and ships were sent to hot spots as a standard part of the response to the periodic crises. However, because the North Korean navy was not large, the Korean War featured few naval battles; the combatant navies served mostly as naval artillery for their in-country armies. A large amphibious landing at Inchon succeeded in driving the North Koreans back across the 38th parallel. The Battle of Chosin Reservoir ended with the evacuation of almost 105,000 UN troops from the port of Hungnam.

The U.S. Navy&#x27;s 1956 shipbuilding program was significant because it included authorization for the construction of eight submarines, the largest such order since World War II. This FY-56 program included five nuclear-powered submarines – &quot;Triton&quot;, the guided missile submarine &quot;Halibut&quot;, the lead ship for the , and the final two &quot;Skate&quot;-class attack submarines, and . It also included the three diesel-electric , the last diesel-electric submarines to be built by the U.S. Navy.

====Vietnam War====
An unlikely combination of Navy ships fought in the Vietnam War 1965–72; aircraft carriers offshore launched thousands of air strikes, while small gunboats of the &quot;brown-water navy&quot; patrolled the rivers. Despite the naval activity, new construction was curtailed by Presidents Johnson and Nixon to save money, and many of the carriers on Yankee Station dated from World War II. By 1978 the fleet had dwindled to 217 surface ships and 119 submarines.

====Soviet challenge====
Meanwhile, the Soviet fleet had been growing, and outnumbered the U.S. fleet in every type except carriers, and the Navy calculated they probably would be defeated by the Soviet Navy in a major conflict. This concern led the Reagan administration to set a goal for a 600-ship Navy, and by 1988 the fleet was at 588, although it declined again in subsequent years. The &quot;Iowa&quot;-class battleships , , &quot;Missouri&quot;, and were reactivated after 40 years in storage, modernized, and made showy appearances off the shores of Lebanon and elsewhere. In 1987 and 1988, the United States Navy conducted various combat operations in the Persian Gulf against Iran, most notably Operation Praying Mantis, the largest surface-air naval battle with US involvement since World War II.

===Post–Cold War (1991–present)===

Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Soviet Navy fell apart, without sufficient personnel to man many of its ships or the money to maintain them—indeed, many of them were sold to foreign nations. This left the United States as the world&#x27;s undisputed naval superpower. U.S. naval forces did undergo a decline in absolute terms but relative to the rest of the world, however, United States dwarfs other nations&#x27; naval power as evinced by its 11 aircraft supercarriers and their supporting battle groups. During the 1990s, the United States naval strategy was based on the overall military strategy of the United States which emphasized the ability of the United States to engage in two simultaneous limited wars along separate fronts.

The ships of the Navy participated in a number of conflicts after the end of the Cold War. After diplomatic efforts failed, the Navy was instrumental in the opening phases of the 1991 Gulf War with Iraq; the ships of the navy launched hundreds of Tomahawk II cruise missiles and naval aircraft flew sorties from six carriers in the Persian Gulf and Red Sea. The battleships &quot;Missouri&quot; and &quot;Wisconsin&quot; fired their 16-inch guns for the first time since the Korean War on several targets in Kuwait in early February. In 1999, hundreds of Navy and Marine Corps aircraft flew thousands of sorties from bases in Italy and carriers in the Adriatic against targets in Serbia and Kosovo to try to stop the ethnic cleansing in Kosovo. After a 78-day campaign Serbia capitulated to NATO&#x27;s demands.

As a result of a large number of command officers being fired for failing to do their job properly, in 2012 the Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) ordered a new method of selecting command officers across the Navy.

In March 2007, the U.S. Navy reached its smallest fleet size, with 274 ships, since World War I. Since the end of the Cold War, the Navy has shifted its focus from preparations for large-scale war with the Soviet Union to special operations and strike missions in regional conflicts. The Navy participated in the Iraq War and is a major participant in the ongoing War on Terror, largely in this capacity. Development continues on new ships and weapons, including the s and the Littoral combat ships. One hundred and three U.S. Navy personnel died in the Iraq War. U.S. Navy warships launched cruise missiles into military targets in Libya during Operation Odyssey Dawn to enforce a UN resolution.

Former U.S. Navy admirals who head the U.S. Naval Institute have raised concerns about what they see as the ability to respond to &quot;aggressive moves by Iran and China&quot;. As part of the pivot to the Pacific, Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta said that the Navy would switch from a 50/50 split between the Pacific and the Atlantic to a 60/40 percent split that favored the Pacific, but the CNO, Admiral Jonathan Greenert, and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Martin Dempsey, have said that this would not mean &quot;a big influx of troops or ships in the Western Pacific&quot;. This pivot is a continuation of the trend towards the Pacific that first saw the Cold War&#x27;s focus against the Soviet Union with 60 percent of the American submarine fleet stationed in the Atlantic shift towards an even split between the coasts and then in 2006, 60 percent of the submarines stationed on the Pacific side to counter China. The pivot is not entirely about numbers as some of the most advanced platforms will now have a Pacific focus, where their capabilities are most needed. However even a single incident can make a big dent in a fleet of modest size with global missions.

On January 12, 2016, Iranian armed forces captured ten Navy personnel when their two boats entered Iranian territorial waters off the coast of Farsi Island in the Persian Gulf. They were released the next day following diplomatic discussions between the U.S. and Iran.

In mid-2017, two Navy ships, and , were involved in collisions with merchant ships during regular transits that resulted in fatalities.

In 2020, the United States Navy was overtaken by the Chinese Navy in terms of raw number of ships. The United States had previously held the title of largest navy since it surpassed the Royal Navy in 1943.

==See also==

* Bibliography of early American naval history
* Board of Naval Commissioners
* General Board of the United States Navy
* History of homeland security in the United States
* List of United States Navy ships
* Naval History and Heritage Command - museums
* Seabees
* United States Coast Guard History and Heritage Sites
* United States Navy bureau system
* United States Navy systems commands

==Citations==
==Bibliography==
* 
* Fock, Harald. &quot;Fast Fighting Boats, 1870–1945 Their Design, Construction, and Use.&quot; Annapolis, Md: Naval Institute Press, 1978.
* Langley, Harold. &quot;Social Reform in the United States Navy, 1798–1862&quot; (University of Illinois Press, 1967)
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Further reading===
* Bennett, Michael J. &quot;Union Jacks: Yankee Sailors in the Civil War&quot; (University of North Carolina Press, 2003)
* Dull, Jonathan R. &quot;American Naval History, 1607–1865: Overcoming the Colonial Legacy&quot; (University of Nebraska Press; 2012) excerpt and text search; full text online
* Grenville, John A. S. and George Berkeley Young, &quot;Politics, Strategy, and American Diplomacy: Studies in Foreign Policy, 1873–1917&quot; (1966) pp. 1–38, on &quot;The Admiral and politics: Stephan B. Luce and the foundation of the modern American Navy.
* Hagan, Kenneth J. and Michael T. McMaster, eds. &quot;In Peace and War: Interpretations of American Naval History&quot; (2008), essays by scholars
* Hendrix, Henry J. &quot;Theodore Roosevelt&#x27;s Naval Diplomacy: The U.S. Navy and the Birth of the American Century&quot; (2009) excerpt
* Isenberg, Michael T. &quot;Shield of the Republic: The United States Navy in an Era of Cold War and Violent Peace 1945–1962&quot; (1993)
* McKee, Christopher. &quot;A Gentlemanly and Honorable Profession: The Creation of the U.S. Naval Officer Corps, 1794–1815&quot; (Naval Institute Press, 1991)
* Pedisich, Paul E. &quot;Congress Buys a Navy: Politics, Economics, and the Rise of American Naval Power, 1881–1921&quot; (Naval Institute, 2016). 286 pp.
* Potter, E.B. &quot; Sea Power: A Naval History&quot; (1981), battle history worldwide
* Rose, Lisle A. &quot;Power at Sea, Volume 1: The Age of Navalism, 1890–1918&quot; (2006) excerpt and text search vol 1; &quot; Power at Sea, Volume 2: The Breaking Storm, 1919–1945&quot; (2006) excerpt and text search vol 2; &quot;Power at Sea, Volume 3: A Violent Peace, 1946–2006&quot; (2006) excerpt and text search vol 3
* Symonds, Craig L. &quot;Decision at Sea: Five Naval Battles that Shaped American History&quot; (2006) excerpt and text search; Lake Erie, Hampton Roads, Manila Bay. Midway, Persian Gulf
* Turnbull, Archibald Douglas, and Clifford Lee Lord. &quot;History of United States Naval Aviation&quot; (Ayer Co Pub, 1972) to 1939
* Verney, Michael A. &quot;Great and Rising Nation: Naval Exploration and Global Empire in the Early US Republic&quot; (University of Chicago Press, 2022) online review
* Wimmel, Kenneth. &quot;Theodore Roosevelt and the Great White Fleet: American Seapower Comes of Age&quot; (Potomac Books, 1998), popular history

===Historiography===
* Hackemer, Kurt H. &quot;The US Navy, 1860–1920.&quot; in James C. Bradford &quot;A Companion to American Military History&quot; (2 vol 2009) 1: 388–398
* Holwitt, Joel I. &quot;Review Essay: Reappraising the Interwar U.S. Navy,&quot; &quot;Journal of Military History&quot; (2012) 76#1 193–210
* McKee, Christopher. &quot;The US Navy, 1794–1860: Men, Ships, and Governance.&quot; in &quot;James C. Bradford A Companion to American Military History&quot; (2 vol 2009) 1: 378–387.
* Winkler, David F. &quot;The US Navy since 1920.&quot; in James C. Bradford &quot;A Companion to American Military History&quot; (2 vol 2009) 1: 399–410.

==External links==
* 
* &quot;A Short History of the United States Navy&quot; by Admiral George R. Clark et al. (textbook written for use at the Naval Academy by its Commandant of Midshipmen; rev. ed. 1927)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1517192" start="4" end="37" title="History of the United States Navy" label="history of the United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170483" start="127" end="139" title="sailing ship" label="sailing ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410980" start="190" end="199" title="Ironclad warship" label="ironclads"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="211" end="229" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="493" end="511" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="588" end="615" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Second Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367216" start="649" end="665" title="Continental Navy" label="Continental Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="687" end="713" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824580" start="761" end="792" title="Presidency of George Washington" label="Presidency of George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410826" start="924" end="941" title="Naval Act of 1794" label="Naval Act of 1794"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339798" start="993" end="1014" title="original six frigates of the United States Navy" label="original six frigates"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="1095" end="1115" title="French Navy" label="French Republic Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q655480" start="1123" end="1132" title="Quasi-War" label="Quasi-War"/>
<link wikidata="Q501768" start="1144" end="1158" title="Barbary Coast" label="Barbary states"/>
<link wikidata="Q468293" start="1166" end="1171" title="First Barbary War" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q233505" start="1176" end="1194" title="Second Barbary War" label="Second Barbary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="1220" end="1231" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="1293" end="1313" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="1445" end="1456" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="1471" end="1484" title="United States Naval Academy" label="Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="1519" end="1538" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="1546" end="1560" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124986" start="1635" end="1658" title="Confederate States Navy" label="Confederate States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q847478" start="2059" end="2074" title="armored cruiser" label="armored cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q182531" start="2080" end="2090" title="battleship" label="battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="2297" end="2317" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2386" end="2397" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="2449" end="2459" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050213" start="2465" end="2492" title="Washington Naval Conference" label="Washington Naval Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="2625" end="2641" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="2716" end="2738" title="Attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q207165" start="2832" end="2855" title="Battle of the Coral Sea" label="Battle of the Coral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q173034" start="2861" end="2877" title="Battle of Midway" label="Battle of Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q217145" start="2913" end="2933" title="Guadalcanal campaign" label="Guadalcanal Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q308999" start="2980" end="3000" title="Battle of Leyte Gulf" label="Battle of Leyte Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q646500" start="3094" end="3108" title="Leapfrogging (strategy)" label="island-hopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q141017" start="3233" end="3242" title="Tokyo Bay" label="Tokyo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q665554" start="3363" end="3395" title="Japanese Instrument of Surrender" label="Japanese Instrument of Surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="3520" end="3528" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="3553" end="3559" title="Korean War" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="3564" end="3571" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q864113" start="3572" end="3581" title="proxy war" label="proxy war"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="3834" end="3847" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596125" start="3885" end="3898" title="600-ship Navy" label="600-ship Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3938" end="3950" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509344" start="4149" end="4162" title="Power projection" label="project power"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="4260" end="4265" title="Gulf War" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="4270" end="4294" title="Iraq War" label="Second Persian Gulf Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890797" start="4432" end="4452" title="United States Naval Institute" label="U.S. Naval Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q755179" start="4623" end="4657" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320919" start="5022" end="5051" title="Rhode Island General Assembly" label="Rhode Island General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q376920" start="5143" end="5157" title="Nicholas Cooke" label="Nicholas Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669225" start="5193" end="5208" title="Abraham Whipple" label="Abraham Whipple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873130" start="5233" end="5249" title="USS Providence (1775)" label="&amp;quot;Katy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367216" start="5365" end="5381" title="Continental Navy" label="Continental Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="5524" end="5534" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367216" start="5612" end="5629" title="Continental Navy" label="Continental fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="5644" end="5664" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="5777" end="5794" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q84874325" start="6005" end="6024" title="Nicholson Broughton" label="Nicholson Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q27416" start="6043" end="6068" title="Marblehead, Massachusetts" label="Marblehead, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q298237" start="6615" end="6630" title="Benedict Arnold" label="Benedict Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q934626" start="6767" end="6785" title="Battle of Valcour Island" label="ensuing engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="7037" end="7044" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="7237" end="7246" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414906" start="7277" end="7294" title="letter of marque" label="letters of marque"/>
<link wikidata="Q314333" start="7734" end="7749" title="John Paul Jones" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="7775" end="7788" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888502" start="7828" end="7854" title="Battle of Flamborough Head" label="Battle of Flamborough Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q942890" start="7893" end="7900" title="rigging" label="rigging"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116086" start="8038" end="8055" title="striking the colors" label="struck his colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="8214" end="8225" title="French Navy" label="French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q694048" start="8575" end="8610" title="Charles Henri Hector d&amp;#x27;Estaing" label="Charles Henri, comte d&amp;#x27;Estaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744875" start="8650" end="8677" title="Siege of Savannah" label="recapture Savannah, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q508363" start="8747" end="8781" title="Jean-Baptiste Donatien de Vimeur, comte de Rochambeau" label="Jean-Baptiste, comte de Rochambeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q197627" start="9064" end="9089" title="François Joseph Paul de Grasse" label="François, comte de Grasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419459" start="9365" end="9393" title="Battle of the Chesapeake" label="Battle of the Virginia Capes"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="9640" end="9655" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="10347" end="10353" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q184840" start="10393" end="10402" title="smuggling" label="smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="10489" end="10511" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="10525" end="10550" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="10551" end="10569" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391541" start="10583" end="10597" title="United States Revenue Cutter Service" label="Revenue-Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="10622" end="10647" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454250" start="10700" end="10711" title="First ten Revenue Service cutters" label="Ten cutters"/>
<link wikidata="Q501768" start="11201" end="11215" title="Barbary Coast" label="Barbary states"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="11289" end="11322" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="11468" end="11493" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045696" start="11578" end="11585" title="Ottoman Algeria" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="11624" end="11643" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Strait of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="11663" end="11678" title="Barbary pirates" label="Barbary pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410826" start="11910" end="11927" title="Naval Act of 1794" label="Naval Act of 1794"/>
<link wikidata="Q319829" start="12628" end="12653" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr." label="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="12696" end="12702" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788282" start="13280" end="13305" title="Treaty of Alliance (1778)" label="Treaty of Alliance (1778)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568837" start="13544" end="13554" title="Jay Treaty" label="Jay Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q266994" start="13970" end="13980" title="XYZ Affair" label="XYZ Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="14315" end="14336" title="United States Department of War" label="War Department&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q742787" start="14389" end="14411" title="United States Department of the Navy" label="Department of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661454" start="14656" end="14679" title="USS Retaliation (1798)" label="&amp;quot;Le Croyable&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984928" start="14766" end="14849" title="USS Constellation vs L&amp;#x27;Insurgente" label="&amp;quot;Constellation&amp;quot; captured the French frigate &amp;quot;L&amp;#x27;Insurgente&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q720374" start="15599" end="15614" title="Stephen Decatur" label="Stephen Decatur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="15656" end="15663" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q211866" start="15701" end="15706" title="Derna, Libya" label="Derna"/>
<link wikidata="Q214196" start="15947" end="15954" title="gunboat" label="gunboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="16258" end="16283" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391541" start="16289" end="16303" title="Revenue-Marine" label="Revenue-Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q683363" start="16401" end="16408" title="Cutter (boat)" label="cutters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440580" start="16441" end="16458" title="Federalist No. 12" label="Federalist Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566803" start="16636" end="16643" title="Impressment" label="impress"/>
<link wikidata="Q382286" start="16804" end="16853" title="Chesapeake–Leopard affair" label="&amp;quot;Chesapeake&amp;quot;-&amp;quot;Leopard&amp;quot; Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868544" start="17539" end="17543" title="USS Constitution vs HMS Guerriere" label="sank"/>
<link wikidata="Q52387698" start="17676" end="17684" title="live oak" label="live oak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17800" end="17808" title="HMS Java (1811)#Engagement with USS Constitution" label="defeated"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931739" start="17970" end="17978" title="USS United States vs HMS Macedonian" label="captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395322" start="17979" end="18005" title="HMS Macedonian" label="HMS &amp;quot;Macedonian&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q558188" start="18190" end="18202" title="David Porter (naval officer)" label="David Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680561" start="18564" end="18577" title="James Hillyar" label="James Hillyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872646" start="18667" end="18681" title="Battle of Valparaíso" label="ensuing battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q894564" start="18902" end="18915" title="Boston Harbor" label="Boston Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680697" start="18983" end="18997" title="James Lawrence" label="James Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q728262" start="19053" end="19065" title="Philip Broke" label="Philip Broke"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="19375" end="19394" title="War of 1812" label="Chesapeake Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q897786" start="19446" end="19456" title="Burning of Washington" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850527" start="19461" end="19470" title="Battle of Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637241" start="19577" end="19597" title="Washington Navy Yard" label="Washington Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="19742" end="19766" title="The Star-Spangled Banner" label="The Star-Spangled Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237111" start="19945" end="19969" title="Battle of Plattsburgh" label="Battle of Lake Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q990715" start="19974" end="19993" title="Battle of Lake Erie" label="Battle of Lake Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324198" start="20116" end="20131" title="Treaty of Ghent" label="Treaty of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037067" start="20197" end="20205" title="Capture of USS President" label="captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037014" start="20297" end="20305" title="Capture of HMS Cyane and HMS Levant" label="captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q698787" start="20534" end="20546" title="German submarine U-505" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667474" start="20883" end="20894" title="Age of Sail" label="Age of Sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q210223" start="21016" end="21021" title="sloop" label="sloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q382533" start="22383" end="22401" title="William Bainbridge" label="William Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q207452" start="22424" end="22441" title="Ship of the line" label="ships of the line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783199" start="22609" end="22616" title="Mashouda" label="Meshuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838431" start="22636" end="22658" title="Battle off Cape Gata" label="Action of 17 June 1815"/>
<link wikidata="Q202539" start="22746" end="22750" title="brig" label="brig"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22757" end="22764" title="Estedio" label="Estedio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873063" start="22778" end="22799" title="Battle of Cape Palos (1815)" label="Battle off Cape Palos"/>
<link wikidata="Q558188" start="23556" end="23568" title="David Porter (naval officer)" label="David Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689594" start="24013" end="24029" title="Africa Squadron" label="African squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191091" start="24291" end="24315" title="Webster–Ashburton Treaty" label="Webster–Ashburton treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="24742" end="24772" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25094" end="25107" title="USS Somers (1842)#The &amp;quot;Somers Affair&amp;quot;" label="Somers Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q511866" start="25120" end="25126" title="mutiny" label="mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184407" start="25204" end="25218" title="Philip Spencer (sailor)" label="Philip Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q741482" start="25220" end="25235" title="George Bancroft" label="George Bancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q940135" start="25247" end="25268" title="United States Secretary of the Navy" label="Secretary of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q844242" start="25394" end="25403" title="Commodore (United States)" label="Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q61855" start="25404" end="25417" title="Matthew C. Perry" label="Matthew Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472013" start="25483" end="25494" title="Fort Severn" label="Fort Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="25498" end="25507" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="25572" end="25599" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976715" start="25884" end="25903" title="Second Seminole War" label="Second Seminole War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745368" start="26392" end="26410" title="Siege of Veracruz" label="Battle of Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q173270" start="26460" end="26468" title="Veracruz (city)" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122704" start="26604" end="26620" title="Pacific Squadron" label="Pacific Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q771451" start="26956" end="26974" title="Convention of Kanagawa" label="Treaty of Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q804558" start="27073" end="27089" title="Bakumatsu" label="opening of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999049" start="27460" end="27477" title="Norfolk Naval Shipyard" label="Norfolk Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="27510" end="27522" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederates"/>
<link wikidata="Q594906" start="27700" end="27715" title="Stephen Mallory" label="Stephen Mallory"/>
<link wikidata="Q435290" start="27833" end="27846" title="John Ericsson" label="John Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q354759" start="27899" end="27913" title="Winfield Scott" label="Winfield Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q761085" start="27996" end="28009" title="Anaconda Plan" label="Anaconda Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="28178" end="28195" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410980" start="28535" end="28544" title="Ironclad warship" label="ironclads"/>
<link wikidata="Q868481" start="28677" end="28700" title="Battle of Hampton Roads" label="Battle of Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q137823" start="28877" end="28892" title="Monitor (warship)" label="monitor warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="29149" end="29159" title="naval mine" label="naval mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q206675" start="29214" end="29225" title="Torpedo (genus)" label="torpedo eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519203" start="29311" end="29331" title="Battle of Mobile Bay" label="Battle of Mobile Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q315607" start="29441" end="29458" title="David Farragut" label="David G. Farragut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784338" start="29584" end="29596" title="spar torpedo" label="spar torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q986676" start="30015" end="30031" title="Commerce raiding" label="commerce raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q884687" start="30036" end="30051" title="blockade runner" label="blockade runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="30180" end="30187" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="30199" end="30210" title="The Bahamas" label="The Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569693" start="30934" end="30944" title="Southern bread riots" label="food riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443093" start="30994" end="31022" title="Second Battle of Fort Fisher" label="Second Battle of Fort Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q485415" start="31675" end="31685" title="United States expedition to Korea" label="expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255358" start="31729" end="31741" title="John Rodgers (American Civil War naval officer)" label="John Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="32206" end="32221" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medals of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825907" start="32473" end="32489" title="Virginius Affair" label="Virginius Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138301" start="32561" end="32576" title="New York Harbor" label="New York Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34597" start="32861" end="32884" title="James A. Garfield" label="Garfield administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q373146" start="33030" end="33045" title="William H. Hunt" label="William H. Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q830335" start="34055" end="34072" title="protected cruiser" label="protected cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q182531" start="34325" end="34335" title="battleship" label="battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494423" start="34450" end="34471" title="Squadron of Evolution" label="Squadron of Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q142988" start="34758" end="34777" title="Alfred Thayer Mahan" label="Alfred Thayer Mahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139846" start="34796" end="34846" title="The Influence of Sea Power upon History" label="The Influence of Sea Power upon History, 1660–1783"/>
<link wikidata="Q474184" start="35171" end="35187" title="Manifest destiny" label="Manifest Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q817478" start="35389" end="35406" title="Benjamin F. Tracy" label="Benjamin F. Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748408" start="35902" end="35930" title="Amphitrite-class monitor" label="&amp;quot;Amphitrite&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q19869422" start="36081" end="36107" title="Arkansas-class monitor" label="&amp;quot;Arkansas&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="36206" end="36226" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165363" start="36266" end="36273" title="torpedo" label="torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q324233" start="36357" end="36369" title="torpedo boat" label="torpedo boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683082" start="36825" end="36838" title="Havana Harbor" label="Havana Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="37280" end="37298" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541133" start="37402" end="37418" title="Asiatic Squadron" label="Asiatic Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q467093" start="37441" end="37453" title="George Dewey" label="George Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q528550" start="37563" end="37583" title="Battle of Manila Bay" label="Battle of Manila Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053998" start="37608" end="37631" title="North Atlantic Squadron" label="North Atlantic Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999889" start="37708" end="37734" title="Battle of Santiago de Cuba" label="Battle of Santiago de Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891726" start="39057" end="39073" title="Nicaragua Canal" label="Nicaraguan Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="39140" end="39157" title="Isthmus of Panama" label="Isthmus of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="39189" end="39197" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131701" start="39222" end="39239" title="Hay–Herrán Treaty" label="Hay–Herrán Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q498979" start="39670" end="39687" title="Panama Canal Zone" label="Panama Canal Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q762570" start="39747" end="39767" title="Guantanamo Bay Naval Base" label="Guantanamo Bay, Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q960949" start="39943" end="39962" title="John Philip Holland" label="John Philip Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="40055" end="40073" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051067" start="40212" end="40238" title="pre-dreadnought battleship" label="pre-dreadnought battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q782583" start="40261" end="40278" title="Great White Fleet" label="Great White Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059449" start="41279" end="41310" title="Ypiranga incident" label="carrying illegal arms to Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316711" start="41506" end="41523" title="United States occupation of Veracruz" label="occupied Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907432" start="41589" end="41605" title="infantry tactics" label="infantry tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q860251" start="41627" end="41639" title="urban combat" label="urban combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="41948" end="41966" title="amphibious assault" label="amphibious assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q187425" start="42284" end="42293" title="RMS Lusitania" label="Lusitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141809" start="42456" end="42473" title="Naval Act of 1916" label="Naval Act of 1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093714" start="42990" end="43006" title="Josephus Daniels" label="Josephus Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q575662" start="43097" end="43114" title="Naval War College" label="Naval War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954860" start="43738" end="43751" title="Bradley A. Fiske" label="Bradley Fiske"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445377" start="44049" end="44066" title="William S. Benson" label="William S. Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="44299" end="44312" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600765" start="44664" end="44676" title="William Sims" label="William Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154910" start="45906" end="45932" title="Naval Reserve Flying Corps" label="Naval Reserve Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885372" start="46183" end="46205" title="North Sea Mine Barrage" label="North Sea Mine Barrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155186" start="46391" end="46413" title="Northern Bombing Group" label="Northern Bombing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="46419" end="46437" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165730" start="46445" end="46461" title="United States Battleship Division Nine (World War I)" label="battleship group"/>
<link wikidata="Q213965" start="46465" end="46475" title="Scapa Flow" label="Scapa Flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q644266" start="46493" end="46512" title="Grand Fleet" label="British Grand Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q733093" start="46528" end="46538" title="Cobh" label="Queenstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207327" start="46728" end="46767" title="Action of 17 November 1917" label="sank the German U-boat &amp;quot;U-58&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052437" start="46912" end="46922" title="Yeoman (F)" label="Yeoman (F)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680981" start="46971" end="46994" title="Loretta Perfectus Walsh" label="Loretta Perfectus Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="47121" end="47142" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q511450" start="47237" end="47247" title="naval artillery" label="naval guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050213" start="48616" end="48643" title="Washington Naval Conference" label="Washington Naval Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q696550" start="48696" end="48719" title="Washington Naval Treaty" label="Washington Naval Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q778129" start="49245" end="49258" title="light cruiser" label="light cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="49264" end="49280" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109500" start="49335" end="49342" title="Collier (ship)" label="collier"/>
<link wikidata="Q214190" start="49427" end="49440" title="battlecruiser" label="battlecruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647257" start="49493" end="49514" title="Bureau of Aeronautics" label="Bureau of Aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890793" start="49593" end="49622" title="United States Naval Aviator" label="United States Naval Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q863201" start="49637" end="49651" title="Billy Mitchell" label="Billy Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961607" start="49968" end="49984" title="William V. Pratt" label="William V. Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q110612764" start="50009" end="50033" title="Foreign policy of Herbert Hoover" label="President Hoovers&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q85761628" start="50203" end="50243" title="Foreign policy of the Franklin D. Roosevelt administration" label="President Franklin Roosevelt (1933-1945)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040943" start="50386" end="50405" title="Carl Vinson" label="Vinson-Trammell Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q43296" start="50760" end="50771" title="Wake Island" label="Wake Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q47863" start="50773" end="50786" title="Midway Atoll" label="Midway Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q8194086" start="50791" end="50803" title="Dutch Harbor" label="Dutch Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="51126" end="51139" title="Yangtze" label="Yangtze River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51577" end="51594" title="Naval Act of 1936" label="Naval Act of 1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q211897" start="51684" end="51701" title="Naval Act of 1938" label="Second Vinson Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q303469" start="51774" end="51792" title="Two-Ocean Navy Act" label="Two-Ocean Navy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072415" start="51834" end="51859" title="Chief of Naval Operations" label="Chief of Naval Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q700730" start="51860" end="51882" title="Harold Rainsford Stark" label="Harold Rainsford Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q196731" start="52034" end="52064" title="Destroyers-for-bases deal" label="Destroyers for Bases Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297940" start="52182" end="52196" title="United States Fleet Forces Command" label="Atlantic Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q643854" start="55077" end="55101" title="Salmon-class submarine" label="&amp;quot;Salmon&amp;quot; class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792815" start="55156" end="55185" title="Tambor-class submarine" label="&amp;quot;Tambor&amp;quot; submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144934" start="55202" end="55232" title="Gato-class submarine" label="&amp;quot;Gato&amp;quot; class of 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q366731" start="56800" end="56814" title="Ernest King" label="Ernest J. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q463385" start="57307" end="57322" title="James Forrestal" label="James Forrestal"/>
<link wikidata="Q729082" start="57388" end="57404" title="William D. Leahy" label="William D. Leahy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217645" start="57673" end="57687" title="Chester W. Nimitz" label="Chester Nimitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q439984" start="57817" end="57836" title="William Halsey Jr." label="Admiral Bull Halsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q316471" start="57849" end="57868" title="Raymond A. Spruance" label="Raymond A. Spruance"/>
<link wikidata="Q152325" start="58002" end="58017" title="Isoroku Yamamoto" label="Yamamoto&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q581261" start="58615" end="58638" title="South West Pacific Area (command)" label="South West Pacific Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q202365" start="58768" end="58785" title="Thomas C. Kinkaid" label="Thomas C. Kinkaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="58894" end="58916" title="Attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q696462" start="59486" end="59497" title="Philippines campaign (1941–42)" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q296754" start="59509" end="59543" title="Battle of Singapore" label="the main British base at Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q40156" start="59758" end="59777" title="Mitsubishi A6M Zero" label="Mitsubishi A6M Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200046" start="59920" end="59935" title="Akutan Zero" label="a captured Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851343" start="60176" end="60236" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney R-2800 Double Wasp" label="2,000 horsepower Pratt and Whitney 18-cylinder radial engine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60252" end="60263" title="Vought F4U Corsair#Development" label="F4U Corsair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427735" start="60330" end="60343" title="Fleet Air Arm" label="Fleet Air Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q646500" start="62106" end="62120" title="Leapfrogging (strategy)" label="island-hopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q157627" start="62358" end="62380" title="Battle of the Atlantic" label="Battle of the Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q253555" start="62473" end="62487" title="escort carrier" label="escort carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499623" start="62493" end="62509" title="destroyer escort" label="destroyer escort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238546" start="63057" end="63094" title="Gilbert and Marshall Islands campaign" label="Gilbert and Marshall Islands campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q696168" start="63188" end="63213" title="Mariana and Palau Islands campaign" label="Mariana and Palau Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q700705" start="63260" end="63276" title="Battle of Saipan" label="Battle of Saipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="63282" end="63304" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q697037" start="63312" end="63326" title="Combined Fleet" label="Combined Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q537291" start="63388" end="63399" title="United States Fifth Fleet" label="Fifth Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q504347" start="63411" end="63439" title="Battle of the Philippine Sea" label="Battle of the Philippine Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q717004" start="63768" end="63773" title="Battle of Leyte" label="Leyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q308999" start="63874" end="63894" title="Battle of Leyte Gulf" label="Battle of Leyte Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q133194" start="63951" end="63959" title="kamikaze" label="kamikaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q192660" start="64118" end="64135" title="Battle of Okinawa" label="Battle of Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="64205" end="64212" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q300879" start="64259" end="64276" title="Operation Downfall" label="invasion of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4113790" start="64308" end="64325" title="Mainland Japan" label="Japanese mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="64961" end="64984" title="Harry S. Truman" label="President Truman&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="65005" end="65016" title="Nuclear weapon" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="65062" end="65082" title="Surrender of Japan" label="Japanese surrendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q141017" start="65116" end="65125" title="Tokyo Bay" label="Tokyo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="65265" end="65275" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030820" start="65467" end="65510" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Armed Services Integration Act" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Armed Services Integration Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q450492" start="65942" end="65964" title="Revolt of the Admirals" label="Revolt of the Admirals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370756" start="66396" end="66412" title="Louis A. Johnson" label="Louis A. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359863" start="66448" end="66470" title="strategic nuclear weapon" label="strategic atomic bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="67484" end="67497" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q541637" start="67541" end="67558" title="Hyman G. Rickover" label="Hyman G. Rickover"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="67579" end="67586" title="missile" label="missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="67592" end="67604" title="jet aircraft" label="jet aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q683570" start="67781" end="67808" title="Ballistic missile submarine" label="Ballistic missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="68318" end="68328" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q483039" start="68784" end="68790" title="Battle of Inchon" label="Inchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q277337" start="68865" end="68891" title="Battle of Chosin Reservoir" label="Battle of Chosin Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q224982" start="68963" end="68970" title="Hungnam" label="Hungnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032759" start="69241" end="69285" title="USS Halibut (SSGN-587)" label="guided missile submarine &amp;quot;Halibut&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126601" start="69291" end="69300" title="USS Skipjack (SSN-585)" label="lead ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q921222" start="69329" end="69370" title="Skate-class submarine" label="&amp;quot;Skate&amp;quot;-class attack submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746796" start="69679" end="69695" title="brown-water navy" label="brown-water navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="69797" end="69804" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="69809" end="69814" title="Richard Nixon" label="Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q458106" start="69858" end="69872" title="Yankee Station" label="Yankee Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="70221" end="70227" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596125" start="70263" end="70276" title="600-ship Navy" label="600-ship Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="70530" end="70537" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026308" start="70677" end="70701" title="Operation Praying Mantis" label="Operation Praying Mantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q150115" start="71819" end="71830" title="Tomahawk (missile family)" label="Tomahawk II"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="71831" end="71845" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="72080" end="72086" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="72289" end="72305" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="72309" end="72315" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="72716" end="72724" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="72911" end="72919" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="72962" end="72975" title="War on terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542187" start="73075" end="73095" title="Littoral combat ship" label="Littoral combat ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q878102" start="73244" end="73266" title="Operation Odyssey Dawn" label="Operation Odyssey Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890797" start="73335" end="73355" title="United States Naval Institute" label="U.S. Naval Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381742" start="73705" end="73722" title="Jonathan Greenert" label="Jonathan Greenert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763459" start="73732" end="73769" title="Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q26093" start="73779" end="73793" title="Martin Dempsey" label="Martin Dempsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679589" start="74536" end="74563" title="2016 U.S.–Iran naval incident" label="captured ten Navy personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30344561" start="74816" end="74826" title="USS Fitzgerald and MV ACX Crystal collision" label="collisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q755179" start="74954" end="74966" title="Chinese Navy" label="Chinese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903414" start="75124" end="75168" title="Bibliography of early United States naval history" label="Bibliography of early American naval history"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931363" start="75171" end="75199" title="Board of Naval Commissioners" label="Board of Naval Commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531736" start="75202" end="75241" title="General Board of the United States Navy" label="General Board of the United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q115826693" start="75244" end="75293" title="History of homeland security in the United States" label="History of homeland security in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253416" start="75296" end="75328" title="List of United States Navy ships" label="List of United States Navy ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250126" start="75331" end="75365" title="Naval History and Heritage Command" label="Naval History and Heritage Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757145" start="75378" end="75384" title="Seabee" label="Seabee"/>
<link wikidata="Q113197062" start="75388" end="75440" title="United States Coast Guard History and Heritage Sites" label="United States Coast Guard History and Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890833" start="75443" end="75475" title="United States Navy bureau system" label="United States Navy bureau system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663859" start="75478" end="75513" title="United States Navy systems commands" label="United States Navy systems commands"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="274945" wikidata="Q1754396" url="?curid=274945" title="Prince of Darkness (Ozzy Osbourne album)">
<text>Prince of Darkness is a box set of four CDs by Ozzy Osbourne released in 2005. The first two CDs are Osbourne&#x27;s solo work containing various studio recordings, live tracks, b-sides, demos and outtakes, and the last two CDs are collaborations, on disc three, and cover songs, on disc four. The cover versions were recorded for this box set compilation, but were released on a stand-alone album entitled &quot;Under Cover&quot; later in the year.

Notably, the album tracks from &quot;Blizzard of Ozz&quot; and &quot;Diary of a Madman&quot; included in the set are taken from the 2002 remasters of those albums, for which the original drum and bass tracks were replaced with new recordings by Osbourne&#x27;s then-current bassist Robert Trujillo and drummer Mike Bordin, as a management response to legal action by original bassist Bob Daisley and drummer Lee Kerslake for unpaid royalty fees. Likewise, the tracks from &quot;Bark at the Moon&quot; are similarly taken from the 2002 remaster, for which they were remixed and altered.

==Track listing==

==Charts==
Album - &quot;Billboard&quot; (America)
==Certifications and sales==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q394970" start="24" end="31" title="box set" label="box set"/>
<link wikidata="Q133151" start="47" end="60" title="Ozzy Osbourne" label="Ozzy Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="232" end="246" title="Collaboration#Music" label="collaborations"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="267" end="278" title="cover version" label="cover songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753807" start="413" end="424" title="Under Cover" label="Under Cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q591967" start="488" end="503" title="Blizzard of Ozz" label="Blizzard of Ozz"/>
<link wikidata="Q730613" start="520" end="537" title="Diary of a Madman (album)" label="Diary of a Madman"/>
<link wikidata="Q213229" start="733" end="748" title="Robert Trujillo" label="Robert Trujillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q439445" start="761" end="772" title="Mike Bordin" label="Mike Bordin"/>
<link wikidata="Q471783" start="835" end="846" title="Bob Daisley" label="Bob Daisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q724308" start="859" end="871" title="Lee Kerslake" label="Lee Kerslake"/>
<link wikidata="Q790482" start="929" end="945" title="Bark at the Moon" label="Bark at the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="1082" end="1091" title="Billboard magazine" label="Billboard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="274946" wikidata="Q3182586" url="?curid=274946" title="John Tesh">
<text>John Frank Tesh Jr. (born July 9, 1952) is an American musician and radio and television presenter. He wrote the &quot;NBA on NBC&quot; basketball theme &quot;Roundball Rock&quot;, and hosts the &quot;Intelligence for Your Life&quot; radio show. In addition, since 2014, he has hosted &quot;Intelligence for Your Life TV&quot; with his wife, Connie Sellecca.

Tesh has won six Emmys and has four gold albums, two Grammy nominations, and an Associated Press award for investigative journalism. Tesh has sold over eight million records. His live concerts have raised more than $7 million for PBS. He has co-hosted the television program &quot;Entertainment Tonight&quot;. He has previously worked as a sports commentator and host for the Olympic Games, Wimbledon, the US Open, the Tour de France, Ironman Triathlon, and as a news anchor and reporter. In 2018, Tesh was inducted into the North Carolina Music Hall of Fame.

==Early life==
Tesh was born in Garden City, New York, on Long Island, the son of Mildred (Bunny), a nurse, and John Frank Tesh Sr., a textile chemist, both from North Carolina. He graduated from Garden City High School in 1970. Playing piano and trumpet from the age of six, he was named to the New York State Symphonic Orchestra in high school, while also playing the organ in a rock band. Tesh studied communications and music at North Carolina State University. He was also a &quot;walk on&quot; with the varsity lacrosse and soccer teams.

While at North Carolina State, studying physics and chemistry, he took a TV and radio course. Tesh worked part-time reading the news for Rick Dees at WKIX (AM) Raleigh in 1974. His roommate, Bill Leslie, anchor at WRAL-TV, helped him get into the radio and TV field. While in the area, Tesh worked as a news anchor in Raleigh, Orlando, Nashville, and New York&#x27;s WCBS-TV; this portion of his career spanned 12 years.

==Career==
===&quot;Entertainment Tonight&quot; and television career===
His television career included a stint as a news anchor and reporter at WSM-TV (now WSMV-TV) in Nashville, Tennessee, in the 1970s, where he often covered the same stories as Oprah Winfrey, who worked at a competing Nashville station. From Nashville, Tesh shuffled to WTVD in Durham, North Carolina, then down to WFTV in Orlando, and finally up to New York&#x27;s WCBS-TV, where, at age 22, he was their youngest reporter. In the fall of 1978, Tesh was a roving reporter for CBS during the 1978 New York City Marathon, which he ran and completed in 3:51:56. However, he became more well known when he co-hosted the television show &quot;Entertainment Tonight&quot; from 1986 to 1996.

Tesh also served as a sportscaster for CBS and later NBC, anchoring events such as the Tour de France bicycle race from 1983 through 1986 (Tesh has the distinction of being the anchor for the first American broadcast of this event), the US Open, and gymnastics at the 1992 and 1996 Summer Olympics.

Tesh hosted the short-lived &quot;One on One with John Tesh&quot; talk show in 1991–92 on NBC daytime, and co-hosted the show &quot;John &amp; Leeza from Hollywood&quot; with fellow &quot;Entertainment Tonight&quot; personality Leeza Gibbons from 1993 to 1994, also on NBC daytime. In 2014, Tesh returned to syndicated television in the series &quot;Intelligence for Your Life TV&quot;, based on his radio show.

Tesh appeared in &quot;The Icarus Factor&quot;, an episode of &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot;, playing a Klingon warrior. He also appeared as himself in a 1987 episode of the daytime serial &quot;Santa Barbara&quot;.

===Musical career===
In 1987, Yanni was assembling his first touring band to promote his album &quot;Out of Silence&quot;, as well as selections from &quot;Keys to Imagination&quot;. Being good friends, Tesh asked Yanni if he could join the band as keyboardist along with Joyce Imbesi and drummer Charlie Adams, as he had never been onstage for a live performance, and he needed the experience. Despite already having a full-time job with &quot;Entertainment Tonight&quot;, and the long hours of rehearsal for the band, he performed exceptionally well, although he participated in only one tour with Yanni, playing in approximately twelve shows, including the &quot;1988 Concert Series&quot;, before being replaced by Bradley Joseph. Later, Yanni assisted Tesh in signing his first recording contract with Private Music.

In the 1990s, Tesh was credited with the theme music to &quot;Bobby&#x27;s World&quot;, hosted by Howie Mandel, and the &quot;NBA on NBC&quot; theme, known as &quot;Roundball Rock&quot;. Tesh composed the &quot;NBA on NBC&quot; theme after an idea hit him while traveling. In order to recall his idea at a later juncture, Tesh recorded the initial beat vocally on his answering machine, by ringing his home phone and leaving a message for himself. The theme was used for the &quot;NBA on NBC&quot; before the network stopped carrying NBA games following the 2001–02 season (as well as an electric guitar-driven spinoff that was used on NBC&#x27;s WNBA telecasts from 1997 to 2002), though NBC would revive the theme for its basketball coverage during the 2008 Summer Olympics. Tesh would later license the song to Fox Sports for its college basketball coverage.

In August 1994, John performed at the Red Rocks Amphitheatre in Morrison, Colorado, for his first &quot;Live at Red Rocks&quot; concert. Tesh performed with conductor John Bisharat and the 70-piece Colorado Symphony Orchestra. The concert featured Tesh playing grand piano, Charlie Bisharat playing electric violin, and Everette Harp playing alto saxophone. Also featured were Olympic gold medal-gymnasts Nadia Comaneci (1976) and Bart Conner (1984) performing gymnastic routines specially-choreographed to Tesh&#x27;s music.

After Tesh left his ten-year job as co-host for &quot;Entertainment Tonight&quot; in 1996, he turned to his career as a contemporary keyboardist. This led to him starting &quot;The John Tesh Radio Show&quot; in 2003.

===&quot;John Tesh Radio Show&quot; and spin-offs===
Tesh currently has a nationally syndicated radio show called the &quot;John Tesh Radio Show&quot;, which typically airs on adult contemporary, classic hits, Christian and soft rock radio formats. The music is interspersed with various factoids and other information Tesh considers useful to listeners, often with topics such as health and well-being.

These factoids are called &quot;Intelligence for Your Life&quot;, played on radio stations across the United States and Canada, and the Armed Forces Network. Select pieces of &quot;Intelligence for Your Life&quot; are broken up and distributed in vignette form to other radio stations (including talk radio formats) and for use on morning shows. There is also a three-hour weekend show, &quot;Intelligence for Your Health&quot;, launched in 2010, hosted by Connie Sellecca.

Across all of its versions, Tesh&#x27;s radio programs reach listeners across the United States, Canada, and United Kingdom, placing it on the list of most-listened-to radio programs. Tesh&#x27;s main rival is &quot;Delilah&quot;, and these two shows are sometimes aired in the same market on competing stations, or occasionally on the same stations in differing time slots.

The show started as a weekend show in 2000 on Clear Channel&#x27;s KKDJ-FM/Bakersfield and then a few other stations, expanding to a daily version in 2003. The program was originally syndicated by Westwood One under the name &quot;On the Air with John Tesh&quot;, albeit with a slightly different format. It is produced by Tesh with a staff of 35 and still distributed by syndicator Westwood One. In September 2016, the partnership with Westwood One was renewed in a new multi-year agreement. At the time, Westwood One indicated that it was airing on 280 radio stations. As of 2022, the programs are distributed through a partnership with Compass Media Networks.

In late 2014, a television version of these factoids, &quot;Intelligence for Your Life TV&quot;, debuted in syndication to local stations. In April 2016, the TV program was seen on 174 stations. The series also features health segments hosted by his wife, Connie Sellecca, based on her own radio program, &quot;Intelligence for Your Health&quot;.

Tesh also authored a book, &quot;Intelligence for Your Life: Powerful Lessons for Personal Growth&quot;, in 2008, reprinted in 2012 (, publisher Thomas Nelson).

==Personal life==
Tesh has been married to actress Connie Sellecca since 1992. They have one daughter together named Prima. His wife also has a son with actor Gil Gerard, named Gib, who now appears on some of Tesh&#x27;s radio and TV programs. Tesh and Sellecca reside in Los Angeles.
In the 1970s, he also briefly dated Oprah Winfrey.

Tesh is a Christian. He was raised a Baptist and was involved in the church during his youth. He played organ, sang in the choir, and went to church camp. He became inactive in the church during his adult life, but became involved again after Sellecca introduced him to pastor Louis Lapides. Since then, he has written and performed Christian music.

==Awards==
During his early career as a television journalist in the 1970s, Tesh received an Associated Press award for investigative journalism. In 2018 John Tesh was inducted into the North Carolina Music Hall of Fame. In 2019 he was inducted into the National Radio Hall of Fame. In 2007, Tesh won the Syndicated Personality/Show of the Year award by &quot;Radio &amp; Records&quot; magazine for his radio show. Tesh was nominated in 2003 for the Grammy for &quot;Best Pop Instrumental Album&quot; for &quot;Power of Love&quot;. John has also earned three gold albums, six Emmys for his sports themes, and a &quot;Keyboard Magazine&quot; Award.

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
* 1987: &quot;Music from the Tour de France, Vol. I&quot; (Tesh Music BMI)
* 1988: &quot;Tour de France&quot; (Private Music)
* 1989: &quot;Garden City&quot; (Cypress)
* 1992: &quot;A Romantic Christmas&quot; (Decca)
* 1992: &quot;Ironman Triathlon&quot; (GTSP)
* 1992: &quot;Music in the Key of Love&quot; (GTSP)
* 1992: &quot;The Games&quot; (GTSP)
* 1993: &quot;Monterey Nights&quot; (GTSP)
* 1993: &quot;Winter Song&quot; (GTSP) 1994: (Decca)
* 1994: &quot;A Family Christmas&quot; (Decca)
* 1994: &quot;Sax by the Fire&quot; (Decca)
* 1995: &quot;Sax on the Beach&quot; (Decca)
* 1996: &quot;Discovery&quot; (Decca)
* 1996: &quot;Choirs of Christmas&quot; (GTSP)
* 1997: &quot;Avalon&quot; (Decca)
* 1997: &quot;Sax All Night&quot; (Decca)
* 1998: &quot;Grand Passion&quot; (GTSP)
* 1998: &quot;Guitar by the Fire&quot; (Decca)
* 1998: &quot;Songs from the Road&quot; (BMG)
* 1998: &quot;Pure Movies&quot; (GTSP)
* 1999: &quot;One World&quot; (GTSP)
* 1999: &quot;John Tesh &amp; Friends&quot; (Columbia River)
* 2000: &quot;Pure Hymns&quot; (Faith MD)
* 2000: &quot;Pure Movies, Vol. 2&quot; (Garden City)
* 2001: &quot;Pure Orchestra&quot; (Garden City)
* 2001: &quot;Pure Gospel&quot; (Faith MD)
* 2001: &quot;Classical Music for an Intimate Mood&quot; (Garden City)
* 2001: &quot;Classical Music for a Stress-Free World&quot; (Garden City)
* 2001: &quot;Classical Music for Babies (and Their Moms)&quot; Vol. 1 &amp; 2 (Garden City)
* 2001: &quot;Classical Music for a Prayerful Mood&quot; (Garden City &amp; Faith MD)
* 2002: &quot;Awesome God&quot; (Garden City)
* 2002: &quot;The Power of Love&quot; (Garden City)
* 2002: &quot;Christmas Worship&quot; (Word)
* 2002: &quot;A Deeper Faith&quot; (Garden City)
* 2002: &quot;God of Wonders&quot; (Garden City)
* 2002: &quot;Worship God&quot; (Garden City)
* 2003: &quot;A Deeper Faith, Vol. 2&quot; (Garden City)
* 2007: &quot;A Passionate Life&quot; (Garden City)
* 2008: &quot;Grand Piano Christmas&quot; (Garden City)
* 2009: &quot;Grand Piano Worship&quot; (Garden City)
* 2010: &quot;Grand Piano Romance&quot; (Garden City)
* 2011: &quot;Big Band Christmas&quot; (Garden City)
* 2012: &quot;Big Band&quot; (Garden City)

===Live albums===
* 1995: &quot;Live at Red Rocks&quot; (Decca)
* 2004: &quot;Worship at Red Rocks&quot; (live) (Garden City)
* 2005: &quot;Red Rocks Platinum&quot; (live) (Garden City)
* 2008: &quot;Alive: Music &amp; Dance&quot; (Garden City)
* 2020: &quot;Songs and Stories from the Grand Piano&quot; (Garden City)

===Compilations and collections===
* 1990: &quot;Tour de France – The Early Years&quot; (Private Music)
* 1993: &quot;Monterey Nights&quot; (Decca)
* 1995: &quot;Anthology&quot;
* 1997: &quot;Victory – the sports collection&quot; (GTSP)
* 1999: &quot;Heart of the Sunrise - The Millennium Collection&quot; (John Tesh)
* 1999: &quot;One Day&quot; (Unison)
* 2000: &quot;Pure Hymns&quot; (Faith MD)
* 2000: &quot;Forever More: The Greatest Hits of John Tesh&quot; (Decca)
* 2003: &quot;Worship Collection: Awesome God&quot; (Garden City)
* 2009: &quot;The Best of Christmas&quot;
* 2009: &quot;John Tesh – Greatest Hits – Live in Concert Vol. 1 CD/DVD&quot; (Garden City)

=== Singles ===
* 1988: &quot;A Thousand Summers&quot; (single) 
* 1989: &quot;You Break It&quot; (Atlantic) (single) 

=== Other albums ===
* 1995: &quot;Backstage with John Tesh&quot; (Digital Entertainment) (an interactive CD-rom) 
* 2005: &quot;Drive Time Intelligence&quot; (26 tracks of Intelligence For Your Life on the go, plus 3 bonus music tracks) 
* 2010: &quot;God of Wonders&quot; (Word)

==Videography==
* 1993: &quot;A Romantic Christmas&quot;
* 1995: &quot;Live in Monterey&quot;
* 1995: &quot;Live at Red Rocks&quot;
* 1997: &quot;The Avalon Concert&quot;
* 2000: &quot;One World&quot;
* 2002: &quot;Christmas Worship&quot;
* 2004: &quot;Worship at Red Rocks&quot;
* 2008: &quot;Alive: Music &amp; Dance&quot;
* 2009: &quot;Greatest Hits: Live in Concert, Vol. 1&quot;
* 2012: &quot;Big Band Live&quot;
* 2020: &quot;Songs and Stories from the Grand Piano&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* Official music website
* John Tesh at Allmovie 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3182586" start="0" end="19" title="John Tesh" label="John Frank Tesh Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6952714" start="119" end="129" title="NBA on NBC" label="NBA on NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371236" start="159" end="173" title="Roundball Rock" label="Roundball Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q262580" start="342" end="357" title="Connie Sellecca" label="Connie Sellecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="377" end="382" title="Emmys" label="Emmys"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="440" end="456" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="590" end="593" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055086" start="641" end="662" title="Entertainment Tonight" label="Entertainment Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="736" end="749" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="751" end="760" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="766" end="773" title="US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="779" end="793" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338800" start="795" end="812" title="Ironman Triathlon" label="Ironman Triathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q270389" start="823" end="834" title="news anchor" label="news anchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054559" start="885" end="918" title="North Carolina Music Hall of Fame" label="North Carolina Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q739452" start="953" end="974" title="Garden City, New York" label="Garden City, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="979" end="990" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="1083" end="1097" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522207" start="1117" end="1140" title="Garden City High School (New York)" label="Garden City High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="1287" end="1296" title="Organ (music)" label="the organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680831" start="1326" end="1340" title="communication studies" label="communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132346" start="1354" end="1385" title="North Carolina State University" label="North Carolina State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q721977" start="1603" end="1612" title="Rick Dees" label="Rick Dees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954504" start="1616" end="1625" title="WKIX (AM)" label="WKIX (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151824" start="1657" end="1668" title="Bill Leslie (journalist)" label="Bill Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390360" start="1680" end="1687" title="WRAL-TV" label="WRAL-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043497" start="1833" end="1840" title="WCBS-TV" label="WCBS-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564794" start="2045" end="2052" title="WSMV-TV" label="WSMV-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="2057" end="2077" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="2136" end="2149" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956467" start="2165" end="2194" title="WTVF-TV" label="a competing Nashville station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564813" start="2229" end="2233" title="WTVD" label="WTVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q49229" start="2237" end="2259" title="Durham, North Carolina" label="Durham, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949550" start="2274" end="2278" title="WFTV" label="WFTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q49233" start="2282" end="2289" title="Orlando, Florida" label="Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043497" start="2325" end="2332" title="WCBS-TV" label="WCBS-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160501" start="2451" end="2478" title="1978 New York City Marathon" label="1978 New York City Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055086" start="2598" end="2619" title="Entertainment Tonight" label="Entertainment Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931052" start="2685" end="2688" title="CBS Sports" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046048" start="2699" end="2702" title="NBC Sports" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="2733" end="2747" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="2883" end="2890" title="US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q8488" start="2914" end="2918" title="1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="2923" end="2943" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516597" start="3078" end="3109" title="Leeza" label="John &amp;amp; Leeza from Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q512367" start="3174" end="3187" title="Leeza Gibbons" label="Leeza Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441800" start="3382" end="3399" title="The Icarus Factor" label="The Icarus Factor"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3427" end="3457" title="Star Trek: The Next Generation" label="Star Trek: The Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q54259" start="3475" end="3482" title="Klingon" label="Klingon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22272" start="3566" end="3579" title="Santa Barbara (TV series)" label="Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q234716" start="3618" end="3623" title="Yanni" label="Yanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601382" start="3689" end="3703" title="Out of Silence (Yanni album)" label="Out of Silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600836" start="3744" end="3763" title="Keys to Imagination" label="Keys to Imagination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563630" start="3860" end="3872" title="Giovanna Joyce Imbesi" label="Joyce Imbesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084426" start="3885" end="3898" title="Charlie Adams (drummer)" label="Charlie Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055086" start="4033" end="4054" title="Entertainment Tonight" label="Entertainment Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q925704" start="4254" end="4273" title="Chameleon Days" label="1988 Concert Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q362168" start="4306" end="4320" title="Bradley Joseph" label="Bradley Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318209" start="4394" end="4407" title="Private Music" label="Private Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447786" start="4472" end="4490" title="Bobby&amp;#x27;s World" label="Bobby&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952714" start="4536" end="4546" title="NBA on NBC" label="NBA on NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371236" start="4575" end="4589" title="Roundball Rock" label="Roundball Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132622" start="4968" end="4982" title="2001-02 NBA season" label="2001–02 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="4998" end="5013" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="5057" end="5061" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association" label="WNBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517815" start="5077" end="5081" title="1997 WNBA season" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536202" start="5085" end="5089" title="2002 WNBA season" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="5165" end="5185" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q77625" start="5224" end="5234" title="Fox Sports" label="Fox Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740102" start="5243" end="5270" title="Fox College Hoops" label="college basketball coverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182648" start="5311" end="5333" title="Red Rocks Amphitheatre" label="Red Rocks Amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221995" start="5440" end="5453" title="John Bisharat" label="John Bisharat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084542" start="5547" end="5563" title="Charlie Bisharat" label="Charlie Bisharat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417090" start="5593" end="5606" title="Everette Harp" label="Everette Harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q33228" start="5678" end="5692" title="Nadia Comaneci" label="Nadia Comaneci"/>
<link wikidata="Q383942" start="5704" end="5715" title="Bart Conner" label="Bart Conner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="6103" end="6113" title="Broadcast syndication" label="syndicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q378988" start="6194" end="6212" title="Adult contemporary music" label="adult contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128242" start="6214" end="6226" title="classic hits" label="classic hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q217191" start="6242" end="6251" title="soft rock" label="soft rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451922" start="6306" end="6313" title="factoid" label="factoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q464570" start="6559" end="6579" title="Armed Forces Network" label="Armed Forces Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q502319" start="6719" end="6729" title="talk radio" label="talk radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q262580" start="6880" end="6895" title="Connie Sellecca" label="Connie Sellecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629053" start="7041" end="7080" title="list of most-listened-to radio programs" label="list of most-listened-to radio programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253981" start="7114" end="7121" title="Delilah (radio show)" label="Delilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270455" start="7471" end="7483" title="Westwood One (current)" label="Westwood One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156100" start="7913" end="7935" title="Compass Media Networks" label="Compass Media Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q262580" start="8499" end="8514" title="Connie Sellecca" label="Connie Sellecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350588" start="8607" end="8617" title="Gil Gerard" label="Gil Gerard"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="8769" end="8782" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="8822" end="8829" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280587" start="9496" end="9515" title="Radio &amp;amp; Records" label="Radio &amp;amp; Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398219" start="9753" end="9770" title="Keyboard (magazine)" label="Keyboard Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318209" start="9932" end="9945" title="Private Music" label="Private Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q85845979" start="9961" end="9972" title="Garden City (John Tesh album)" label="Garden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q107057858" start="10003" end="10023" title="A Romantic Christmas" label="A Romantic Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="10031" end="10036" title="Decca Records" label="Decca"/>
<link wikidata="Q104848685" start="10229" end="10240" title="Winter Song (John Tesh album)" label="Winter Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034303" start="11486" end="11490" title="Word Records" label="Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q85846442" start="12038" end="12055" title="Live at Red Rocks (John Tesh album)" label="Live at Red Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q85816288" start="12084" end="12104" title="Worship at Red Rocks" label="Worship at Red Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="13095" end="13103" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q477809" start="13950" end="13958" title="Allmovie" label="Allmovie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="274947" wikidata="Q284982" url="?curid=274947" title="WxWidgets">
<text>wxWidgets (formerly wxWindows) is a widget toolkit and tools library for creating graphical user interfaces (GUIs) for cross-platform applications. wxWidgets enables a program&#x27;s GUI code to compile and run on several computer platforms with no significant code changes. A wide choice of compilers and other tools to use with wxWidgets facilitates development of sophisticated applications. wxWidgets supports a comprehensive range of popular operating systems and graphical libraries, both proprietary and free.

The project was started under the name wxWindows in 1992 by Julian Smart at the University of Edinburgh. The project was renamed wxWidgets in 2004 in response to a trademark claim by Microsoft UK.

It is free and open source software, distributed under the terms of the wxWidgets Licence, which satisfies those who wish to produce for GPL and proprietary software.

==Portability and deployment==
wxWidgets covers systems such as Microsoft Windows, Mac OS (Carbon and Cocoa), iOS (Cocoa Touch), Linux/Unix (X11, Motif, and GTK), OpenVMS, OS/2 and AmigaOS. A version for embedded systems is under development.

wxWidgets is used across various industry sectors, most notably by Xerox, Advanced Micro Devices (AMD), Lockheed Martin, NASA and the Center for Naval Analyses. It is also used in the public sector and education by, for example, Dartmouth Medical School, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Center for Biotechnology Information, and many others. wxWidgets is used in many open source projects, and by individual developers.

==History==
wxWidgets (initially wxWindows; &quot;w&quot; is for Windows, and &quot;x&quot; is for X Window System) was started in 1992 by Julian Smart at the University of Edinburgh. He attained an honours degree in Computational science from the University of St Andrews in 1986, and is still a core developer.

On 20 February 2004, the developers of wxWindows announced that the project was changing its name to &quot;wxWidgets&quot;, as a result of Microsoft requesting Julian Smart to respect Microsoft&#x27;s United Kingdom trademark of the term &quot;Windows&quot;.

Major release versions were 2.4 on 6 January 2003, 2.6 on 21 April 2005 and 2.8.0 on 14 December 2006. Version 3.0 was released on 11 November 2013.

wxWidgets has participated in the Google Summer of Code since 2006.
==License==
wxWidgets is distributed under a custom made &quot;wxWindows Licence&quot;, similar to the GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL), with an exception stating that derived works in binary form may be distributed on the user&#x27;s own terms. This license is a free software license approved by the FSF, making wxWidgets free software. It has been approved by the Open Source Initiative (OSI).

==Official support==

===Supported platforms===
wxWidgets is supported on the following platforms:
* Windows – (64-bits Windows XP up to Windows 11 and 32-bits Windows 3.11 for Workgroups (with Win32s extension) up to Windows 11)
* Linux/Unix – wxGTK, wxX11, wxMotif
* Mac OS – wxMac (Mac OS X 10.3 using Carbon, Mac OS X 10.5 using Cocoa), (32/64-bits Mac OS X 10.7 or later)
* OS/2 – wxOS2, , wxWidgets for GTK or Motif can be compiled on OS/2
* Embedded platforms – wxEmbedded

====External ports====
* Amiga – wxWidgets-AOS: AmigaOS port (Work In Progress)

===Supported compilers===
wxWidgets is officially confirmed to work properly with the following compilers:
== Programming language bindings ==


The wxWidgets library is implemented in C++, with bindings available for many commonly used programming languages.

wxWidgets is best described as a native mode toolkit as it provides a thin abstraction to a platform&#x27;s native widgets, contrary to emulating the display of widgets using graphic primitives. Calling a native widget on the target platform results in a more native looking interface than toolkits such as Swing (for Java), as well as offering performance and other benefits.

The toolkit is also not restricted to GUI development, having an inter-process communication layer, socket networking functionality, and more.

==RAD tools and IDEs for wxWidgets==

There are many Rapid Application Development (RAD) and Integrated Development Environment (IDE) tools available. Notable tools include:
* (via wxSmith plugin)
* CodeLite (via wxCrafter plugin)
* wxFormBuilder

==Applications built using wxWidgets==


Notable applications that use wxWidgets:
* &quot;0 A.D.&quot; – a FOSS video game similar to &quot;Age of Empires&quot;
* Amaya – web authoring tool
* aMule – peer-to-peer file sharing application
* ActivePresenter – screen recorder, video editor &amp; e-learning application
* Audacity – cross-platform sound editor
* BitTorrent – peer-to-peer file sharing application
*Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network Computing – an open-source middleware system
* – C/C++ IDE
* CodeLite – simple C++ Editor (Collection of free Tools, implemented by plugins)
* FileZilla – FTP client
* FreeFileSync – a free and open-source file synchronization software
* GrandOrgue – virtual pipe organ simulator
* Guayadeque Music Player – a music player with database
* Hollywood – uses wxWidgets in its RapaGUI plugin
* KiCad – a free software suite for electronic design automation (EDA)
* RapidSVN – Subversion client
* TortoiseCVS – CVS client

==See also==

* FLTK – a light, cross platform, non-native widget toolkit
* FOX toolkit – a fast, open source, cross-platform widget toolkit
* GTK – the GIMP toolkit, a widget toolkit used by GNOME applications
* gtkmm – C++ version of GTK
* Juce – an extensive cross-platform widget toolkit
* IUP – a multi-platform toolkit for building native graphical user interfaces
* Qt (toolkit) – an application framework used by KDE applications
* U++ – a C++ cross-platform development framework
* Widget toolkit
* List of widget toolkits

== References ==
==Further reading==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q284982" start="0" end="9" title="WxWidgets" label="wxWidgets"/>
<link wikidata="Q284982" start="20" end="29" title="WxWidgets" label="wxWindows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193246" start="36" end="50" title="widget toolkit" label="widget toolkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="82" end="106" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q174666" start="119" end="133" title="cross-platform" label="cross-platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="261" end="265" title="source code" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="292" end="300" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="447" end="463" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q218616" start="495" end="506" title="Proprietary software" label="proprietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="511" end="515" title="Free software" label="free"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="598" end="621" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="701" end="710" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="711" end="713" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="722" end="726" title="free software" label="free"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="731" end="751" title="open source software" label="open source software"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="788" end="805" title="#License" label="wxWidgets Licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="853" end="856" title="GNU General Public License" label="GPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q218616" start="861" end="881" title="proprietary software" label="proprietary software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="948" end="965" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q43627" start="967" end="973" title="Mac OS" label="Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035519" start="975" end="981" title="Carbon (API)" label="Carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051988" start="986" end="991" title="Cocoa (API)" label="Cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="994" end="997" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q117480832" start="999" end="1010" title="Cocoa Touch" label="Cocoa Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="1013" end="1018" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="1019" end="1023" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="1025" end="1028" title="X11" label="X11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136830" start="1030" end="1035" title="Motif (software)" label="Motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q189464" start="1041" end="1044" title="GTK" label="GTK"/>
<link wikidata="Q479882" start="1047" end="1054" title="OpenVMS" label="OpenVMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="1056" end="1060" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q380526" start="1065" end="1072" title="AmigaOS" label="AmigaOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="1088" end="1103" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q152433" start="1195" end="1200" title="Xerox" label="Xerox"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="1202" end="1224" title="Advanced Micro Devices" label="Advanced Micro Devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="1232" end="1247" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="1249" end="1253" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059792" start="1262" end="1287" title="Center for Naval Analyses" label="Center for Naval Analyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530214" start="1357" end="1381" title="Dartmouth Medical School" label="Dartmouth Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634459" start="1383" end="1423" title="National Human Genome Research Institute" label="National Human Genome Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q82494" start="1425" end="1470" title="National Center for Biotechnology Information" label="National Center for Biotechnology Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="1633" end="1640" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="1667" end="1682" title="X Window System" label="X Window System"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="1727" end="1750" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q117801" start="1785" end="1806" title="Computational science" label="Computational science"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="1816" end="1840" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="2021" end="2030" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2083" end="2097" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="2098" end="2107" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324301" start="2326" end="2347" title="Google Summer of Code" label="Google Summer of Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q192897" start="2463" end="2496" title="GNU Lesser General Public License" label="GNU Lesser General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q218013" start="2553" end="2564" title="binary file" label="binary form"/>
<link wikidata="Q207621" start="2619" end="2626" title="software license" label="license"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943414" start="2632" end="2653" title="free software license" label="free software license"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="2692" end="2705" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q845918" start="2735" end="2757" title="Open Source Initiative" label="Open Source Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q17065847" start="3011" end="3016" title="wxGTK" label="wxGTK"/>
<link wikidata="Q747434" start="3051" end="3064" title="Mac OS X 10.3" label="Mac OS X 10.3"/>
<link wikidata="Q222996" start="3079" end="3092" title="Mac OS X 10.5" label="Mac OS X 10.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q476915" start="3119" end="3132" title="Mac OS X 10.7" label="Mac OS X 10.7"/>
<link wikidata="Q188860" start="3487" end="3494" title="Library (computing)" label="library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="3513" end="3516" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q510878" start="3523" end="3531" title="Language binding" label="bindings"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="3565" end="3585" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187908" start="3622" end="3633" title="native mode" label="native mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q859221" start="3896" end="3901" title="Swing (Java)" label="Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q751436" start="4032" end="4059" title="inter-process communication" label="inter-process communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044498" start="4067" end="4073" title="internet socket" label="socket"/>
<link wikidata="Q795549" start="4164" end="4193" title="Rapid Application Development" label="Rapid Application Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="4204" end="4238" title="Integrated Development Environment" label="Integrated Development Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q610854" start="4310" end="4318" title="CodeLite" label="CodeLite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053267" start="4344" end="4357" title="wxFormBuilder" label="wxFormBuilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q161234" start="4449" end="4455" title="0 A.D. (video game)" label="0 A.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="4466" end="4470" title="Free and open-source software" label="FOSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q34811" start="4499" end="4513" title="Age of Empires (series)" label="Age of Empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q455973" start="4522" end="4527" title="Amaya (web editor)" label="Amaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q295495" start="4551" end="4556" title="aMule" label="aMule"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677477" start="4599" end="4614" title="ActivePresenter" label="ActivePresenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q191782" start="4678" end="4686" title="Audacity (audio editor)" label="Audacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q878713" start="4719" end="4729" title="BitTorrent (software)" label="BitTorrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q209563" start="4771" end="4821" title="Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network Computing" label="Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q39162" start="4827" end="4838" title="Open-source model" label="open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q146923" start="4839" end="4849" title="Middleware (distributed applications)" label="middleware"/>
<link wikidata="Q610854" start="4873" end="4881" title="CodeLite" label="CodeLite"/>
<link wikidata="Q300662" start="4955" end="4964" title="FileZilla" label="FileZilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150468" start="4980" end="4992" title="FreeFileSync" label="FreeFileSync"/>
<link wikidata="Q27926666" start="5050" end="5060" title="GrandOrgue" label="GrandOrgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q14943874" start="5094" end="5117" title="Guayadeque Music Player" label="Guayadeque Music Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571870" start="5151" end="5160" title="Hollywood (programming language)" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q942363" start="5202" end="5207" title="KiCad" label="KiCad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048026" start="5273" end="5281" title="RapidSVN" label="RapidSVN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883113" start="5304" end="5315" title="TortoiseCVS" label="TortoiseCVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331203" start="5346" end="5350" title="FLTK" label="FLTK"/>
<link wikidata="Q863984" start="5406" end="5417" title="FOX toolkit" label="FOX toolkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q189464" start="5473" end="5476" title="GTK" label="GTK"/>
<link wikidata="Q44316" start="5522" end="5527" title="GNOME" label="GNOME"/>
<link wikidata="Q284796" start="5543" end="5548" title="gtkmm" label="gtkmm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041910" start="5572" end="5576" title="Juce" label="Juce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041171" start="5624" end="5627" title="IUP (software)" label="IUP"/>
<link wikidata="Q201904" start="5703" end="5715" title="Qt (toolkit)" label="Qt (toolkit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431" start="5751" end="5754" title="KDE" label="KDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q387705" start="5770" end="5773" title="Ultimate++" label="U++"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193246" start="5821" end="5835" title="Widget toolkit" label="Widget toolkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q200593" start="5838" end="5861" title="List of widget toolkits" label="List of widget toolkits"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="274950" wikidata="Q1946228" url="?curid=274950" title="Montezuma Castle National Monument">
<text>Montezuma Castle National Monument protects a set of well-preserved dwellings located in Camp Verde, Arizona, which were built and used by the Sinagua people, a pre-Columbian culture closely related to the Hohokam and other indigenous peoples of the southwestern United States, between approximately AD 1100 and 1425. The main structure comprises five stories and about 20 rooms and was built over the course of three centuries.

Several Hopi clans and Yavapai communities trace their ancestries to early immigrants from the Montezuma Castle/Beaver Creek area. Archaeological evidence proves that the Hohokam and Hakataya settled around or in the Verde Valley. Clan members periodically return to these ancestral homes for religious ceremonies.

==Etymology==

Neither part of the monument&#x27;s name is correct. When European-Americans first observed the ruins in the 1860s, by then long-abandoned, they named them for the famous Aztec emperor Montezuma in the mistaken belief that he had been connected to their construction (see also Montezuma mythology). Having no connections to the Aztecs, the Montezuma Castle was given that name due to the fact that the public had this image of the Aztecs creating any archaeological site. In fact, the dwelling was abandoned more than 40 years before Montezuma was born, and was not a &quot;castle&quot; in the traditional sense, but instead functioned more like a &quot;prehistoric high rise apartment complex&quot;.

==Cliff dwelling==
Montezuma Castle is situated about up a sheer limestone cliff, facing the adjacent Beaver Creek, which drains into the perennial Verde River just north of Camp Verde. It is one of the best-preserved cliff dwellings in North America, in part because of its ideal placement in a natural alcove that protects it from exposure to the elements. The precariousness of the dwelling&#x27;s location and its immense scale of floor space across five stories suggest that the Sinagua were daring builders and skilled engineers. Access into the structure was most likely permitted by a series of portable ladders, which made it difficult for enemy tribes to penetrate the natural defense of the vertical barrier.

Perhaps the main reason the Sinagua chose to build the Castle so far above the ground, however, was to escape the threat of natural disaster in the form of the annual flooding of Beaver Creek. During the summer monsoon season, the creek frequently breached its banks, inundating the floodplain with water. The Sinagua recognized the importance of these floods to their agriculture, but likely also the potential destruction they presented to any structures built in the floodplain. Their solution was to build a permanent structure in the high recess afforded by the limestone cliff.

The walls of Montezuma Castle are examples of early stone-and-mortar masonry, constructed almost entirely from chunks of limestone found at the base of the cliff, as well as mud and/or clay from the creek bottom. The ceilings of the rooms also incorporated sectioned timbers as a kind of roof thatching, obtained primarily from the Arizona sycamore, a large hardwood tree native to the Verde Valley.

==History==
Evidence of permanent dwellings like those at Montezuma Castle begins to appear in the archaeological record of Arizona&#x27;s Verde Valley about 1050 AD. The first distinctly Sinagua culture may have occupied the region as early as 700 AD.


The area was briefly abandoned due to the eruption of Sunset Crater Volcano, about to the north, in the mid-11th century. Although the short-term impact may have been destructive, nutrient-rich sediment deposited by the volcano may have aided more expansive agriculture in later decades. During the interim, the Sinagua lived in the surrounding highlands and sustained themselves on small-scale agriculture dependent on rain. After 1125, the Sinagua resettled the Verde Valley, using the reliable watershed of the Verde River alongside irrigation systems left by previous inhabitants, perhaps including Hohokam peoples, to support more widespread farming.

The region&#x27;s population likely peaked around 1300 AD, with the Castle housing between 30 and 50 people in at least 20 rooms. Radiocarbon dates from multiple construction beams show that the cliff dwelling was probably constructed in the middle 1100s AD with remodeling and additions in the last decades of the 1200s. A neighboring segment of the same cliff wall suggests there was an even larger dwelling (&quot;Castle A&quot;) around the same time, of which only the stone foundations have survived. Its discovery in 1933 revealed many Sinagua artifacts and greatly increased understanding of their way of life.

The latest estimated date of occupation for any Sinagua site comes from Montezuma Castle, around 1425 AD. After this, the Sinagua people apparently abandoned their permanent settlements and migrated elsewhere, as did other cultural groups in the southwestern United States around that time. The reasons for abandonment are unclear, but possibilities include drought, resource depletion, and clashes with the newly arrived Yavapai people. Due to the very little human contact since abandonment, Montezuma Castle was well preserved. It was heavily looted in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, though other Sinagua sites have remained more or less intact. Because of the rise in settlers, tourists and industries in or surrounding Montezuma Castle, the monument and even Verde Valley have been threats to the preservation of Montezuma Castle.


==Plants and animals==
Due to the lack of basic knowledge on the natural resources of the national parks, the National Park Service created a program in order to record and identify any changes in the environment and its inhabitants. An inventory of plants and animals at Montezuma Castle was taken between 1991 and 1994 by researchers from Northern Arizona University and the United States Geological Survey. According to the United States Geological Survey, about 784 species were recorded at Montezuma Castle National Monument, including plants, fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals. Only 11% of the species were non-native. Common species include bats, snakes, turtles, lizards, frogs, foxes, owls and mice.

==Federal protection==
The monument itself encloses 860 acres near the geographic center of Arizona and the intersection of the Colorado Plateau and Basin and Range physiographic provinces.

The dwellings and the surrounding area were declared a U.S. National Monument on December 8, 1906 as a result of the American Antiquities Act, signed earlier that year. It is one of the four original sites designated National Monuments by President Theodore Roosevelt. Montezuma Castle was added to the National Register of Historic Places on October 15, 1966.

It is an easy monument to visit, just a short distance off Interstate 17, at exit 289. There is a paved trail starting at the visitor center that follows the base of the cliff containing the ruins. Access to the interior of the ruins has not been allowed since 1951 due to concerns about visitor safety and damage to the dwelling. About 400,000 tourists visit the site each year. The park is open from 8am to 5pm every day of the year, except for Christmas Day.

The visitor center includes a museum about the Sinagua culture and the tools they used to build the dwellings. The museum houses many artifacts, such as stone tools, metates used for grinding corn, bone needles, and ornaments of shell and gemstone, which prove that the Sinagua were fine artisans as well as prolific traders. There is also a Park Store operated by Western National Parks Association.

==Montezuma Well==
Montezuma Well, a natural limestone sinkhole, measuring approximately 100 by 120 yards, also containing Sinagua dwellings, was purchased by the federal government in 1947 and is considered a detached unit of Montezuma Castle National Monument. It is located about 5 miles north of the Castle near the town of Rimrock, Arizona, accessible from exits 293 and 298 off Interstate 17.

==Climate==
Montezuma Castle National Monument has a cold semi-arid climate (Köppen: &quot;BSk&quot;) with cool winters and very hot summers.

==In popular culture==

Montezuma Castle plays a key role in the climax of the Western &quot;Flaming Feather&quot; (1952), which was shot on location at the site.

==Architecture based on==

The Rocky Slope Residence was designed by well-known Phoenix Valley architect Eddie M. Jones and the residence had strong architectural similarities to the Montezuma Castle Monument. The design and the residence were featured by many magazines including the &quot;Architect Magazine&quot; in 2013. The design was completed and approved by the City of Phoenix in 2007 and construction was completed by 2009. As seen in the photos, the house design has a strong resemblance to the curved walls of Montezuma Castle as well as the layered structure.

==See also==
*List of national monuments of the United States
*List of the oldest buildings in Arizona

==References==
Notes
Bibliography

==External links==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1946228" start="0" end="34" title="Montezuma Castle National Monument" label="Montezuma Castle National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q983745" start="89" end="108" title="Camp Verde, Arizona" label="Camp Verde, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891996" start="143" end="150" title="Sinagua" label="Sinagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="161" end="174" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255768" start="206" end="213" title="Hohokam" label="Hohokam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239948" start="224" end="276" title="Prehistoric Southwestern cultural divisions" label="indigenous peoples of the southwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q117255" start="438" end="442" title="Hopi" label="Hopi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894736" start="453" end="460" title="Yavapai people" label="Yavapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255768" start="601" end="608" title="Hohokam" label="Hohokam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553958" start="613" end="621" title="Hakataya" label="Hakataya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031810" start="647" end="659" title="Verde Valley" label="Verde Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="932" end="937" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q141791" start="946" end="955" title="Moctezuma II" label="Montezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317756" start="1038" end="1057" title="Montezuma (mythology)" label="Montezuma mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="1089" end="1094" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="1192" end="1197" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q4107580" start="1611" end="1622" title="Verde River" label="Verde River"/>
<link wikidata="Q983745" start="1637" end="1647" title="Camp Verde, Arizona" label="Camp Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117517" start="2395" end="2409" title="monsoon season" label="monsoon season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115345" start="3101" end="3117" title="Arizona sycamore" label="Arizona sycamore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031810" start="3309" end="3321" title="Verde Valley" label="Verde Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8554430" start="3479" end="3500" title="Sunset Crater Volcano" label="Sunset Crater Volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827199" start="3808" end="3831" title="small-scale agriculture" label="small-scale agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891996" start="3867" end="3874" title="Sinagua" label="Sinagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031810" start="3889" end="3901" title="Verde Valley" label="Verde Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737914" start="5068" end="5086" title="resource depletion" label="resource depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031810" start="5474" end="5486" title="Verde Valley" label="Verde Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="5658" end="5679" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q139901" start="5889" end="5916" title="Northern Arizona University" label="Northern Arizona University"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="5925" end="5956" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="5975" end="6006" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q925906" start="6399" end="6415" title="Colorado Plateau" label="Colorado Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q810178" start="6420" end="6435" title="Basin and Range Province" label="Basin and Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="6517" end="6539" title="U.S. National Monument" label="U.S. National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774237" start="6579" end="6603" title="Antiquities Act" label="American Antiquities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="6711" end="6729" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="6765" end="6801" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q93561" start="6883" end="6896" title="Interstate 17" label="Interstate 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854307" start="7453" end="7459" title="metate" label="metate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891996" start="7812" end="7819" title="Sinagua" label="Sinagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703146" start="8017" end="8033" title="Rimrock, Arizona" label="Rimrock, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="8147" end="8164" title="semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="8166" end="8172" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457225" start="8325" end="8340" title="Flaming Feather" label="Flaming Feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670549" start="8984" end="9031" title="List of national monuments of the United States" label="List of national monuments of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q115773237" start="9033" end="9072" title="List of the oldest buildings in Arizona" label="List of the oldest buildings in Arizona"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="274951" wikidata="Q210611" url="?curid=274951" title="Mesoproterozoic">
<text>The Mesoproterozoic Era is a geologic era that occurred from . The Mesoproterozoic was the first era of Earth&#x27;s history for which a fairly definitive geological record survives. Continents existed during the preceding era (the Paleoproterozoic), but little is known about them. The continental masses of the Mesoproterozoic were more or less the same ones that exist today, although their arrangement on the Earth&#x27;s surface was different.

== Major events and characteristics ==
The major events of this era are the breakup of the Columbia supercontinent, the formation of the Rodinia supercontinent, and the evolution of sexual reproduction.

This era is marked by the further development of continental plates and plate tectonics. The supercontinent of Columbia broke up between 1500 and 1350 million years ago, and the fragments reassembled into the supercontinent of Rodinia around 1100 to 900 million years ago, on the time boundary between the Mesoproterozoic and the subsequent Neoproterozoic. These tectonic events were accompanied by numerous orogenies (episodes of mountain building) that included the Kibaran orogeny in Africa; the Late Ruker orogeny in Antarctica; the Gothian and Sveconorwegian orogenies in Europe; and the Picuris and Grenville orogenies in North America.

The era saw the development of sexual reproduction, which greatly increased the complexity of life to come and signified the start of development of true multicellular organisms. Though the biota of the era was once thought to be exclusively microbial, recent finds have shown multicellular life did exist during the Mesoproterozoic. This era was also the high point of the stromatolites before they declined in the Neoproterozoic.

==Subdivisions==
The subdivisions of the Mesoproterozoic are arbitrary divisions based on time. They are not geostratigraphic or biostratigraphic units. The decision to base the Precambrian time scale on radiometric dating reflects the sparse nature of the fossil record, and Precambrian subdivisions of geologic time roughly reflect major tectonic cycles. It is possible that future revisions to the time scale will reflect more &quot;natural&quot; boundaries based on correlative geologic events.

The Mesoproterozoic is presently divided into the Calymmian (1600 to 1400 Mya) and the Ectasian (1400 to 1200 Mya), and the Stenian (1200 to 1000 Mya). The Calymmian and Ectasian were characterized by stabilization and expansion of cratonic covers and the Stenian by formation of orogenic belts.

The time period from 1780 Ma to 850 Ma, an unofficial period based on stratigraphy rather than chronometry, named the Rodinian, is described in the geological timescale review 2012 edited by Gradstein et al., but , this has not yet been officially adopted by the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS).

==See also==
*Boring Billion

==References==


==External links==
* Mesoproterozoic (chronostratigraphy scale)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q210611" start="4" end="23" title="Mesoproterozoic" label="Mesoproterozoic Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="29" end="37" title="geology" label="geologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="38" end="41" title="era (geology)" label="era"/>
<link wikidata="Q193738" start="232" end="248" title="Paleoproterozoic" label="Paleoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q870505" start="541" end="564" title="Columbia (supercontinent)" label="Columbia supercontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q185161" start="587" end="594" title="Rodinia" label="Rodinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55833" start="595" end="609" title="supercontinent" label="supercontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="632" end="651" title="sexual reproduction" label="sexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="726" end="741" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q191935" start="995" end="1009" title="Neoproterozoic" label="Neoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184554" start="1062" end="1071" title="orogenies" label="orogenies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925465" start="1085" end="1102" title="mountain building" label="mountain building"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403956" start="1122" end="1137" title="Kibaran orogeny" label="Kibaran orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q85775920" start="1153" end="1171" title="Late Ruker orogeny" label="Late Ruker orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q22160000" start="1191" end="1198" title="Gothian orogeny" label="Gothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19391309" start="1203" end="1217" title="Sveconorwegian orogeny" label="Sveconorwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q85793286" start="1247" end="1254" title="Picuris orogeny" label="Picuris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036937" start="1259" end="1268" title="Grenville orogeny" label="Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q36458" start="1452" end="1475" title="multicellular organisms" label="multicellular organisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q176739" start="1672" end="1685" title="stromatolites" label="stromatolites"/>
<link wikidata="Q191935" start="1714" end="1728" title="Neoproterozoic" label="Neoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q876805" start="2281" end="2290" title="Calymmian" label="Calymmian"/>
<link wikidata="Q367597" start="2318" end="2326" title="Ectasian" label="Ectasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q776333" start="2355" end="2362" title="Stenian" label="Stenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="2598" end="2610" title="stratigraphy" label="stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186398" start="2623" end="2634" title="chronometry" label="chronometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q579663" start="2791" end="2833" title="International Union of Geological Sciences" label="International Union of Geological Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q23579307" start="2857" end="2871" title="Boring Billion" label="Boring Billion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="274954" wikidata="Q228125" url="?curid=274954" title="Bananaquit">
<text>The bananaquit (Coereba flaveola) is a species of passerine bird in the tanager family Thraupidae. Before the development of molecular genetics in the 21st century, its relationship to other species was uncertain and it was either placed with the buntings and New World sparrows in the family Emberizidae, with New World warblers in the family Parulidae or its own monotypic family Coerebidae. This small, active nectarivore is found in warmer parts of the Americas and is generally common.

Its name is derived from its yellow color and the English word &quot;&quot;, which refers to small passerines of tropical America; cf. grassquit, orangequit.
== Taxonomy ==
The bananaquit was formally described by Carl Linnaeus in his landmark 1758 10th edition of &quot;Systema Naturae&quot; as &quot;Certhia flaveola&quot;. Linnaeus based his description on the &quot;black and yellow bird&quot; described by John Ray and Hans Sloane, and the &quot;Black and Yellow Creeper&quot; described and illustrated by George Edwards in 1751. The bananaquit was reclassified as the only member of the genus &quot;Coereba&quot; by Louis Pierre Vieillot in 1809. The genus name is of uncertain origin but may be from a Tupi name &quot;Güirá&quot; for a small black and yellow bird. The specific epithet &quot;flaveolus&quot; is a diminutive of the Latin &quot;flavus&quot; meaning &quot;golden&quot; or &quot;yellow&quot;.

Before the development of techniques to sequence DNA, the relationship of the bananaquit to other species was uncertain. It was variously placed with the New World warblers in the family Parulidae, with the buntings and New World sparrows in the family Emberizidae, or in its own monotypic family Coerebidae. Based on the results of molecular phylogenetic studies, the bananaquit is now placed in the tanager family Thraupidae and belongs with Darwin&#x27;s finches to the subfamily Coerebinae.

It is still unclear if any of the island subspecies should be elevated to species, but phylogenetic studies have revealed three clades: the nominate group from Jamaica, Hispaniola, and the Cayman Islands, the &quot;bahamensis&quot; group from the Bahamas and Quintana Roo, and the &quot;bartholemica&quot; group from South and Central America, Mexico (except Quintana Roo), the Lesser Antilles and Puerto Rico. Several taxa were not sampled, but most of these are easily placed in the above groups based on zoogeography alone. Exceptions are &quot;oblita&quot; (San Andrés Island) and &quot;tricolor&quot; (Providencia Island), and their placement is therefore uncertain. In February 2010, the International Ornithological Congress listed &quot;bahamensis&quot; and &quot;bartholemica&quot; as proposed splits from &quot;C. flaveola&quot;.

===Subspecies===
There are 41 currently recognized subspecies:

* &quot;C. f. bahamensis&quot; : Bahamas
* &quot;C. f. caboti&quot; : east Yucatan Peninsula and nearby islands
* &quot;C. f. flaveola&quot; : nominate, Jamaica
* &quot;C. f. sharpei&quot; : Cayman Is.
* &quot;C. f. bananivora&quot; : Hispaniola and nearby islands
* &quot;C. f. nectarea&quot; : Tortue I.
* &quot;C. f. portoricensis&quot; : Puerto Rico
* &quot;C. f. sanctithomae&quot; : north Virgin Is.
* &quot;C. f. newtoni&quot; : Saint Croix (south Virgin Is.)
* &quot;C. f. bartholemica&quot; : north and central Lesser Antilles
* &quot;C. f. martinicana&quot; : Martinique and Saint Lucia (south central Lesser Antilles)
* &quot;C. f. barbadensis&quot; : Barbados
* &quot;C. f. atrata&quot; : St. Vincent (south Lesser Antilles)
* &quot;C. f. aterrima&quot; : Grenada and the Grenadines (south Lesser Antilles)
* &quot;C. f. uropygialis&quot; : Aruba and Curaçao (Netherlands Antilles)
* &quot;C. f. tricolor&quot; : Providencia I. (off east Nicaragua)
* &quot;C. f. oblita&quot; : San Andrés I. (off east Nicaragua)
* &quot;C. f. mexicana&quot; : southeastern Mexico to western Panama
* &quot;C. f. cerinoclunis&quot; : Pearl Is. (south of Panama)
* &quot;C. f. columbiana&quot; : eastern Panama to southwestern Colombia and southern Venezuela
* &quot;C. f. bonairensis&quot; : Bonaire I. (Netherlands Antilles)
* &quot;C. f. melanornis&quot; : Cayo Sal I. (off Venezuela)
* &quot;C. f. lowii&quot; : Los Roques Is. (off Venezuela)
* &quot;C. f. ferryi&quot; : La Tortuga I. (off Venezuela)
* &quot;C. f. frailensis&quot; : Los Frailes and Los Hermanos Is. (off Venezuela)
* &quot;C. f. laurae&quot; : Los Testigos (off Venezuela)
* &quot;C. f. luteola&quot; : coastal northern Colombia and Venezuela, Trinidad and Tobago
* &quot;C. f. obscura&quot; : northeastern Colombia and western Venezuela
* &quot;C. f. minima&quot; : eastern Colombia and southern Venezuela to French Guiana and north central Brazil
* &quot;C. f. montana&quot; : Andes of northwestern Venezuela
* &quot;C. f. caucae&quot; : western Colombia
* &quot;C. f. gorgonae&quot; : Gorgona I. (off western Colombia)
* &quot;C. f. intermedia&quot; : southwestern Colombia, western Ecuador and northern Peru east to southern Venezuela and western Brazil
* &quot;C. f. bolivari&quot; : eastern Venezuela
* &quot;C. f. guianensis&quot; : southeastern Venezuela to Guyana
* &quot;C. f. roraimae&quot; : tepui regions of southeastern Venezuela, southwestern Guyana and northern Brazil
* &quot;C. f. pacifica&quot; : eastern Peru
* &quot;C. f. magnirostris&quot; : northern Peru
* &quot;C. f. dispar&quot; : north central Peru to western Bolivia
* &quot;C. f. chloropyga&quot; : east central Peru to central Bolivia and east to eastern Brazil, northern Uruguay, northeastern Argentina and Paraguay
* &quot;C. f. alleni&quot; : eastern Bolivia to central Brazil
===Subspecies gallery===
== Description ==
The bananaquit is a small bird, although there is some degree of size variation across the various subspecies. Length can range from . Weight ranges from .

Most subspecies of the bananaquit have dark grey (almost black) upperparts, black crowns and sides of the head, a prominent white eyestripe, grey throat, white vent, and yellow chest, belly, and rump. Coloration is heavily influenced by melanocortin 1 receptor variation.

The sexes are alike, but juveniles are duller and often have partially yellow eyebrows and throat.

In the subspecies &quot;bahamensis&quot; and &quot;caboti&quot; from the Bahamas and Cozumel, respectively, the throat and upper chest are white or very pale grey, while &quot;ferryi&quot; from La Tortuga Island has a white forehead. The subspecies &quot;laurae&quot;, &quot;lowii,&quot; and &quot;melanornis&quot; from small islands off the coast of northern Venezuela are overall blackish, while the subspecies &quot;aterrima&quot; and &quot;atrata&quot; from Grenada and Saint Vincent have two plumage morphs, one &quot;normal&quot; and another blackish. The pink gape is usually very prominent in the subspecies from islands in the Caribbean Sea.

The tongue is paddle-shaped, with an extremely long paddle section.

== Distribution and habitat==

It is resident in tropical South America north to southern Mexico and the Caribbean. It is found throughout the West Indies, except for Cuba. Birds from the Bahamas are rare visitors to Florida.

It occurs in a wide range of open to semi-open habitats, including gardens and parks, but it is rare or absent in deserts, dense forests (e.g. large parts of the Amazon rainforest), and at altitudes above .

Bananaquit nests are known to be used by frog species, such as the Common coquí.

== Behaviour and ecology ==
The bananaquit has a slender, curved bill, adapted to taking nectar from flowers, including mistletoes. Nectivory is probably an independent innovation in &quot;Coereba&quot;. Since then &quot;C. flaveola&quot;″s tongue shape has shown convergent evolution with other birds feeding on the same flowers, and its source flowers have shown convergence to accommodate its tongue. It sometimes pierces flowers from the side, taking the nectar without pollinating the plant - known as nectar robbing. It also feeds on fruits - including mistletoe fruits, other berries, and ripe bananas (hence the common name and &quot;bananivora&quot; for the Hispaniolan subspecies). It has been observed taking fruits&#x27; sweet juices by puncturing fruit with its beak and it will also eat small insects (such as ants and flies), their larvae, and other small arthropods (such as spiders) on occasion. While feeding, the bananaquit must always perch, as it cannot hover like a hummingbird.

The bananaquit is known for its ability to adjust remarkably to human environments. It often visits gardens and may become very tame. Its nickname, the sugar bird, comes from its affinity for bowls or bird feeders stocked with granular sugar, a common method of attracting these birds. The bananaquit builds a spherical lined nest with a side entrance hole, laying up to three eggs, which are incubated solely by the female. It may also build its nest in human-made objects, such as lampshades and garden trellises. The birds breed all year regardless of season and build new nests throughout the year.

== References ==
== Literature cited ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==


== External links ==
* 
* (with range map) at 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q228125" start="4" end="14" title="Bananaquit" label="bananaquit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25341" start="50" end="59" title="passerine" label="passerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="60" end="64" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q666222" start="87" end="97" title="Thraupidae" label="Thraupidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425706" start="260" end="277" title="New World sparrow" label="New World sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q614481" start="293" end="304" title="Emberizidae" label="Emberizidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q739200" start="344" end="353" title="Parulidae" label="Parulidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="365" end="374" title="monotypic" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q120880" start="413" end="424" title="nectarivore" label="nectarivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="457" end="465" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q25341" start="591" end="601" title="passerines" label="passerines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597570" start="627" end="636" title="grassquit" label="grassquit"/>
<link wikidata="Q992570" start="638" end="648" title="orangequit" label="orangequit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361864" start="684" end="702" title="species description" label="formally described"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="706" end="719" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547210" start="741" end="784" title="10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="10th edition of &amp;quot;Systema Naturae&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q316949" start="903" end="911" title="John Ray" label="John Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q310326" start="916" end="927" title="Hans Sloane" label="Hans Sloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q257668" start="1003" end="1017" title="George Edwards (naturalist)" label="George Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="1085" end="1090" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q358217" start="1114" end="1135" title="Louis Pierre Vieillot" label="Louis Pierre Vieillot"/>
<link wikidata="Q56944" start="1201" end="1205" title="Tupi language" label="Tupi"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1330" end="1335" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q739200" start="1593" end="1602" title="Parulidae" label="Parulidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425706" start="1626" end="1643" title="New World sparrow" label="New World sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q614481" start="1659" end="1670" title="Emberizidae" label="Emberizidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="1686" end="1695" title="monotypic" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="1739" end="1761" title="molecular phylogenetic" label="molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q666222" start="1822" end="1832" title="Thraupidae" label="Thraupidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q756311" start="1850" end="1871" title="Darwin&amp;#x27;s finches" label="Darwin&amp;#x27;s finches"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="1943" end="1953" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="1989" end="2001" title="Phylogenetics" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="2030" end="2035" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="2042" end="2050" title="Nominate subspecies" label="nominate"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="2062" end="2069" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="2071" end="2081" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q5785" start="2091" end="2105" title="Cayman Islands" label="Cayman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="2145" end="2156" title="the Bahamas" label="the Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q80245" start="2161" end="2173" title="Quintana Roo" label="Quintana Roo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="2219" end="2224" title="South America" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="2229" end="2244" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="2246" end="2252" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="2280" end="2295" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="2300" end="2311" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="2321" end="2325" title="taxa" label="taxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q599991" start="2409" end="2421" title="zoogeography" label="zoogeography"/>
<link wikidata="Q131051" start="2464" end="2481" title="San Andrés (island)" label="San Andrés Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138756" start="2509" end="2527" title="Providencia Island" label="Providencia Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325616" start="2596" end="2633" title="International Ornithological Congress" label="International Ornithological Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q130978" start="2882" end="2899" title="Yucatan Peninsula" label="Yucatan Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2950" end="2958" title="Nominate subspecies#Nominotypical subspecies and subspecies autonyms" label="nominate"/>
<link wikidata="Q208345" start="3103" end="3112" title="Tortuga (Haiti)" label="Tortue I."/>
<link wikidata="Q642481" start="3243" end="3254" title="Saint Croix" label="Saint Croix"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054" start="3377" end="3387" title="Martinique" label="Martinique"/>
<link wikidata="Q760" start="3392" end="3403" title="Saint Lucia" label="Saint Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="3470" end="3478" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q503482" start="3591" end="3601" title="Grenadines" label="Grenadines"/>
<link wikidata="Q25227" start="3679" end="3699" title="Netherlands Antilles" label="Netherlands Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="3757" end="3766" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="3894" end="3900" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142129" start="3936" end="3945" title="Pearl Islands" label="Pearl Is."/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="4028" end="4036" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q318678" start="4217" end="4231" title="Los Roques Archipelago" label="Los Roques Is."/>
<link wikidata="Q208345" start="4277" end="4290" title="Tortuga (Haiti)" label="La Tortuga I."/>
<link wikidata="Q1685696" start="4340" end="4351" title="Islas Los Frailes" label="Los Frailes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553413" start="4356" end="4372" title="Los Hermanos Archipelago" label="Los Hermanos Is."/>
<link wikidata="Q1332426" start="4418" end="4430" title="Los Testigos Islands" label="Los Testigos"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="4518" end="4537" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769" start="4684" end="4697" title="French Guiana" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="4716" end="4722" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="4753" end="4758" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q982879" start="4862" end="4872" title="Gorgona Island, Colombia" label="Gorgona I."/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="4960" end="4967" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="4981" end="4985" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="5140" end="5146" title="Guyana" label="Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q828329" start="5178" end="5183" title="tepui" label="tepui"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="5411" end="5418" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="5526" end="5533" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="5548" end="5557" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="5562" end="5570" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242894" start="6035" end="6045" title="Animal coloration" label="Coloration"/>
<link wikidata="Q21173746" start="6071" end="6094" title="melanocortin 1 receptor" label="melanocortin 1 receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q20119933" start="6292" end="6299" title="Cozumel" label="Cozumel"/>
<link wikidata="Q130348" start="6401" end="6418" title="La Tortuga Island" label="La Tortuga Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="6567" end="6576" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q769" start="6669" end="6676" title="Grenada" label="Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q379656" start="6681" end="6694" title="Saint Vincent (Antilles)" label="Saint Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q485680" start="6712" end="6718" title="Morph (biology)" label="morphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="6774" end="6778" title="gape" label="gape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="6843" end="6856" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="7033" end="7042" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="7095" end="7099" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="7145" end="7152" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="7317" end="7334" title="Amazon rainforest" label="Amazon rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q616638" start="7430" end="7442" title="Common coquí" label="Common coquí"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="7534" end="7540" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="7546" end="7553" title="flowers" label="flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885646" start="7565" end="7574" title="mistletoe" label="mistletoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q120880" start="7577" end="7586" title="Nectivory" label="Nectivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="7709" end="7729" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="7919" end="7930" title="pollinating" label="pollinating"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562668" start="7952" end="7966" title="nectar robbing" label="nectar robbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16128920" start="8028" end="8035" title="berries" label="berries"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="8046" end="8052" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="8269" end="8272" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312" start="8278" end="8283" title="flies" label="flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357" start="8336" end="8342" title="spider" label="spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q43624" start="8433" end="8444" title="hummingbird" label="hummingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q277151" start="8952" end="8961" title="Trellis (architecture)" label="trellises"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="274957" wikidata="Q357234" url="?curid=274957" title="Coburg (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Coburg]] is a town in Germany.

Coburg may also refer to:
==Places==
;Antarctica
* Coburg Peak, Graham Land

;Australia
* Coburg, Victoria, a suburb of Melbourne
** Coburg railway station
* City of Coburg, a former local government area
* Cobourg Peninsula, Northern Territory

;Canada
* Cobourg, Ontario
* Coburg Island, Nunavut

;Germany
* Free State of Coburg, which existed from 1918 to 1920
* Coburg (district), a district of Bavaria
* Coburg (electoral district), a parliamentary constituency of Bavaria

;United States
* Coburg, Indiana, an unincorporated community
* Coburg, Iowa, a city
* Coburg, Kentucky, an unincorporated community
* Coburg, Oregon, a city
* Coburg Hills, a range of foothills of the Cascades, east of Coburg, Oregon

==Sports==
* FC Coburg, a football club in Bavaria
* DVV Coburg, a former football club in Bavaria, predecessor of FC Coburg
* HSC 2000 Coburg, a handball team in Bavaria
* Coburg Football Club, Coburg, Australia

==Schools==
* Coburg University of Applied Sciences, Coburg, Bavaria
* Coburg High School, Coburg, Australia

==Other uses==
* Coburg Dock, Port of Liverpool, England
* , a Kriegsmarine weather ship
* Operation Coburg, a 1968 Australian and New Zealand Vietnam War operation

==See also==
* Cobourg, a town in Ontario, Canada</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q357234" start="0" end="10" title="Coburg (disambiguation)" label="[[Coburg]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q357234" start="34" end="40" title="Coburg (disambiguation)" label="Coburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395951" start="85" end="96" title="Coburg Peak" label="Coburg Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q647356" start="124" end="140" title="Coburg, Victoria" label="Coburg, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139028" start="167" end="189" title="Coburg railway station" label="Coburg railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123635" start="192" end="206" title="City of Coburg" label="City of Coburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104735" start="241" end="258" title="Cobourg Peninsula" label="Cobourg Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007418" start="290" end="297" title="Cobourg" label="Cobourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104823" start="309" end="322" title="Coburg Island" label="Coburg Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q314925" start="344" end="364" title="Free State of Coburg" label="Free State of Coburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10440" start="400" end="417" title="Coburg (district)" label="Coburg (district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q990907" start="443" end="470" title="Coburg (electoral district)" label="Coburg (electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197783" start="530" end="545" title="Coburg, Indiana" label="Coburg, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808351" start="577" end="589" title="Coburg, Iowa" label="Coburg, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139016" start="600" end="616" title="Coburg, Kentucky" label="Coburg, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104308" start="648" end="662" title="Coburg, Oregon" label="Coburg, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139023" start="673" end="685" title="Coburg Hills" label="Coburg Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354522" start="762" end="771" title="FC Coburg" label="FC Coburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q824266" start="802" end="812" title="DVV Coburg" label="DVV Coburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q122245" start="876" end="891" title="HSC 2000 Coburg" label="HSC 2000 Coburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139022" start="922" end="942" title="Coburg Football Club" label="Coburg Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622234" start="977" end="1014" title="Coburg University of Applied Sciences" label="Coburg University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139026" start="1034" end="1052" title="Coburg High School" label="Coburg High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139021" start="1090" end="1101" title="Coburg Dock" label="Coburg Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096909" start="1164" end="1180" title="Operation Coburg" label="Operation Coburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007418" start="1254" end="1261" title="Cobourg" label="Cobourg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="274959" wikidata="Q575023" url="?curid=274959" title="Marc Lépine">
<text>Marc Lépine (; born Gamil Rodrigue Liass Gharbi; October 26, 1964 – December 6, 1989) was a Canadian mass murderer from Montreal, Quebec. On December 6, 1989, he murdered fourteen women and wounded another ten women and four men in what is known as the École Polytechnique massacre. It took place at the École Polytechnique de Montréal, an engineering school affiliated with the Université de Montréal.

Lépine was born in Montreal, the son of French Canadian nurse Monique Lépine and Algerian businessman Rachid Gharbi. Gharbi was abusive towards and contemptuous of women, and left the relationship after Monique returned to nursing to support her children; Lépine was seven at the time. Lépine and his younger sister lived with other families who cared for them during the week, only seeing their mother on weekends. Lépine was considered bright but withdrawn, and he had difficulties with peer and family relationships. At the age of 14, he legally changed his name, giving &quot;hatred of his father&quot; as the reason.

Lépine&#x27;s application to the Canadian Forces was rejected. In 1982 he began a science program at a college, switching to a more technical program after one year. In 1986 he dropped out of the course in his final term, and was subsequently fired from his job at a hospital due to his poor attitude. Lépine began a computer programming course in 1988, and again abandoned it before completion. He twice applied for admission to the École Polytechnique, but lacked two required compulsory courses. 

Lépine had long complained about women working in &quot;non-traditional&quot; jobs. After several months of planning, including the legal purchase of a Ruger Mini-14, he entered the École Polytechnique on the afternoon of December 6, 1989, separated the men from the women in a classroom, and shot the women, while yelling, &quot;I hate feminists&quot;. He said he was &quot;fighting feminism&quot;. He moved into other parts of the building, targeting women, before fatally shooting himself. His suicide note blamed feminists for ruining his life.

Lépine&#x27;s actions have been variously ascribed from a psychiatric perspective with diagnoses such as a personality disorder, psychosis, or attachment disorder, noting societal factors such as poverty, isolation, powerlessness, and violence in the media. The massacre is regarded by criminologists as an example of a hate crime against women. Feminists and government officials considered it a misogynist attack and an example of the larger issue of a high frequency of violence against women. December 6 is now observed in Canada as a National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women.

==Life==
===Childhood===
Marc Lépine was born Gamil Rodrigue Liass Gharbi on October 26, 1964, in Montreal, Quebec, the son of Algerian immigrant Rachid Liass Gharbi and Canadian nurse Monique Lépine. Gamil&#x27;s sister, Nadia, was born in 1967. 

Rachid was a mutual funds salesman and was travelling in the Caribbean at the time of his son&#x27;s birth. During his absence, Monique discovered evidence that her husband had been having an affair. Rachid was a non-practising Muslim, and Monique a former Catholic nun; she had rejected organized religion after she left the convent. Their son was baptized a Catholic as an infant, but received no religious instruction during his childhood; his mother described her son as &quot;a confirmed atheist all his life&quot;. 

Instability and violence marked the family: they moved frequently. Much of young Gamil&#x27;s early childhood was spent in Costa Rica and Puerto Rico, where his father worked for a Swiss mutual funds company. 

The family returned to Montreal permanently in 1968, shortly before a stock market crash led to the loss of much of the family&#x27;s assets. Rachid was an authoritarian, possessive and jealous man, frequently violent towards his wife and children. He had contempt for women and believed that they were intended only to serve men. He required his wife to act as his personal secretary, slapping her if she made any errors in typing, and forcing her to retype documents in spite of the cries of their toddler. He was also neglectful and abusive towards his children, particularly his son, and discouraged any tenderness as he considered it spoiling.

In 1970, following an incident in which Rachid struck Gamil so hard that the marks on his face were visible a week later, Monique decided to leave. The legal separation was finalized in 1971, and the divorce in 1976. Following the separation, Gamil lived with his mother and younger sister Nadia; soon after, their home and possessions were seized when Rachid defaulted on mortgage payments. Gamil was afraid of his father, and at first saw him only on weekly supervised visits. The visits ended quickly, as Rachid ceased contact with his children soon after the separation. Gamil never saw his father again. In the future he refused to discuss him with others.

Rachid made only two child support payments. Monique returned to nursing to support her family. She started taking further courses to advance her career. During this time the children lived with other families during the week, seeing their mother only on weekends. Concerned about her children and parenting skills, she sought help for the family from a psychiatrist at Sainte-Justine Hospital in 1976; the assessment concluded there was nothing wrong with the shy and withdrawn Gamil, but recommended therapy for his sister Nadia, who was challenging Monique&#x27;s authority. Nadia died in 1996 at the age of 28 from a drug overdose of cocaine.

===Adolescence===
After the divorce became final in 1976, the Lépine children, then aged 12 and 9, returned to live with their mother, who had been promoted to director of nursing at a Montreal hospital. In 1977 the family moved to a house purchased in the middle-class Montreal suburb of Pierrefonds. Gamil attended junior high and high school, where he was described as a quiet student who obtained average to above average marks. He developed a close friendship with another boy, but he did not fit in with other students. Taunted as an Arab because of his name, at the age of 14 he legally changed it to &quot;Marc Lépine&quot;, citing his hatred of his father as the reason for taking his mother&#x27;s surname. Lépine was uncommunicative and showed little emotion. He suffered from low self-esteem, exacerbated by his chronic acne. Family relations remained difficult as his younger sister Nadia publicly humiliated him about his acne and his lack of girlfriends. Lépine fantasized about her death, and on one occasion made a mock grave for her. He was overjoyed when in 1981 she was placed in a group home because of her delinquent behaviour and drug abuse.

Seeking a good male role model for Lépine, his mother arranged for a Big Brother. For two years, the experience proved positive as Lépine, often with his best friend, enjoyed the time with photography and moto-cross motorcycles. However, in 1979, the meetings ceased abruptly when the Big Brother was detained on suspicion of molesting young boys. Both Lépine and his Big Brother denied that any molestation had occurred. 

Lépine owned an air rifle as a teenager, which he used to shoot pigeons near his home with his friend. They also enjoyed designing and building electronic gadgets. Lépine developed an interest in World War II and an admiration of Adolf Hitler, and enjoyed action and horror movies. He also took considerable responsibility at home, including cleaning and doing repairs while his mother worked.

Lépine applied to join the Canadian Forces as an officer cadet in September 1981 at the age of 17, but was rejected during the interview process. He later told his friend it was because of difficulties accepting authority. In his 1989 suicide letter, he noted that he had been found to be &quot;anti-social&quot;. An official statement from the military after the massacre stated that Lépine had been &quot;interviewed, assessed and determined to be unsuitable&quot;.

===Adulthood===
In 1982, when Lépine was 18, his family moved to Saint-Laurent, closer to his mother&#x27;s work and to Lépine&#x27;s new CEGEP. He lost contact with his school friend soon after the move. This period marks the beginning of the seven year period which he described in his suicide note as having &quot;brought [him] no joy&quot;.

In August 1982, Lépine began a two-year pre-university course in pure sciences at Cégep de Saint-Laurent. He failed two courses in the first semester but improved his grades considerably in the second semester. He worked part-time at the hospital where his mother worked, serving food and doing custodial duties. Lépine was seen as nervous, hyperactive, and immature by his colleagues. He developed an attraction to another employee, but he was too shy to act on his feelings.

After a year at college, he switched from the university-destined science program into electronics technology, a three-year technical program geared more towards immediate employment. His teachers remembered him as being a model student, quiet, hardworking, and generally doing well in his classes, particularly those related to electrotechnology. There was an unexplained drop in his marks in the fall 1985 term. In February 1986, during the last term of the program, he suddenly and without explanation stopped attending classes, as a result failing to complete his diploma.

Lépine moved out of his mother&#x27;s home into his own apartment, and in 1986 he applied to study engineering at École Polytechnique de Montréal. He was admitted on the condition that he complete two compulsory courses, including one in solution chemistry. He never did this work.

In 1987, Lépine was fired from his job at the hospital for aggressive behaviour, as well as disrespect of his superiors and carelessness in his work. He was enraged at his dismissal, and at the time described a plan to commit a murderous rampage and then commit suicide. Lépine&#x27;s friends noted that he became unpredictable, flying into rages when frustrated.

In the fall of 1987, in order to complete his college diploma, Lépine took three courses, obtaining good marks in all of them. In February 1988, he began a course in computer programming at a private college in downtown Montreal, funding his studies with government student loans. He moved into a downtown apartment with his old high school friend, and in the winter of 1989 took a CEGEP night course in solution chemistry, a prerequisite course for the École Polytechnique.

Lépine wanted a girlfriend, but was generally ill at ease around women. He tended to boss women around and show off his knowledge in front of them. He spoke out to men about his dislike of feminists, career women and women in traditionally male occupations, such as the police force, stating that women should remain in the home caring for their families. Lépine applied again to the École Polytechnique in 1989; however his application was rejected as he still lacked required courses. In March 1989, he abandoned the course in computer programming, though he performed well in the CEGEP course. He obtained 100% in his final exam. In April 1989, he met with a university admissions officer and complained about how women were taking over the job market from men.

==Massacre==
The massacre appeared to have been planned for several months. In August 1989 Lépine picked up an application for a firearms-acquisition certificate, and in mid-October he received his permit. On November 21, 1989, he purchased a Ruger Mini-14 semi-automatic rifle at a local sporting goods store. Between October and December 1989 he was seen at least seven times at the École Polytechnique. Four days before the shooting, Lépine brought his mother a present, though it was several weeks before her birthday; he also brought a note and two bags of belongings, which she did not discover until long after the shooting. Lépine had previously always been very punctual paying his rent, but had not done so in December 1989.

On December 6, 1989, Lépine walked into the École Polytechnique. He entered a second-floor classroom where he separated the men and women, and ordered the approximately fifty men to leave. Claiming that he was fighting feminism, he shot the nine women who remained, killing six and injuring the rest. The men waited outside as their female classmates were killed. After this, Lépine moved to other areas of the building, including the cafeteria, corridors and another classroom. He killed a total of fourteen women (twelve engineering students, one nursing student, and one university employee), and injured four men and ten more women before turning the gun on himself. The event was later described as a &quot;pseudo-community&quot; type of &quot;pseudo-commando&quot; murder-suicide, in which the perpetrator targets a specific group, usually in a public place, and intends to die in &quot;a blaze of glory&quot;.

A three-page suicide letter was found in the pocket of Lépine&#x27;s jacket. The letter was never officially made public and only portions were initially released by police. It was leaked in November 1990 to Francine Pelletier and published in the newspaper &quot;La Presse&quot;. In his letter, Lépine claimed political motives, blamed feminists for ruining his life, and expressed admiration for Denis Lortie, who had mounted an attack on the National Assembly of Quebec in 1984 for political reasons, killing three Quebec government employees. The letter also contained a list of nineteen Quebec women whom Lépine labeled as &quot;radical feminists&quot; and appeared to target for killing. Another letter, written to a friend, promised the explanation to the massacre lay by following clues left in Lépine&#x27;s apartment. The hunt led only to a suitcase of computer games and hardware.

Lépine was buried in the Notre Dame des Neiges Cemetery in Montreal, a few blocks from where he committed the massacre.

===Rationale===
A police psychiatrist who interviewed Lépine&#x27;s family and entourage, and who had access to his letters, suggested that he may have had a serious personality disorder. He chose the multiple homicide/suicide strategy (killing oneself after killing others) that is a characteristic of this disorder. The psychiatrist noted &quot;extreme narcissistic vulnerability&quot; as shown by fantasies of power and success, combined with high levels of self-criticism and difficulties dealing with rejection and failure. Feelings of powerlessness and incompetence were compensated for by a violent and grandiose imaginary life. Other psychiatrists suggested that Lépine was psychotic, having lost touch with reality as he tried to erase the memories of a brutal and absent father, while at the same time unconsciously identifying with a violent manhood that dominates women. Other theories were that Lépine&#x27;s experiences of abuse as a child had caused brain damage or led him to feel victimized as he faced losses and rejections in his later life. RCMP investigator André Tessier, who led the inquest into the attacks, also described Lépine as &quot;asocial&quot; and &quot;schizophrenic&quot;.

Lépine&#x27;s mother speculated that he may have suffered from attachment disorder due to the abuse and sense of abandonment he had suffered in his childhood. She also wondered whether Lépine viewed her as a feminist, and that the massacre might have been an unconscious attempt to get revenge for her neglect while she pursued her career and for his sister&#x27;s taunts. Others take a less individualistic approach. Many feminists and governmental officials view it as an illustration of misogynistic violence against women. Criminologists consider the massacre as an example of a hate or bias crime against women. A few antifeminists have sought to rehabilitate Lépine as hero of the antifeminist cause. Others wondered if Lépine&#x27;s actions were the result of societal changes that had led to increased poverty, powerlessness, individual isolation or increased violence in the media and in society.

==Suicide statement==

The following is a translation of the suicide letter written by Lépine on the day of the shooting.
The original letter in French is also available.
The letter is followed by the list of nineteen names, with a note at the bottom:

==Memorial==
Canadians mark the day of the killings with a National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women. In 2008, Monique Lépine published &quot;Aftermath&quot;, a memoir of her own journey through the grief and pain of the incident. She had stayed silent until 2006, when she decided to speak out for the first time in the wake of that year&#x27;s Dawson College shooting.

==In popular culture==
Lépine&#x27;s life and death was dramatized by Adam Kelly in his controversial play &quot;The Anorak&quot;.

Lépine was portrayed by Maxim Gaudette in Denis Villeneuve&#x27;s 2009 film &quot;Polytechnique&quot;, although the film never refers to Lépine by name. Gaudette won the Genie Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal of Lépine.

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==

==External links==
*CBC Archives on the Montreal Massacre
*Article about Lépine on Crimelibrary.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q575023" start="0" end="11" title="Marc Lépine" label="Marc Lépine"/>
<link wikidata="Q575023" start="20" end="47" title="Marc Lépine" label="Gamil Rodrigue Liass Gharbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q750215" start="101" end="114" title="mass murderer" label="mass murderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="120" end="128" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="130" end="136" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q473834" start="253" end="281" title="École Polytechnique massacre" label="École Polytechnique massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q273619" start="304" end="335" title="École Polytechnique de Montréal" label="École Polytechnique de Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q392189" start="379" end="401" title="Université de Montréal" label="Université de Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="532" end="547" title="domestic abuse" label="abusive towards"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="552" end="573" title="Misogyny" label="contemptuous of women"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343619" start="953" end="969" title="name change" label="changed his name"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="1060" end="1075" title="Canadian Forces" label="Canadian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322733" start="1680" end="1693" title="Ruger Mini-14" label="Ruger Mini-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="1865" end="1874" title="feminists" label="feminists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963679" start="2025" end="2037" title="suicide note" label="suicide note"/>
<link wikidata="Q270673" start="2185" end="2205" title="personality disorder" label="personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="2207" end="2216" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540868" start="2221" end="2240" title="attachment disorder" label="attachment disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="2398" end="2408" title="hate crime" label="hate crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800556" start="2551" end="2573" title="violence against women" label="violence against women"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187073" start="2617" end="2681" title="National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women" label="National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="2782" end="2790" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="2792" end="2798" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q218272" start="2811" end="2819" title="French Algeria" label="Algerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="2820" end="2829" title="immigrant" label="immigrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q791974" start="2946" end="2958" title="mutual funds" label="mutual funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="2994" end="3003" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="3161" end="3167" title="Islam" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3190" end="3198" title="Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="3199" end="3202" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359138" start="3221" end="3239" title="organized religion" label="organized religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="3426" end="3433" title="atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="3472" end="3480" title="domestic violence" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="3579" end="3589" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="3594" end="3605" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020018" start="3737" end="3755" title="stock market crash" label="stock market crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="3923" end="3941" title="misogyny" label="contempt for women"/>
<link wikidata="Q559562" start="4188" end="4198" title="child neglect" label="neglectful"/>
<link wikidata="Q167191" start="4203" end="4210" title="child abuse" label="abusive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142948" start="4469" end="4485" title="legal separation" label="legal separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="4517" end="4524" title="divorce" label="divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210094" start="4690" end="4698" title="mortgage" label="mortgage"/>
<link wikidata="Q954957" start="5001" end="5014" title="child support" label="child support"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945760" start="5350" end="5373" title="Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine" label="Sainte-Justine Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="5601" end="5614" title="drug overdose" label="drug overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="5618" end="5625" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="5885" end="5897" title="middle-class" label="middle-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360927" start="5917" end="5928" title="Pierrefonds, Quebec" label="Pierrefonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="6168" end="6172" title="Arab people" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343619" start="6214" end="6232" title="name change" label="legally changed it"/>
<link wikidata="Q79928" start="6460" end="6464" title="acne" label="acne"/>
<link wikidata="Q442993" start="6730" end="6740" title="group home" label="group home"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905381" start="6863" end="6874" title="Big Brothers Big Sisters of Canada" label="Big Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="7120" end="7129" title="child molestation" label="molesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q193427" start="7234" end="7243" title="air rifle" label="air rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40053" start="7276" end="7289" title="Cruelty to animals" label="shoot pigeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7414" end="7426" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="7448" end="7460" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="7640" end="7655" title="Canadian Forces" label="Canadian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963679" start="7848" end="7862" title="suicide letter" label="suicide letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q734611" start="7908" end="7919" title="anti-social behaviour" label="anti-social"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117999" start="8147" end="8160" title="Saint-Laurent (borough)" label="Saint-Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110056" start="8220" end="8225" title="CEGEP" label="CEGEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q964754" start="8493" end="8505" title="pure science" label="pure science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010009" start="8510" end="8532" title="Cégep de Saint-Laurent" label="Cégep de Saint-Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="8769" end="8780" title="hyperactive" label="hyperactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029062" start="9474" end="9481" title="Diploma of Collegial Studies" label="diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q273619" start="9598" end="9629" title="École Polytechnique de Montréal" label="École Polytechnique de Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="9722" end="9740" title="solution (chemistry)" label="solution chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="10029" end="10036" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q462058" start="10398" end="10410" title="student loan" label="student loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="10797" end="10806" title="feminism" label="feminists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322733" start="11617" end="11630" title="Ruger Mini-14" label="Ruger Mini-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291248" start="11631" end="11651" title="semi-automatic rifle" label="semi-automatic rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="12866" end="12874" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307578" start="12881" end="12895" title="murder-suicide" label="murder-suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479864" start="13236" end="13254" title="Francine Pelletier (journalist)" label="Francine Pelletier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083289" start="13292" end="13301" title="La Presse (Canadian newspaper)" label="La Presse"/>
<link wikidata="Q542493" start="13426" end="13438" title="Denis Lortie" label="Denis Lortie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492249" start="13473" end="13500" title="National Assembly of Quebec" label="National Assembly of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q507432" start="13946" end="13976" title="Notre Dame des Neiges Cemetery" label="Notre Dame des Neiges Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q270673" start="14208" end="14228" title="personality disorder" label="personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q186529" start="14397" end="14409" title="narcissism" label="narcissistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="14724" end="14733" title="psychotic" label="psychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q720026" start="15007" end="15019" title="brain damage" label="brain damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540868" start="15314" end="15333" title="attachment disorder" label="attachment disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800556" start="15754" end="15776" title="violence against women" label="violence against women"/>
<link wikidata="Q161733" start="15778" end="15792" title="Criminologists" label="Criminologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="15834" end="15852" title="hate crime" label="hate or bias crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q575220" start="15874" end="15886" title="antifeminist" label="antifeminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187073" start="16470" end="16534" title="National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women" label="National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q64112" start="16780" end="16803" title="Dawson College shooting" label="Dawson College shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679324" start="16876" end="16886" title="Adam Kelly" label="Adam Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713886" start="16919" end="16929" title="The Anorak" label="The Anorak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302455" start="16962" end="16976" title="Maxim Gaudette" label="Maxim Gaudette"/>
<link wikidata="Q548823" start="16980" end="16996" title="Denis Villeneuve" label="Denis Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053630" start="17020" end="17033" title="Polytechnique (film)" label="Polytechnique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502249" start="17108" end="17119" title="Genie Award" label="Genie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671430" start="17124" end="17145" title="Genie Award for Best Performance by an Actor in a Supporting Role" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="274963" wikidata="Q7522420" url="?curid=274963" title="Sinepuxent, Maryland">
<text>Sinepuxent or Sinepuxent Town was a village in Worcester County, Maryland, located on Sinepuxent Neck across Sinepuxent Bay from the barrier island of Assateague. The village was destroyed by a hurricane in 1818 and never rebuilt. Its location arose in large part from its convenience to ocean-going ships: an inlet—Sinepuxent Inlet—allowed access through Assateague Island from the Atlantic Ocean to Sinepuxent Bay, until it was closed by the same hurricane that destroyed the village.

Sinepuxent was the birthplace of U.S. Navy officer Stephen Decatur in 1779.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7522420" start="0" end="10" title="Sinepuxent, Maryland" label="Sinepuxent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522420" start="14" end="29" title="Sinepuxent, Maryland" label="Sinepuxent Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q494072" start="47" end="73" title="Worcester County, Maryland" label="Worcester County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522421" start="109" end="123" title="Sinepuxent Bay" label="Sinepuxent Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q289161" start="151" end="161" title="Assateague Island" label="Assateague"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="194" end="203" title="hurricane" label="hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q756825" start="207" end="211" title="1818 Atlantic hurricane season" label="1818"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172599" start="310" end="315" title="inlet" label="inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="521" end="530" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q720374" start="539" end="554" title="Stephen Decatur" label="Stephen Decatur"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="274967" wikidata="Q223689" url="?curid=274967" title="Pietà">
<text>The Pietà (; meaning &quot;pity&quot;, &quot;compassion&quot;) is a subject in Christian art depicting the Blessed Virgin Mary cradling the mortal body of Jesus Christ after his Descent from the Cross. It is most often found in sculpture. The Pietà is a specific form of the Lamentation of Christ in which Jesus is mourned by the Virgin Mary alone. However, in practice works called a &quot;Pietà&quot; may include angels, the other figures usual in &quot;Lamentations&quot;, and even donor portraits. 

An image consisting only of a dead Christ with angels is also called a Pietà, at least in German, where &quot;Engelpietà&quot; (literally &quot;Angel Pietà&quot;) is the term for what is usually called &quot;Dead Christ supported by angels&quot; in English.
Several namesake images have merited a Pontifical decree of coronation, including the Pieta of Saint Peter&#x27;s Basilica in Rome, in the Marienthal Basilica in France, the Franciscan church in Leuven, Belgium, at the Kamp-Bornhofen, Germany, and Our Lady of Charity in Cartagena, Spain.

==Context and development==
The Pietà is one of the three common artistic representations of a sorrowful Virgin Mary, the other two being the &quot;Mater Dolorosa&quot; (&quot;dolorous mother&quot;) and the &quot;Stabat Mater&quot; (&quot;standing mother&quot;). The other two representations are most commonly found in paintings, rather than sculpture, although combined forms exist.

The Pietà developed in Germany (where it is called &quot;Vesperbild&quot;) about 1300, reached Italy about 1400, and was especially popular in Central European Andachtsbilder. Many German and Polish 15th-century examples in wood greatly emphasise Christ&#x27;s wounds. Although the subject was known in Italy, the name may have been slower to be adopted, and the Florentine diarist Luca Landucci, after describing a painting in an entry for June 1482, added &quot;which is called by some a Pietà&quot;. 

The Deposition of Christ and the Lamentation or Pietà form the 13th of the Stations of the Cross, as well as one of the Seven Sorrows of the Virgin.

Although the Pietà most often shows the Virgin Mary holding Jesus, there are other compositions, including those where God the Father participates in holding Jesus Christ. In Spain the Virgin often holds up one or both hands, sometimes with Christ&#x27;s body slumped to the floor.

== Michelangelo ==

A famous example by the Italian sculptor Michelangelo in marble is in Saint Peter&#x27;s Basilica in the Vatican City. The body of Christ is different from most earlier Pietà statues, which were usually smaller and in wood. The Virgin is also unusually youthful, and in repose, rather than the older, sorrowing Mary of most Pietàs. She is shown as youthful for two reasons: God is the source of all beauty and she is one of the closest to God, and because the exterior is thought as the revelation of the interior; therefore, the virgin is morally beautiful. Michelangelo&#x27;s Pieta sculpture is also unique in the fact that it is the only one of his works that he ever signed. Upon hearing that visitors thought it had been sculpted by Cristoforo Solari, a competitor, he carved his signature into Mary&#x27;s sash as &quot;MICHAELA[N]GELUS BONAROTUS FLORENTIN[US] FACIEBA[T]&quot;: &quot;Michelangelo Buonarroti the Florentine made this&quot;.

In a lesser known Michelangelo Pietà, &quot;The Deposition&quot; (), it is not the Virgin Mary who is holding Christ&#x27;s body, but rather Nicodemus (or possibly Joseph of Arimathea), Mary Magdalene, and the Virgin Mary. There is some indication that the man in the hood is based on a self-portrait of the artist. The sculpture is housed in the Museo dell&#x27;Opera del Duomo in Florence and is also known as the &quot;Florentine Pietà&quot;.

A generation later, the Spanish painter Luis de Morales painted a number of highly emotional Pietàs, with examples in the Louvre and .

==&quot;Dead Christ supported by angels&quot;==
This related subject is called &quot;Engelpietà&quot; (literally &quot;Angel Pietà&quot;) in German, and included here for that reason. It is a variant of the &quot;Man of Sorrows&quot; (&quot;Imago Pietatis&quot;) type of andachtsbilder, but showing a Christ who is clearly dead (in &quot;Man of Sorrows&quot; images he tends to have his eyes open). Typically the half-length body of the dead Christ sits on a ledge, held up by smaller angels at each side. Christ is naked down to a loin-cloth and his wounds are visible. But there are many variants of this composition, especially after about 1500. It was common in both sculpture and painting from the 14th century until the Counter Reformation, but found through the Baroque period as well.

== Comic book art and popular culture ==
The iconography of Piéta, with a figure holding a body in their arms, has been regularly used in comic book art, especially on covers. One of the most famous examples is the cover for Crisis on Infinite Earths #7, which features the death of Supergirl.

Lana Del Rey&#x27;s 2012 music video Born to Die features the scene of a man holding the corpse of the singer in a Piéta-like pose.

St. Vincent (musician)&#x27;s song Pietà references her father holding her in a Holiday Inn pool for her baptism &quot;like an inverse-Piéta&quot;. This song was released on the St. Vincent (album) deluxe edition.

The ending to John Steinbeck’s &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; is often interpreted to symbolize a pietà, with Rose of Sharon cradling a dying old man.

==See also==
* List of statues of Jesus
* &quot;Pietà&quot; (Michelangelo)
* Replicas of Michelangelo&#x27;s Pietà

==References==
*&quot;RDK&quot; &quot;Engelpietà&quot; by Osten, Gert von der, in the online &quot;Reallexikon zur Deutschen Kunstgeschichte&quot; (in print: Vol. V (1960), pp. 601–621)

==Further reading==

==External links==
* Data collection of the image type Pietà in sculpture
* 3D model of a detail of Mary from a cast made by the Metropolitan Museum of Art for the Vatican Museums, via photogrammetric survey
* Poem by Moez Surani proposing nine new sculptural Pietas</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q223689" start="4" end="9" title="Pietà" label="Pietà"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724817" start="27" end="31" title="pity" label="pity"/>
<link wikidata="Q645717" start="79" end="92" title="Christian art" label="Christian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="107" end="126" title="Mary (mother of Jesus)" label="Blessed Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="155" end="167" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365963" start="178" end="200" title="Descent from the Cross" label="Descent from the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="228" end="237" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155356" start="275" end="296" title="Lamentation of Christ" label="Lamentation of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348713" start="485" end="499" title="donor portrait" label="donor portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033350" start="801" end="832" title="Canonical coronation" label="Pontifical decree of coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="857" end="884" title="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886951" start="901" end="920" title="Basilique Notre-Dame de Marienthal" label="Marienthal Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="957" end="972" title="Leuven, Belgium" label="Leuven, Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q567183" start="981" end="995" title="Kamp-Bornhofen" label="Kamp-Bornhofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759344" start="1010" end="1029" title="Our Lady of Charity" label="Our Lady of Charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q162615" start="1033" end="1049" title="Cartagena, Spain" label="Cartagena, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196075" start="1200" end="1214" title="Mater Dolorosa" label="Mater Dolorosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595702" start="1265" end="1277" title="Stabat Mater (art)" label="Stabat Mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q489632" start="1598" end="1612" title="Andachtsbilder" label="Andachtsbilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="1801" end="1811" title="Florence" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365963" start="1947" end="1967" title="Deposition of Christ" label="Deposition of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q231685" start="2018" end="2039" title="Stations of the Cross" label="Stations of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196075" start="2063" end="2090" title="Seven Sorrows of the Virgin" label="Seven Sorrows of the Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186350" start="2212" end="2226" title="God the Father" label="God the Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q235242" start="2398" end="2412" title="Pietà (Michelangelo)" label="famous example"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="2437" end="2449" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="2466" end="2493" title="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="2501" end="2513" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408409" start="3135" end="3152" title="Cristoforo Solari" label="Cristoforo Solari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342843" start="3389" end="3403" title="The Deposition (Michelangelo)" label="The Deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q295084" start="3486" end="3495" title="Nicodemus" label="Nicodemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q271474" start="3509" end="3528" title="Joseph of Arimathea" label="Joseph of Arimathea"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="3531" end="3545" title="Mary Magdalene" label="Mary Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200696" start="3692" end="3723" title="Museo dell&amp;#x27;Opera del Duomo (Florence)" label="Museo dell&amp;#x27;Opera del Duomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="3727" end="3735" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q703250" start="3832" end="3847" title="Luis de Morales" label="Luis de Morales"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="3914" end="3920" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q49599" start="4141" end="4155" title="Man of Sorrows" label="Man of Sorrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="4654" end="4673" title="Counter Reformation" label="Counter Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q522623" start="4947" end="4972" title="Crisis on Infinite Earths" label="Crisis on Infinite Earths"/>
<link wikidata="Q8981293" start="5005" end="5014" title="Supergirl" label="Supergirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q37150" start="5017" end="5029" title="Lana Del Rey" label="Lana Del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q37148" start="5054" end="5065" title="Born to Die" label="Born to Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q238795" start="5150" end="5172" title="St. Vincent (musician)" label="St. Vincent (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717882" start="5230" end="5241" title="Holiday Inn" label="Holiday Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15707989" start="5328" end="5347" title="St. Vincent (album)" label="St. Vincent (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604491" start="5533" end="5557" title="List of statues of Jesus" label="List of statues of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q235242" start="5560" end="5592" title="Pietà (Michelangelo)" label="&amp;quot;Pietà&amp;quot; (Michelangelo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18204411" start="5595" end="5632" title="Replicas of Michelangelo&amp;#x27;s Pietà" label="Replicas of Michelangelo&amp;#x27;s Pietà"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="274968" wikidata="Q848856" url="?curid=274968" title="Decametre">
<text>A decametre (International spelling as used by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures and by most English speaking countries, United States spelling dekameter or decameter), symbol dam (&quot;da&quot; for the SI prefix &quot;deca-&quot;, &quot;m&quot; for the SI unit metre), is a unit of length in the International System of Units (SI) equal to ten metres.

While any combination of SI prefix and unit can be used, many are rarely used in practice; the decametre is used less frequently than other units of length. One practical use is for altitude of geopotential heights in meteorology. The volumetric form &quot;cubic decametre&quot; is convenient for describing large volumes of water such as in rivers and lakes; a volume of one cubic decametre (dam3) is equivalent to a capacity of one megalitre (ML).

One technical atmosphere is the pressure of one decametre of water. Also, the are (a), a metric unit for land area, is equal to one square decametre (dam2).

==See also==
*Orders of magnitude (length)
*Conversion of units, for comparison with other units

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q848856" start="2" end="11" title="Decametre" label="decametre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13" end="35" title="American and British English spelling differences#-re, -er" label="International spelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q229478" start="51" end="95" title="International Bureau of Weights and Measures" label="International Bureau of Weights and Measures"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="136" end="158" title="American and British English spelling differences#-re, -er" label="United States spelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q848856" start="159" end="168" title="Decametre" label="dekameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q848856" start="172" end="181" title="Decametre" label="decameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q848856" start="191" end="194" title="Decametre" label="dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="219" end="228" title="SI prefix" label="SI prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q152516" start="235" end="240" title="deca-" label="deca-"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="270" end="272" title="SI" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q11573" start="278" end="283" title="metre" label="metre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978718" start="291" end="305" title="unit of length" label="unit of length"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="313" end="342" title="International System of Units" label="International System of Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q12432978" start="564" end="583" title="geopotential height" label="geopotential height"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582667" start="825" end="845" title="technical atmosphere" label="technical atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="899" end="902" title="are (unit)" label="are"/>
<link wikidata="Q11500" start="931" end="935" title="area" label="area"/>
<link wikidata="Q855630" start="993" end="1021" title="Orders of magnitude (length)" label="Orders of magnitude (length)"/>
<link wikidata="Q618655" start="1023" end="1042" title="Conversion of units" label="Conversion of units"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="274975" wikidata="Q294569" url="?curid=274975" title="C-QUAM">
<text>C-QUAM (Compatible QUadrature Amplitude Modulation) is the method of AM stereo broadcasting used in Canada, the United States and most other countries. It was invented in 1977 by Norman Parker, Francis Hilbert, and Yoshio Sakaie, and published in an IEEE journal.

Using circuitry developed by Motorola, C-QUAM uses quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) to encode the stereo separation signal. This extra signal is then stripped down in such a way that it is compatible with the envelope detector of older receivers, hence the name C-QUAM for Compatible. A 25 Hz pilot tone is added to trigger receivers; unlike its counterpart in FM radio, this carrier is not necessary for the reconstruction of the original audio sources.

== Description ==
The C-QUAM signal is composed of two distinct modulation stages: a conventional AM version and a compatible quadrature PM version.

Stage 1 provides the transmitter with a summed L+R mono audio input. This input is precisely the same as conventional AM-Mono transmission methods and ensures 100% compatibility with conventional &#x27;envelope detector&#x27; receivers.

Stage 2 provides the stereo multiplexed (muxed) audio input and replaces the conventional crystal oscillator stage of otherwise AM-Mono transmitters. So as to not create interference with &#x27;envelope detector&#x27; receivers, the stage 2 signal takes the multiplexed (muxed) audio signals and phase modulates both, using a divide-by-4 Johnson counter and two balanced modulators operating 90 degrees out of phase with each other. Stage 2 is not amplitude modulated, it is phase modulated, and is made up of both a L+R input and a L-R input. 

To recover the &#x27;stereo&#x27; audio signals, a synchronous detector extracts the L-R audio from the phase modulated quadrature portion of the signal created in stage 2. The L+R audio can be extracted from either the AM (stage 1) or the PM (stage 2) modulation component. From there, the audio can be readily de-multiplexed (de-muxed) back to &#x27;stereo&#x27;, a.k.a. Left and Right channels.

For additional information, see the attached PDF: &quot;Introduction to the Motorola C-QUAM AM Stereo System&quot;.

== Known problems ==

C-QUAM is not perfect, however, in large part because pre-AMAX it exhibited platform motion, with the audio &quot;center&quot; rocking back and forth as if changing the balance knob. This effect is potentially bothersome, especially in a moving vehicle where the received signal changes rapidly, and occupants (particularly the driver) would be more prone to its effects (this was an effect that happened primarily with skywave signals. Groundwave or local coverage usually did not suffer from this issue). This has been alleviated in subsequent revisions. Also, since some stereo information is contained in the sidebands, adjacent channel interference can cause problems. Finally, when only part of a sideband is attenuated (as often happens to skywave signals reflecting off the ionosphere), an effect known as selective fading, very unpleasant effects result; hence, the C-QUAM system is not often if ever used for shortwave broadcasting, nor by stations which receive a great deal of skywave interference.
== User base ==
Nowadays, this standard faces fierce competition with some other stereophonic standards on AM.

, there are still a number of AM radio stations in North America broadcasting in C-QUAM stereo. Among those stations are WXYG/540: Sauk Rapids, MN; CFCB/570: Corner Brook, NL; CFCO/630: Chatham, Ontario (covering SW Ontario, Eastern Michigan and Northern Ohio); WNMB/900: North Myrtle Beach, South Carolina; WBLQ/1230: Westerly, Rhode Island; WIRY/1340: Plattsburgh, New York; WAXB/850: Ridgefield, Connecticut and WYLD-AM/940: New Orleans, Louisiana. In addition to FCC-Licensed C-QUAM AM broadcast stations, low-powered (&lt;100 mW) Part 15 C-QUAM stereo transmitters are available for sale for use in the United States. In Rome, Italy, there is Broadcastitalia on 1485 kHz.

Also see: 
*

== Competition from IBOC Hybrid Digital Systems ==

While C-QUAM is an accepted international standard for AM Radio broadcasting, it is incompatible with the IBOC (In-band on-channel) &quot;HD&quot; (Hybrid Digital) radio system, so a broadcaster must choose what system they will use. The IBOC system allows transmission of an audio frequency range extending to approximately 15 kHz, 2-ch Stereo on the AM band, but with significant digital artifact and aliasing due to substantial codec inadequacy.

In addition, C-QUAM patents have expired. iBiquity still controls IBOC intellectual property through patents, through licensing fees for both the use of the technology, and any modifications to be made, even if the broadcaster in question has purchased the equipment outright and made costly modifications to their transmitter plant in order to implement it.

Very few AM radio stations that broadcast with IBOC HD Radio during the day switch to C-QUAM AM Stereo during nighttime operation to reduce sideband digital (hash) interference and to provide long-range stereo reception. A number of HD radio tuners have the limited ability to decode C-Quam stereo transmissions, (typically with lower bandwidth), and as a result, reduced audio quality than what could be expected from a specifically designed AMAX/C-QUAM only tuner. C-QUAM AM Stereo transmissions have the same range as AM Monural transmission, a key benefit.

Whereas many stations in the late 2000s changed from C-QUAM to HD Radio, in the 2010s the trend reversed with many HD Radio stations shutting off their digital equipment. However, few of these stations returned to C-QUAM broadcasts. 

There has been a move to bring back C-QUAM in the last few years, due to the poor sound quality of digital audio encoding at low bit rates. Where AM stereo receivers use a dual IF bandwidth setup, for an extended audio frequency response over mono receivers. Providing for a full, rich stereo sound is simply not possible with digital audio encoding. The down side of analog broadcasting is the amount of unwanted noise.

==See also==
*List of AM stereo radio stations

==References==
Introduction to the Motorola C-QUAM AM Stereo System


== External links ==
*History of AM Stereo
*Another AM Stereo information and vendor site - meduci.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q294569" start="0" end="6" title="C-QUAM" label="C-QUAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002739" start="69" end="78" title="AM stereo" label="AM stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="100" end="106" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="112" end="125" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="234" end="241" title="publish" label="publish"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="250" end="254" title="IEEE" label="IEEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q737498" start="255" end="262" title="Academic journal" label="journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815901" start="271" end="280" title="circuitry" label="circuitry"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="294" end="302" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q749753" start="316" end="347" title="quadrature amplitude modulation" label="quadrature amplitude modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188889" start="357" end="363" title="Code" label="encode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412443" start="386" end="392" title="signal (computing)" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652250" start="479" end="496" title="envelope detector" label="envelope detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="560" end="562" title="Hertz" label="Hz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095206" start="563" end="573" title="pilot tone" label="pilot tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="594" end="603" title="receiver (radio)" label="receivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="631" end="639" title="FM radio" label="FM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q48970779" start="1711" end="1731" title="synchronous detector" label="synchronous detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652524" start="2256" end="2260" title="AMAX" label="AMAX"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2274" end="2289" title="platform motion" label="platform motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267009" start="2811" end="2819" title="sideband" label="sideband"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683140" start="2822" end="2851" title="adjacent channel interference" label="adjacent channel interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639901" start="2945" end="2952" title="skywave" label="skywave"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="2980" end="2990" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196572" start="3012" end="3028" title="selective fading" label="selective fading"/>
<link wikidata="Q368646" start="3117" end="3126" title="shortwave" label="shortwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q112741969" start="3262" end="3273" title="AM Stereo and Digital AM in and near the United States" label="competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957920" start="3442" end="3446" title="WXYG" label="WXYG"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010472" start="3469" end="3473" title="CFCB" label="CFCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010483" start="3497" end="3501" title="CFCO" label="CFCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953499" start="3583" end="3587" title="WNMB" label="WNMB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690579" start="3593" end="3627" title="North Myrtle Beach" label="North Myrtle Beach, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947273" start="3629" end="3633" title="WBLQ (AM)" label="WBLQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028023" start="3640" end="3648" title="Westerly, Rhode Island" label="Westerly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="3650" end="3662" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950892" start="3664" end="3668" title="WIRY (AM)" label="WIRY"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946864" start="3698" end="3702" title="WAXB" label="WAXB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958066" start="3736" end="3743" title="WYLD-AM" label="WYLD-AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810092" start="3856" end="3863" title="Part 15" label="Part 15"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4149" end="4161" title=":wikt:incompatible" label="incompatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149586" start="4171" end="4175" title="IBOC" label="IBOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969275" start="4557" end="4565" title="iBiquity" label="iBiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563454" start="4927" end="4935" title="HD Radio" label="HD Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776879" start="6108" end="6140" title="List of AM stereo radio stations" label="List of AM stereo radio stations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="274976" wikidata="Q1629164" url="?curid=274976" title="WPS Office">
<text>WPS Office (an acronym for Writer, Presentation and Spreadsheets, previously known as Kingsoft Office) is an office suite for Microsoft Windows, macOS, Linux, iOS, Android, Fire OS and HarmonyOS developed by Chinese software developer company, Kingsoft Office Software. It also comes pre-installed on Amazon Fire tablets. WPS Office is made up of three primary components: WPS Writer, WPS Slides, and WPS Sheets. By 2022, WPS Office reached a number of more than 494 million monthly active users and over 1.2 billion installations.

The personal basic version is free to use, however a subscription is required to use all features. The WPS Pro and WPS AI versions are available as subscriptions. WPS Office 2016 was released in 2016. As of 2019, the Linux version is developed and supported by a volunteer community rather than Kingsoft itself.

The product has had a long history of development in China under the name &quot;WPS&quot; and &quot;WPS Office&quot;. For a time, Kingsoft branded the suite as &quot;KSOffice&quot; for the international market, but later returned to &quot;WPS Office&quot;. Since the release of WPS Office 2005, the user interface is similar to that of Microsoft Office products, and it supports Microsoft document formats, which are now used by default, in addition to its own files.

== History ==

=== Origins ===

WPS Office was initially known as Super-WPS文字处理系统 (Super-WPS Word Processing System, then known simply as WPS) in 1988 as a word processor that ran on DOS systems and sold by then-Hong Kong Kingsun COMPUTER CO. LTD.. It was the first Chinese-language word processor designed and developed for the mainland Chinese market. WPS was used from the late 1980s.

=== Early history ===

Faced with competition from Microsoft Office, Kingsoft chief software architect Pak Kwan Kau (求伯君) diverted 4 million Renminbi from his personal account to assist in the development of WPS 97 for Microsoft Windows. In 1997, WPS 97 was released. The next version, WPS 2000, was released two years later. Both products were developed for a 16-bit Windows platform, with the capability of running on 32-bit Windows platforms.

In May 2001, Kingsoft launched a full office suite under the name WPS Office 2001, which contained a word processor together with spreadsheet and presentation applications. With WPS Office 2001, Kingsoft entered the office productivity market in the People&#x27;s Republic of China.

In 2002, WPS Office 2002 was released, adding an email client to the office suite. WPS Office 2002 aimed to maintain interface compatibility with established office products.

The 2004 incarnation of the office suite, dubbed &quot;WPS Office Storm&quot;, was released in late 2004. It claimed to offer total backward compatibility with Microsoft Office file formats. Unlike previous versions, WPS Storm was based on OpenOffice.org and was the first WPS Office suite to support operating systems other than Microsoft Windows. Kingsoft collaborated with Intel and IBM to integrate its text-to-text and text-to-speech technology into WPS Office Storm.

In late 2005, WPS Office 2005 was released with a revamped interface and a smaller file size. Besides the Professional edition, a free Simplified Chinese edition was offered for students and home users. A Wine-hosted edition was provided for Linux users of WPS Office Storm.

In 2007, Kingsoft Office 2007 was released. This was the first version that tried to enter international markets, with support for the English and Japanese languages. The native Chinese-language version continued under the name WPS Office.

In 2009, Kingsoft Office 2009 was released. It had increased compatibility with Microsoft Office including support for the newer 2007-version file formats.

In 2011, Kingsoft Office was granted funding from the Chinese government and received further orders from central ministries in China.

Kingsoft Office Suite Free 2012 was released in 2011. Kingsoft Office Professional 2012 and Kingsoft Office Standard 2012 were released for sale in February 2012, in addition to Kingsoft Office for Android. The initial release for Android included standard word processor functions such as creating documents, spreadsheets, and presentations.

On March 28, 2012, Kingsoft announced that WPS for Linux was under development. It is the third WPS Linux product, following WPS Storm and WPS 2005. It was developed from scratch, based on the Qt framework, as compatible as possible with its Windows counterpart.

The free and paid versions of Kingsoft Office 2013 were released on June 4, 2013. They consist of three programs: Writer, Spreadsheets, and Presentation, which are similar to Microsoft Word, Excel, and PowerPoint. WPS Office for Linux Alpha 18 Patch 1 was released on June 11, 2015.

=== 2014–present ===

On June 6, 2014, all Kingsoft Office products were renamed WPS Office.

On December 16, 2014, WPS Office 2014 for Windows, build 9.1.0.4932, was released as a subscription model for a monthly charge of US$3 for some features. The free version provided basic features and supported Microsoft Office .doc, .xls, and .ppt file formats. Premium paid versions provided full compatibility for Microsoft Office files. Officially only the paid 2014 version supported saving files in .docx, .xlsx, and .pptx formats, but, actually, the free version also supported these formats (as had the 2013 free version).

On June 21, 2016, WPS Office 2016 for Windows became generally available as Freemium software, with no subscription needed for basic features.

On May 28, 2017 Kingsoft tweeted that the Linux version was at a halt, but denied this a few days later, removed the tweet, and issued a further alpha version. Kingsoft also tweeted making reference to making WPS Office for Linux open-source towards the end of 2017 to allow the Linux community to step in and continue maintaining it, but later deleted this tweet too. Since at least June 2022, the fully functional Linux freeware version &quot;WPS 2021&quot; could simply be downloaded from the WPS website at no cost to the user.

WPS Office 2019 was released on May 6, 2019. It introduced new integration and personalized features as well as full support for the PDF format.

On July 22, 2021, WPS Office arrived on Huawei&#x27;s new HarmonyOS platform on smartphones and tablets with Multi-terminal document service capabilities as a native APP format. HarmonyOS version comes with large-screen presentation, small-screen prompts, text highlighting to focus on key information, full-screen video playback without professional settings, small-screen graffiti, large-screen presentation, picture zoom information at a glance, atomic service on-the-go. Also the HarmonyOS version of WPS Office connects the personal version and multi-screen collaboration to improve productivity.

On March 15, 2024, Huawei announced that the WPS Office has completed the HarmonyOS native app core features development for HarmonyOS NEXT system which will launch in fall 2024. It was reported that consumers would soon be able to use a new version of the Office app with smoother and safer services across many devices with continuity with smart screen office functionalities.

== Editions ==

WPS Office has versions for multiple operating systems: Windows, macOS, Linux (Fedora, CentOS, OpenSUSE, Ubuntu, Mint, Knoppix), Android, iOS and HarmonyOS. In addition, WPS Office also has a web version.

== File format ==

According to an April 2017 review of WPS Office 2016 Free v10.2.0.5871 for Windows, the program opens and saves all Microsoft Office document formats (doc, docx, xls, xlsx, etc.), HTML, RTF, XML, and PDF.

* Text document formats: wps, wpt, doc, dot, docx, dotx, docm, dotm
* XML document formats: xml, htm, html, mht, mhtm, mhtml
* Spreadsheet document formats: et, ett, xls, xlsx, xlt, xltx, csv, xlsm, xltm, xlsb, ets
* Slideshow document formats: ppt, pot, pps, dps, dpt, pptx, potx, ppsx, pptm, potm, ppsm, dpss

== Exploits ==
Since at least 2018, threat actor &#x27;Blackwood&#x27; has used sophisticated methods to operate as an Adversary-in-the-Middle (AitM) to inject malware identified as &#x27;NSPX30&#x27; into update mechanisms for WPS Office. Once the malware is installed, it can affect many other programs, such as virus protection software 360 Safeguard, and messaging software such as Skype, Telegram, and Tencent QQ. Activity by this system was first noticed in 2023 by cybersecurity company ESET.

== See also ==

* List of office suites
* Comparison of office suites
* Office Open XML software
* OpenDocument software
* Web desktop

== Notes and references ==

== External links ==
* 
* Windows Update History</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1629164" start="0" end="10" title="WPS Office" label="WPS Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="15" end="22" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629164" start="86" end="101" title="WPS Office" label="Kingsoft Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247856" start="109" end="121" title="office suite" label="office suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="126" end="143" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="145" end="150" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="152" end="157" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="159" end="162" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="164" end="171" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089879" start="173" end="180" title="Fire OS" label="Fire OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q63986220" start="185" end="194" title="HarmonyOS" label="HarmonyOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q105975512" start="244" end="268" title="Kingsoft Office Software" label="Kingsoft Office Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q196561" start="301" end="319" title="Fire tablet" label="Amazon Fire tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="899" end="904" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="1145" end="1159" title="user interface" label="user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q11255" start="1182" end="1198" title="Microsoft Office" label="Microsoft Office"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1381" end="1396" title=":zh:Super-WPS" label="Super-WPS文字处理系统"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="1498" end="1501" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="1527" end="1536" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="1845" end="1853" title="Renminbi" label="Renminbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="2743" end="2765" title="backward compatibility" label="backward compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q511977" start="2851" end="2865" title="OpenOffice.org" label="OpenOffice.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="2987" end="2992" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="2997" end="3000" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16346" start="3035" end="3049" title="text-to-speech" label="text-to-speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q188558" start="3290" end="3294" title="Wine (software)" label="Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q201904" start="4432" end="4434" title="Qt (framework)" label="Qt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="5011" end="5014" title="US$" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444631" start="5487" end="5495" title="Freemium" label="Freemium"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="5580" end="5587" title="Twitter" label="tweeted"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="6221" end="6224" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q63986220" start="6292" end="6301" title="HarmonyOS" label="HarmonyOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q122212378" start="6400" end="6410" title="App (file format)" label="APP format"/>
<link wikidata="Q123469520" start="6962" end="6976" title="HarmonyOS NEXT" label="HarmonyOS NEXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="7289" end="7296" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="7298" end="7303" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="7305" end="7310" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q48267" start="7312" end="7318" title="Fedora Linux" label="Fedora"/>
<link wikidata="Q207542" start="7320" end="7326" title="CentOS" label="CentOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16691" start="7328" end="7336" title="OpenSUSE" label="OpenSUSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q381" start="7338" end="7344" title="Ubuntu" label="Ubuntu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027" start="7346" end="7350" title="Linux Mint" label="Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q102410" start="7352" end="7359" title="Knoppix" label="Knoppix"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="7362" end="7369" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="7371" end="7374" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q63986220" start="7379" end="7388" title="HarmonyOS" label="HarmonyOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11255" start="7574" end="7590" title="Microsoft Office" label="Microsoft Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="7638" end="7642" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q467454" start="7644" end="7647" title="Rich Text Format" label="RTF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="7649" end="7652" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="7658" end="7661" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q20062351" start="8316" end="8329" title="360 Safeguard" label="360 Safeguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q40984" start="8362" end="8367" title="Skype" label="Skype"/>
<link wikidata="Q15616276" start="8369" end="8377" title="Telegram_(software)" label="Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q857640" start="8383" end="8393" title="Tencent QQ" label="Tencent QQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510521" start="8448" end="8461" title="Computer_security" label="cybersecurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q817209" start="8470" end="8474" title="ESET" label="ESET"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631585" start="8495" end="8516" title="List of office suites" label="List of office suites"/>
<link wikidata="Q14273961" start="8519" end="8546" title="Comparison of office suites" label="Comparison of office suites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639727" start="8549" end="8573" title="Office Open XML software" label="Office Open XML software"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500606" start="8576" end="8597" title="OpenDocument software" label="OpenDocument software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780763" start="8600" end="8611" title="Web desktop" label="Web desktop"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="274984" wikidata="Q952337" url="?curid=274984" title="Hooverphonic">
<text>Hooverphonic is a Belgian electronic band that was formed in October 1995. Though originally categorized as a trip hop group, they quickly expanded their sound to the point where it could no longer be described as a belonging to a single genre, but rather as encompassing alternative, electronica, electropop, rock, and a mixture of others. The band was originally named Hoover, but was later renamed Hooverphonic to avoid confusion with bands already using the Hoover name, and a possible legal copyright problem with the vacuum cleaner company.

Since their formation, Hooverphonic&#x27;s lineup consisted of bassist Alex Callier, guitarist Raymond Geerts, and various lead singers. Prominent ones included Liesje Sadonius (1996–1997), Geike Arnaert (1997–2008, 2020–present), Noémie Wolfs (2010–2015), and Luka Cruysberghs (2018–2020).

The band were set to represent at the Eurovision Song Contest 2020 in Rotterdam with their song &quot;Release Me&quot;. However, on March 18, 2020, the event was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. They instead represented Belgium in the Eurovision Song Contest 2021 with the song &quot;The Wrong Place&quot;.

== History ==

=== &quot;A New Stereophonic Sound Spectacular&quot; ===
The original members of the group were vocalist Esther Lybeert, keyboardist Frank Duchêne, bassist Alex Callier, and guitarist Raymond Geerts. Lybeert recorded several demos with the group; however, she backed out of the band on the day they were to sign their contract with Sony Music. The band then brought in Liesje Sadonius to record the album. Sadonius left Hooverphonic on amicable terms shortly after the release of &quot;A New Stereophonic Sound Spectacular&quot;. Kyoko Baertsoen, singer for fellow Belgian trip hop band Lunascape, filled in for Sadonius for three months of a European tour in 1997 before Geike Arnaert was made the permanent singer later that year.

The band achieved international recognition through the inclusion of the &quot;Stereophonic&quot; track &quot;2Wicky&quot; on the soundtrack to Bernardo Bertolucci&#x27;s 1996 film &quot;Stealing Beauty&quot;. &quot;2Wicky&quot; also appeared on the soundtracks of &quot;I Know What You Did Last Summer&quot; and &quot;Heights&quot;. The track&#x27;s main riff is sampled from Isaac Hayes&#x27; recording of the 1960s hit &quot;Walk On By&quot;.

Additional session musicians for &quot;Stereophonic&quot; include Eric Bosteels, a session drummer with Hooverphonic from 1997 to 1998 (replaced by Mario Goossens until 2005) and David Poltrock, a keyboard player with the group on and off from 1998 until 2005. In 1998, Hooverphonic also contributed to the Depeche Mode tribute album &quot;For the Masses&quot; with their cover of &quot;Shake the Disease&quot;.

=== &quot;Blue Wonder Power Milk&quot; ===
After an extensive European tour with artists such as Massive Attack, Morcheeba, and Apollo 440, and a tour opening for Fiona Apple in the United States in 1997, the band released &quot;Blue Wonder Power Milk&quot; in 1998 with 18-year-old Arnaert on vocals. A marked departure from their debut, the album is driven less by breakbeats and samples, and more by organic string elements and traditional song structures.

The single &quot;Club Montepulciano&quot; was a hit in native Belgium and a minor college hit in the U.S., while &quot;Renaissance Affair&quot; was featured in the North American commercial campaign for the new Volkswagen Vapor Beetle. &quot;This Strange Effect&quot; and &quot;Eden&quot; were both featured in American cell phone commercials: &quot;This Strange Effect&quot; for the Motorola SLVR, and in 2006, &quot;Eden&quot; for the Cingular 8525. &quot;Eden&quot; was also used in the 1998 slasher film &quot;I Still Know What You Did Last Summer&quot;. At the time of their release, both songs were also featured in two separate third-season episodes of &quot;La Femme Nikita&quot;. Shortly afterwards, Sarah Brightman recorded a cover of &quot;Eden&quot; on her 1998 album &quot;Eden&quot;. Yoko Kanno samples the opening track &quot;Battersea&quot; in &quot;Cyberbird&quot;, on the &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex&quot; O.S.T. 2.

At this point, Frank Duchêne decided to quit the band: &quot;Having made two successful albums for Sony Music with his band Hooverphonic, and after extensive touring as support for Fiona Apple, Moloko &amp; Massive Attack, he was unhappy with the project and near the end of 1998, decided to leave&quot;

=== Early 2000s: &quot;The Magnificent Tree&quot; ===
The band followed up &quot;Blue Wonder Power Milk&quot; with 2000&#x27;s &quot;The Magnificent Tree&quot;, which expands on the sound of &quot;Milk&quot; with a warmer, more approachable sound. Highlights from the album are the string-laden &quot;Out of Sight&quot;, &quot;Mad About You&quot;, and the title track.

The same year, Hooverphonic was asked to write a song specifically for the opening ceremony of the 2000 European Football Championship, which took place in Brussels, Belgium. The result — a 12-minute-long track called &quot;Visions,&quot; Hooverphonic&#x27;s performance at the opening ceremony was heard/seen by more than 1 billion people.

On the heels of &quot;Tree&quot;&#x27;s success, the band became the first Belgian outfit to headline the Belgian Rock Werchter musical festival in 2001.

=== 2002: &quot;Hooverphonic Presents Jackie Cane&quot; ===
2002 saw the group shifting gears again, this time releasing the concept album &quot;Hooverphonic Presents Jackie Cane&quot;. The album tells the story of the fictional title character, a celebrity and singer catapulted into stardom at the expense of her relationship with her twin sister. Driven to the brink of insanity by the pressures of fame, Jackie quits show business and returns home to attempt reconciliation, where her sister kills them both with a poisoned last supper.

&quot;Jackie Cane&quot; retains the dreamy elements of Hooverphonic&#x27;s previous works, most notably on songs &quot;Nirvana Blue&quot; and &quot;Human Interest&quot; (which contains references to &quot;Echoes&quot; by Pink Floyd), but tracks like &quot;The World Is Mine&quot; (the first single) and &quot;Day After Day&quot; have a clear Broadway influence and quality to them. The album went platinum in Belgium and won the group ZAMU’s Best Pop/Rock Band and Best Album awards in 2002.

=== 2003: &quot;Sit Down and Listen to Hooverphonic&quot; ===
In 2003, the band released an album performed live in a studio with an orchestra entitled &quot;Sit Down and Listen to Hooverphonic&quot;, featuring a selection of songs from the band’s body of work, as well as the new songs &quot;Antarctica&quot; and &quot;The Last Thing I Need Is You&quot;, and a cover of Lee Hazlewood&#x27;s &quot;My Autumn’s Done Come&quot;. The band launched into an extended European tour in September 2003, performing in over 100 concert halls.

=== 2005: &quot;No More Sweet Music&quot; ===
The band&#x27;s fifth studio album, a double CD entitled &quot;No More Sweet Music/More Sweet Music&quot;, was released in December 2005. Both CDs include the same 11 tracks, however, they are all different versions.

=== 2006: &quot;Singles &#x27;96–&#x27;06&quot; ===
In 2006 the band left Sony/BMG, complaining of lack of label support for &quot;No More Sweet Music&quot;. A greatest hits album (&quot;Singles &#x27;96–&#x27;06&quot;) was released to end the relation with Sony/BMG. The band went on to work without a label.

=== 2007–2008: &quot;The President of the LSD Golf Club&quot; ===

In an interview for the Spanish TV program &quot;Nosolomusica&quot;, Alex Callier gave some hints of a new, more psychedelic orientation for the band&#x27;s forthcoming music. During a show in Moscow (October 2007), the band revealed the first single of the new album, &quot;Expedition Impossible&quot;.

&quot;The President of the LSD Golf Club&quot; was released in October 2007 in Belgium and the Netherlands. The album was released in Europe in March 2008. Following the release, the lead singer of the band, Geike Arnaert, announced on 10 October 2008 she would be leaving the band to pursue a solo career. Arnaert had been working on solo material for a few months. The last concert Hooverphonic did with Geike was on 13 December 2008 in Tele-Club, Ekaterinburg, Russia. It was filmed by the local MTV station and was shown on Russian TV in 2009.

=== 2010s: &quot;The Night Before&quot;, &quot;With Orchestra&quot;, &quot;Reflection&quot; and &quot;In Wonderland&quot; ===
On 4 November 2010, the new lead singer Noémie Wolfs was announced on &quot;De Laatste Show&quot; at the VRT, the Flemish public broadcasting organization.

On 29 October 2010, Hooverphonic announced a new single on their website. The videoclip showcased fourteen possible singers but only one of them, Noémie Wolfs, proved to be the real successor to Geike Arnaert. The single &quot;The Night Before&quot; introduced the new singer and was followed on November 26 by the release of the full-length album &quot;The Night Before&quot;. The album went platinum in Belgium soon after its release.

On 9 November 2011 they announced the re-release of their first album, &quot;A New Stereophonic Sound Spectacular&quot;.

Three more albums were released in the following years featuring Wolfs as main vocalist: the orchestral album &quot;With Orchestra&quot; and the live album &quot;With Orchestra Live&quot; in 2012, and the studio album &quot;Reflection&quot; in 2013. &quot;With Orchestra Live&quot; features orchestral renditions of songs spanning the Hooverphonic entire career performed live at the Koningin Elisabethzaal in Antwerp. The performance was also released on DVD. In 2016, all the songs from the concert were uploaded on the band&#x27;s official YouTube channel in high definition. With more than 100 million views, the &quot;Mad About You&quot; performance is the most watched video of Hooverphonic.

On 26 March 2015, Hooverphonic announced that Wolfs would be leaving the band &quot;in mutual agreement&quot;. The band&#x27;s ninth studio album, &quot;In Wonderland&quot; (2016), featured vocals from Janie Price, Emilie Satt, Litlo Tinz, Christa Jérôme, Tjeerd Bomhof and Felix Howard. Anton Marin, of the design agency Power &amp; Glory, who had been the band&#x27;s official house illustrator and designer since their debut, released a special comic strip based on the lyrics of Hooverphonic&#x27;s hit single &quot;Badaboum&quot;. 

=== 2020s: &quot;Looking For Stars&quot;, Eurovision Song Contest and Geike Arnaert’s return ===
In April 2018, Hooverphonic introduced their new singer Luka Cruysberghs. Cruysberghs provided vocals for the band&#x27;s tenth studio album &quot;Looking For Stars&quot;, anticipated by the single &quot;Romantic&quot;.

Hooverphonic were supposed to represent at the Eurovision Song Contest 2020 in Rotterdam with their song &quot;Release Me&quot;. The event was cancelled because of the COVID-19 pandemic. Hooverphonic was the only Eurovision entrant for 2020 who refused to take part in the &quot;Love Shine a Light&quot; performance, where entrants each contributed sections of the song, although a photograph of Cruysberghs was included with the other participants making a hand heart at the end.

On 9 November 2020, Cruysberghs was fired from the band to make way for the return of Geike Arnaert. Also on the same day, they released a new version of &quot;Mad About You&quot; for the song&#x27;s 20th anniversary.

They participated at the Eurovision Song Contest 2021 with the song &quot;The Wrong Place&quot;. They finished the contest in 19th place with 74 points.

In May 2021, the band released their eleventh studio album overall and sixth to feature Arnaert as vocalist, &quot;Hidden Stories&quot;. The album featured the singles &quot;The Wrong Place&quot;, &quot;Thinking About You&quot;, &quot;Lift Me Up&quot; and &quot;Belgium In The Rain&quot;. Like &quot;The Wrong Place&quot;, the album went to #1 in the charts.

On March 21, 2024 Hooverphonic released the album &quot;Fake Is The New Dope&quot;, preceded by the singles &quot;Don&#x27;t Think&quot; (2023), &quot;Por Favor&quot; (2023), &quot;Then I Found You&quot; (2023), the title track (2024) and &quot;The Best Day Of Our Life&quot; (2024). Belgian newspaper De Standaard headlined: Hooverphonic surprises with introspective new album. It went to #4 in the album charts. The album was listed on entertainment website &quot;Culture Fix&quot; as one of their best albums of 2024, highlighting the album &quot;skilfully blends enigmatic pop hooks with trippier experimental sound.&quot;

== Band members ==

Current members
* Alex Callier — bass guitar, keyboards, programming 
* Raymond Geerts — lead guitar 
* Geike Arnaert — lead vocals 
Former members
* Esther Lybeert — lead vocals 
* Frank Duchêne — keyboards 
* Liesje Sadonius — lead vocals 
* Kyoko Baertsoen — lead vocals 
* Noémie Wolfs — lead vocals 
* Luka Cruysberghs — lead vocals 
=== Timeline ===
== Discography ==

* &quot;A New Stereophonic Sound Spectacular&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Blue Wonder Power Milk&quot; (1998)
* &quot;The Magnificent Tree&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Hooverphonic Presents Jackie Cane&quot; (2002)
* &quot;No More Sweet Music/More Sweet Music&quot; (2005)
* &quot;The President of the LSD Golf Club&quot; (2007)
* &quot;The Night Before&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Reflection&quot; (2013)
* &quot;In Wonderland&quot; (2016)
* &quot;Looking for Stars&quot; (2018)
* &quot;Hidden Stories&quot; (2021)
* &quot;Fake Is the New Dope&quot; (2024)

== Use of music in television and movies ==

Hooverphonic&#x27;s music has also appeared in a number of commercials and other TV series:
* &quot;2Wicky&quot; has appeared in numerous movies, including &quot;I Know What You Did Last Summer&quot;, &quot;Permanent Midnight&quot;, &quot;The Interview&quot;, Bernardo Bertolucci&#x27;s &quot;Stealing Beauty&quot;, as well as an episode of &quot;Entourage&quot;. &quot;2Wicky&quot; and &quot;Inhaler&quot; were also featured on episodes of &quot;&quot; and are also on the series soundtrack.
* &quot;Eden&quot; is included on the soundtrack of the film &quot;I Still Know What You Did Last Summer&quot; and in episode 10 of season three of the series &quot;La Femme Nikita&quot;.
* &quot;Renaissance Affair&quot; and &quot;This Strange Effect&quot; were used in the Belgian movie &quot;Shades&quot;, as was &quot;Shades&quot; (the theme composed for the film). Alex Callier worked as the composer for the movie. &quot;Renaissance Affair&quot; was also used in the US in a Volkswagen New Beetle TV ad circa 2000. &quot;This Strange Effect&quot; was also used in the 20th episode of &quot;La Femme Nikita&quot;.
* &quot;Battersea&quot; was used in the 1999 pilot of the NBC TV series &quot;Third Watch&quot; and in the end of the show&#x27;s last episode (&quot;Goodbye to Camelot&quot;), in 2005.
* &quot;Mad About You&quot; was used in the CBS TV series &quot;Cold Case&quot;, in the third-season episode &quot;Sanctuary&quot;. The song was also featured in the film &quot;A Lot Like Love&quot; during the New Year&#x27;s Eve sequence, in the 2002 film &quot;New Best Friend&quot;, and in &quot;Driven&quot;. Netflix also used this song in &quot;The Umbrella Academy&quot; season 1, episode 8 titled &quot;I Heard a Rumor&quot;. The song was also used as a lip sync song on season 2 of &quot;Drag Race Belgique&quot;.
* &quot;The World is Mine&quot; was featured as the theme song of the UK television series &quot;Mile High&quot; (2003–2005), which follows the lives of an airline crew at the fictional UK airline &quot;Fresh!&quot;.

== References ==
== External links ==

* Hooverphonic official site
* Alex Callier’s MySpace page
* Allmusic: Hooverphonic
* Hooverphonic’s official YouTube Channel
* Hooverphonic on Last.fm</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q952337" start="0" end="12" title="Hooverphonic" label="Hooverphonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="26" end="36" title="Electronic music" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q205560" start="110" end="118" title="trip hop" label="trip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="272" end="283" title="Alternative rock" label="alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q817138" start="285" end="296" title="electronica" label="electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q188450" start="298" end="308" title="electropop" label="electropop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="310" end="314" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q952337" start="371" end="377" title="Hooverphonic" label="Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535858" start="523" end="545" title="The Hoover Company" label="vacuum cleaner company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054289" start="619" end="631" title="Alex Callier" label="Alex Callier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238246" start="709" end="724" title="Liesje Sadonius" label="Liesje Sadonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q465958" start="738" end="751" title="Geike Arnaert" label="Geike Arnaert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979585" start="779" end="791" title="Noémie Wolfs" label="Noémie Wolfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q30973589" start="878" end="906" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2020" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="910" end="919" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q85397314" start="942" end="952" title="Release Me (Hooverphonic song)" label="Release Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q50729731" start="1082" end="1110" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2021" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q105749872" start="1131" end="1146" title="The Wrong Place" label="The Wrong Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054289" start="1326" end="1338" title="Alex Callier" label="Alex Callier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238246" start="1539" end="1554" title="Liesje Sadonius" label="Liesje Sadonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756365" start="1656" end="1692" title="A New Stereophonic Sound Spectacular" label="A New Stereophonic Sound Spectacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690739" start="1757" end="1766" title="Lunascape (Belgian band)" label="Lunascape"/>
<link wikidata="Q465958" start="1842" end="1855" title="Geike Arnaert" label="Geike Arnaert"/>
<link wikidata="Q53009" start="2048" end="2067" title="Bernardo Bertolucci" label="Bernardo Bertolucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q749191" start="2091" end="2106" title="Stealing Beauty" label="Stealing Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q302174" start="2175" end="2206" title="I Know What You Did Last Summer" label="I Know What You Did Last Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129421" start="2223" end="2230" title="Heights (film)" label="Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="2268" end="2275" title="Sampling (music)" label="sampled"/>
<link wikidata="Q206439" start="2281" end="2292" title="Isaac Hayes" label="Isaac Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047446" start="2332" end="2342" title="Walk On By (song)" label="Walk On By"/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="2658" end="2670" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636695" start="2691" end="2705" title="For the Masses" label="For the Masses"/>
<link wikidata="Q935925" start="2738" end="2755" title="Shake the Disease" label="Shake the Disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q357418" start="2861" end="2875" title="Massive Attack" label="Massive Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q749019" start="2877" end="2886" title="Morcheeba" label="Morcheeba"/>
<link wikidata="Q619067" start="2892" end="2902" title="Apollo 440" label="Apollo 440"/>
<link wikidata="Q228968" start="2927" end="2938" title="Fiona Apple" label="Fiona Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756109" start="2993" end="3015" title="Blue Wonder Power Milk" label="Blue Wonder Power Milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q622618" start="3432" end="3459" title="Volkswagen New Beetle" label="new Volkswagen Vapor Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q659467" start="3467" end="3486" title="This Strange Effect" label="This Strange Effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q290252" start="3503" end="3507" title="Eden (Hooverphonic song)" label="Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801677" start="3609" end="3622" title="Motorola SLVR L7" label="Motorola SLVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q711895" start="3662" end="3675" title="Cingular 8525" label="Cingular 8525"/>
<link wikidata="Q832363" start="3739" end="3776" title="I Still Know What You Did Last Summer" label="I Still Know What You Did Last Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869406" start="3891" end="3906" title="La Femme Nikita (TV series)" label="La Femme Nikita"/>
<link wikidata="Q151814" start="3934" end="3949" title="Sarah Brightman" label="Sarah Brightman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504237" start="4011" end="4015" title="Eden (Sarah Brightman album)" label="Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q224981" start="4023" end="4033" title="Yoko Kanno" label="Yoko Kanno"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4115" end="4175" title="Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex O.S.T. 2" label="&amp;quot;Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex&amp;quot; O.S.T. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121732" start="4372" end="4378" title="Moloko" label="Moloko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135940" start="4616" end="4636" title="The Magnificent Tree" label="The Magnificent Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3842213" start="4810" end="4823" title="Mad About You (Hooverphonic song)" label="Mad About You"/>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="4952" end="4987" title="2000 European Football Championship" label="2000 European Football Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="5009" end="5017" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547650" start="5309" end="5322" title="Rock Werchter" label="Rock Werchter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="5475" end="5488" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q965881" start="5495" end="5528" title="Hooverphonic Presents Jackie Cane" label="Hooverphonic Presents Jackie Cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q507727" start="6097" end="6103" title="Echoes (Pink Floyd song)" label="Echoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="6113" end="6123" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q965881" start="6148" end="6165" title="The World Is Mine (Hooverphonic song)" label="The World Is Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="6234" end="6242" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246462" start="6327" end="6331" title="Zamu Music Awards" label="ZAMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962316" start="6543" end="6578" title="Sit Down and Listen to Hooverphonic" label="Sit Down and Listen to Hooverphonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q364781" start="6756" end="6769" title="Lee Hazlewood" label="Lee Hazlewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3877486" start="7028" end="7064" title="No More Sweet Music" label="No More Sweet Music/More Sweet Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q723849" start="7343" end="7362" title="greatest hits album" label="greatest hits album"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961845" start="7370" end="7395" title="Singles &amp;#x27;96–&amp;#x27;06" label="Singles &amp;#x27;96–&amp;#x27;06"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420898" start="7836" end="7857" title="Expedition Impossible (song)" label="Expedition Impossible"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988818" start="7872" end="7906" title="The President of the LSD Golf Club" label="The President of the LSD Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q887" start="8316" end="8328" title="Ekaterinburg" label="Ekaterinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="8330" end="8336" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979585" start="8581" end="8593" title="Noémie Wolfs" label="Noémie Wolfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858" start="8646" end="8649" title="Vlaamse Radio- en Televisieomroep" label="VRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979585" start="8844" end="8856" title="Noémie Wolfs" label="Noémie Wolfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988497" start="9052" end="9068" title="The Night Before (Hooverphonic album)" label="The Night Before"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756365" start="9213" end="9249" title="A New Stereophonic Sound Spectacular" label="A New Stereophonic Sound Spectacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q104848215" start="9482" end="9492" title="Reflection (Hooverphonic album)" label="Reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473106" start="9642" end="9664" title="Queen Elisabeth Hall" label="Koningin Elisabethzaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="9668" end="9675" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403533" start="10231" end="10243" title="Felix Howard" label="Felix Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q30973589" start="10860" end="10888" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2020" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="10892" end="10901" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q85397314" start="10924" end="10934" title="Release Me (Hooverphonic song)" label="Release Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q86458103" start="10981" end="10998" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Europe" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086679" start="11092" end="11110" title="Love Shine a Light" label="Love Shine a Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q50729731" start="11539" end="11567" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2021" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q105749872" start="11588" end="11603" title="The Wrong Place" label="The Wrong Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054289" start="12694" end="12706" title="Alex Callier" label="Alex Callier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12748" end="12762" title="Raymond Geerts" label="Raymond Geerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q465958" start="12780" end="12793" title="Geike Arnaert" label="Geike Arnaert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238246" start="12887" end="12902" title="Liesje Sadonius" label="Liesje Sadonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979585" start="12953" end="12965" title="Noémie Wolfs" label="Noémie Wolfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756365" start="13059" end="13095" title="A New Stereophonic Sound Spectacular" label="A New Stereophonic Sound Spectacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756109" start="13117" end="13139" title="Blue Wonder Power Milk" label="Blue Wonder Power Milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135940" start="13161" end="13181" title="The Magnificent Tree" label="The Magnificent Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q965881" start="13203" end="13236" title="Hooverphonic Presents Jackie Cane" label="Hooverphonic Presents Jackie Cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3877486" start="13258" end="13294" title="No More Sweet Music" label="No More Sweet Music/More Sweet Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988818" start="13316" end="13350" title="The President of the LSD Golf Club" label="The President of the LSD Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988497" start="13372" end="13388" title="The Night Before (Hooverphonic album)" label="The Night Before"/>
<link wikidata="Q104848215" start="13410" end="13420" title="Reflection (Hooverphonic album)" label="Reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q302174" start="13794" end="13825" title="I Know What You Did Last Summer" label="I Know What You Did Last Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q920982" start="13839" end="13857" title="Permanent Midnight" label="Permanent Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q15524911" start="13871" end="13884" title="The Interview" label="The Interview"/>
<link wikidata="Q53009" start="13892" end="13911" title="Bernardo Bertolucci" label="Bernardo Bertolucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q749191" start="13925" end="13940" title="Stealing Beauty" label="Stealing Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q253205" start="13979" end="13988" title="Entourage (U.S. TV series)" label="Entourage"/>
<link wikidata="Q832363" start="14192" end="14229" title="I Still Know What You Did Last Summer" label="I Still Know What You Did Last Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869406" start="14290" end="14305" title="La Femme Nikita (TV series)" label="La Femme Nikita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106125" start="14419" end="14425" title="Shades (film)" label="Shades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054289" start="14494" end="14506" title="Alex Callier" label="Alex Callier"/>
<link wikidata="Q653916" start="14788" end="14793" title="television pilot" label="pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="14801" end="14804" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q927245" start="14821" end="14832" title="Third Watch" label="Third Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q440918" start="14893" end="14911" title="Goodbye to Camelot (Third Watch)" label="Goodbye to Camelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q733960" start="14993" end="15002" title="Cold Case (TV series)" label="Cold Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q75546" start="15106" end="15121" title="A Lot Like Love" label="A Lot Like Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005527" start="15192" end="15207" title="New Best Friend" label="New Best Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259419" start="15228" end="15234" title="Driven (2001 film)" label="Driven"/>
<link wikidata="Q44535025" start="15273" end="15305" title="The Umbrella Academy (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Umbrella Academy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q124296301" start="15407" end="15415" title="Drag Race Belgique (season 2)" label="season 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q112967616" start="15425" end="15443" title="Drag Race Belgique" label="Drag Race Belgique"/>
<link wikidata="Q574166" start="15548" end="15557" title="Mile High" label="Mile High"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="274989" wikidata="Q749019" url="?curid=274989" title="Morcheeba">
<text>Morcheeba are an English electronic band formed in the mid-1990s with founding members vocalist Skye Edwards and the brothers Paul and Ross Godfrey. They mix influences from trip hop, rock, folk rock and downtempo, and have produced ten regular studio albums since 1995, two of which reached the UK top ten. Edwards left the band in 2003, after which the brothers used a number of singers before she rejoined in 2009. They recruit additional members for their live performances and have toured internationally. In 2014 Paul Godfrey resigned from the band. Edwards and Ross Godfrey later formed Skye &amp; Ross and released a self-titled album in September 2016. Their latest studio album as Morcheeba, &quot;Blackest Blue&quot;, was released in May 2021 and was preceded by singles &quot;Sounds of Blue&quot;, &quot;Oh Oh Yeah&quot; and &quot;The Moon&quot;. It features collaborations with Brad Barr from The Barr Brothers, and Duke Garwood, whom Edwards described as &quot;a diamond geezer&quot;.

==Biography==
===1995–2001: Beginnings and mainstream success===
Originally from the small village of Saltwood, just north of Hythe, Kent, the Godfrey brothers—DJ/producer/engineer Paul and multi-instrumentalist Ross—moved to London when they were gaining traction from A&amp;R people. Sometime in the mid 1990s, at a party in Greenwich, the brothers met Skye Edwards, who was singing backup in a funk band, and also played guitar; before too long the three began recording songs together, and formed the trio Morcheeba. At first Paul produced tracks at their home studio in his bedroom, with engineer Pete Norris helping with the wiring.

They were eventually signed to China Records by Angus Blair (A&amp;R) and the band released their debut &quot;Trigger Hippie&quot; EP in October 1995. At the same time, Paul Ablett came on board temporarily as the second manager. The band&#x27;s debut album, &quot;Who Can You Trust?&quot;, was released in April 1996 and fitted snugly into the trip hop genre through a combination of Paul Godfrey&#x27;s hip hop roots, Ross Godfrey&#x27;s psychedelic rock influences and Edwards&#x27; soul-styled vocals. A second single, &quot;Tape Loop&quot;, appeared in July 1996 and was a hit on BBC Radio 1 and TV. The band began to play live non-stop in Europe and North America, with a live band that included five additional members. At this point, the band had outgrown the home recording set-up and the brothers were renting their own studio in Battersea as Paul was heavily influenced by the Beastie Boys and wanted total creative freedom, having engineered many different styles in Kent before starting the project and being a sample seeker he felt he knew the versatile way to keep albums interesting. In 1997, After a mind blowing phone call Paul had with a family hero they contributed to the David Byrne album &quot;Feelings&quot;, participating in the recording and production of the release when they weren&#x27;t on the road. 

With a more high end analogue recording set-up, and the fact the brothers had written most of &quot;Big Calm&quot; in an evening in 1995 before the release of their debut, they began developing their ideas for the second album, with Norris involved again, the band moved towards a more varied sound with Ross&#x27; skills and collaborators brought in by Paul. At the same time, Edwards appeared on the BBC charity single &quot;Perfect Day&quot;. The follow-up, 1998&#x27;s &quot;Big Calm&quot;, drifted slighty away from trip hop incorporating a more Californian, folk song-based sound. One of the album&#x27;s singles, &quot;The Sea&quot;, became a radio favourite. The album proved to be a big seller and ensured Morcheeba as an influential act of the zeitgeist. In 1998, Morcheeba collaborated with Hubert Laws to record the classic song &quot;Summer Time&quot; for the Red Hot Organization&#x27;s compilation album &quot;Red Hot + Rhapsody&quot;, a tribute to George Gershwin, which raised money for various charities devoted to increasing AIDS awareness and fighting the disease.

In 2000, Morcheeba released their third album, &quot;Fragments of Freedom&quot;. This repeated the sales of &quot;Big Calm&quot; but being too far ahead of the nu disco trend it received a less positive critical response. Despite achieving success in Europe including their home country of the U.K. the band didn&#x27;t find as much in the United States. Although &quot;Fragments of Freedom&quot; was high charting in several European countries, some of the fans felt disappointed but the band&#x27;s fourth album, &quot;Charango&quot;, released in 2002 saw a return to their roots. The singles &quot;Otherwise&quot; and &quot;Way Beyond&quot; followed. The lyrics for &quot;Undress Me Now&quot; and appearance on &quot;What New York Couples Fight About&quot; were written with Lambchop&#x27;s Kurt Wagner, other collaborators on the album were with rappers Pace Won and Old School Legend Slick Rick. In January 2003, the band undertook their first significant tour of the World since 1998. In 2001, the Godfrey brothers contributed three songs to the Jim White album &quot;No Such Place&quot;.

===2003–2008: Split and &quot;Dive Deep&quot;===
By the end of 2003, the Godfrey brothers split with Edwards, citing creative and personal differences. Edwards received &quot;a phone call from our manager saying that it was over. It was a relief to think we didn&#x27;t have to continue&quot;. She was under the impression that the band had ceased to operate. A greatest hits compilation, &quot;Parts of the Process&quot;, helped to retain interest in the band and featured two new tracks: &quot;What&#x27;s Your Name&quot; (featuring a rhyming cameo from Big Daddy Kane) and &quot;Can&#x27;t Stand It&quot;. At around the same time, they released the live DVD &quot;Morcheeba: From Brixton to Beijing&quot;. A decade later, Ross Godfrey reflected on this period, saying: &quot;We just felt like we couldn&#x27;t breathe, I&#x27;d been in the band and on the road since I was 18, so to have any kind of break from that was just amazing&quot;.

The two brothers reunited the year after, leaving Paul to explain that &quot;Ross and I realised that Morcheeba was kind of our family company, and that we wanted very much to keep it going, hence the change&quot;. In 2005, Morcheeba released their fifth studio (and first post-Edwards) album, &quot;The Antidote&quot;. Daisy Martey (formerly of the band Noonday Underground) was recruited to replace Edwards as the album vocalist. However, Martey&#x27;s period with the band was brief and she was sacked in the middle of the promotional tour, to be replaced by Jody Sternberg. Martey subsequently sued the band for breach of contract and defamation. Sternberg&#x27;s own tenure with the band was similarly brief, and she only appeared to have been part of the band to fulfil tour dates. According to Ross, the entire episode &quot;was difficult to say the least. It left us in near-ruin&quot;.

After a break of several years, Morcheeba released their sixth studio album, &quot;Dive Deep&quot;, in February 2008. On this album, Paul Godfrey fell back into his role as producer collaborating with Dan Goldman on most tracks (as Ross had moved to L.A.) and selecting five vocalists to perform the songs. The folk-rock singer Judie Tzuke, Norwegian star Thomas Dybdahl and blues singer/guitarist Bradley Burgess appeared as lead vocalists together with the Korean-American rapper Cool Calm Pete and French singer Manda (Amanda Zamolo). Both Manda and Burgess toured with Morcheeba as lead singers on their 2008 tour.

===2009–2013: Reunion, &quot;Blood Like Lemonade&quot; and &quot;Head Up High&quot;===
As a solo artist, Edwards remained with the same management company as Morcheeba—Chris Morrison the CM of CMO Management represented both artists—which led to a chance meeting in their London offices sometime in 2009. Edwards and the Godfrey brothers met again to discuss her possible involvement in a new project. Initially the singer was hesitant and pointed out that she &quot;really enjoyed doing my solo stuff and writing my own lyrics&quot;. Eventually, Edwards rejoined the band and the trio began work on a new album, with Edwards still on tour promoting her solo album, Ross Godfrey living in California and Paul Godfrey in France. On 12 February 2010, &quot;NME&quot; revealed that Edwards was once again back with the band, which was confirmed by Paul Godfrey the day after on the band&#x27;s Myspace blog. Edwards made her live return with the band at the Caprices Festival, Switzerland on 9 April 2010. Edwards&#x27; role in the band changed, as she had &quot;become more confident&quot; in her &quot;ability as a singer and a songwriter&quot;, and found that during the recording process they were &quot;more honest with each other&quot;, and thus they produced &quot;a more honest record&quot;.

Morcheeba released their seventh album, &quot;Blood Like Lemonade&quot;, on PIAS in June 2010, preceded by the single &quot;Even Though&quot;. It was produced and Mastered by Paul Godfrey, who described the album as &quot;a warm, fuzzy blanket of psychedelia&quot;, while Edwards described the lyrics as &quot;having dark themes&quot;. She also remarked on how the brothers had made her part of the creative process again. An eighteen-month tour followed that saw the band play around the Americas and Europe.

Their eighth album, &quot;Head Up High&quot;, was released on 14 October 2013, again on PIAS. In 2014, the band toured Australia, with a line-up consisting of Skye Edwards (vocals), Ross Godfrey (guitars), Steve Gordon (bass), Richard Milner (keyboards), Martin Carling (drums) and James Anthony (decks).

===2014–2016: Departure of Paul Godfrey and &quot;Skye &amp; Ross&quot; release===
In 2014, Paul Godfrey was &quot;bored of reinventing the wheel and didn&#x27;t enjoy touring&quot; so instead of leading, he left the band. Ross Godfrey later explained that: &quot;Paul and I had not been getting on musically, or personally and after the &quot;Head Up High&quot; album in 2013, Paul told us he was leaving the band. Skye and I thought it best to just release the record we had made under our own names. There will be no more Morcheeba albums&quot;. Paul Godfrey has since established a recording studio, Sacrosync Sound, in St Leonards near Hastings and recorded a new album &quot;Cool Your Soul&quot; with Rachel Cuming the singer that had attracted the record companies on early demos under the moniker Morcheeba Productions.

Ross Godfrey and Skye Edwards announced a new project in 2016 named Skye &amp; Ross. They have toured, and released an eponymous album on 2 September 2016. The band started as an acoustic duo but soon included Edwards&#x27; son Jaega (drums), her husband Steve Gordon (bass) and Godfrey&#x27;s wife Amanda Zamolo (backing vocals). Edwards took responsibility for the lyrics while Ross Godfrey noted that the recording process was &quot;a very organic experience&quot;.

===2018–2022: &quot;Blaze Away&quot; and &quot;Blackest Blue&quot; ===
&quot;Blaze Away&quot;, Morcheeba&#x27;s ninth album, was released on 1 June 2018. The album featured the singles &quot;Never Undo&quot;, &quot;Blaze Away&quot; and &quot;It&#x27;s Summertime&quot;. On 14 May 2021, Morcheeba released their tenth album, &quot;Blackest Blue&quot;. It features collaborations with Duke Garwood and Brad Barr and was preceded by singles &quot;Sounds of Blue&quot;, &quot;Oh Oh Yeah&quot; and &quot;The Moon&quot;. &quot;Blackest Blue&quot; did not enter the Official Albums UK Top 100 Chart, but peaked at number 14 on the Official Album Downloads Chart Top 100.

===2023-present: &quot;Escape the Chaos&quot;===
Skye Edwards revealed in a June 2023 interview that the band had begun working on their eleventh album with ten tracks in the demo phase.

From June to October 2024 the band licensed the name from Paul and toured European festivals, including the 2024 Meltdown at London&#x27;s South Bank Centre curated by Chaka Khan.

In January 2025, the band released the single &quot;Call for Love&quot;, which is the lead single from their forthcoming studio album, &quot;Escape the Chaos&quot;, expected in May 2025. A second single, &quot;We Live and Die&quot;, was released on 28 February 2025.

==Band name==
The name &quot;Morcheeba&quot; comes from the initials &quot;MOR&quot; (indicating Middle of the Road) as a joke and needing more &quot;cheeba&quot;, a slang term used by Paul&#x27;s hero Schoolly D for cannabis.

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
===Charted compilation albums and others===
===Singles===
==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q749019" start="0" end="9" title="Morcheeba" label="Morcheeba"/>
<link wikidata="Q448268" start="96" end="108" title="Skye Edwards" label="Skye Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q205560" start="174" end="182" title="trip hop" label="trip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="184" end="188" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q186472" start="190" end="199" title="folk rock" label="folk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q251192" start="204" end="213" title="downtempo" label="downtempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q749019" start="594" end="609" title="Morcheeba" label="Skye &amp;amp; Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953791" start="891" end="900" title="Brad Barr" label="Brad Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715688" start="906" end="923" title="The Barr Brothers" label="The Barr Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312785" start="929" end="941" title="Duke Garwood" label="Duke Garwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621103" start="1102" end="1110" title="Saltwood" label="Saltwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q967166" start="1126" end="1137" title="Hythe, Kent" label="Hythe, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="1160" end="1162" title="DJ" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="1163" end="1180" title="record producer" label="producer/engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327329" start="1190" end="1211" title="multi-instrumentalist" label="multi-instrumentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179385" start="1327" end="1336" title="Greenwich" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073478" start="1671" end="1684" title="China Records" label="China Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q925475" start="1905" end="1923" title="Who Can You Trust? (album)" label="Who Can You Trust?"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="2045" end="2052" title="hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="2080" end="2096" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q336640" start="2833" end="2844" title="David Byrne" label="David Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q390333" start="2851" end="2871" title="Feelings (David Byrne album)" label="&amp;quot;Feelings&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="3374" end="3377" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463270" start="3399" end="3410" title="Perfect Day (Lou Reed song)" label="Perfect Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q794700" start="3451" end="3459" title="Big Calm" label="Big Calm"/>
<link wikidata="Q721330" start="3774" end="3785" title="Hubert Laws" label="Hubert Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q748704" start="3845" end="3865" title="Red Hot Organization" label="Red Hot Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304337" start="3897" end="3915" title="Red Hot + Rhapsody" label="Red Hot + Rhapsody"/>
<link wikidata="Q123829" start="3936" end="3951" title="George Gershwin" label="George Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="4016" end="4020" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q897852" start="4111" end="4131" title="Fragments of Freedom" label="Fragments of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q900143" start="4579" end="4587" title="Charango (album)" label="Charango"/>
<link wikidata="Q374679" start="4836" end="4844" title="Lambchop (band)" label="Lambchop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6447112" start="4852" end="4863" title="Kurt Wagner (musician)" label="Kurt Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q708620" start="4940" end="4957" title="Slick Rick" label="Legend Slick Rick"/>
<link wikidata="Q323547" start="5110" end="5119" title="Jim White (guitarist)" label="Jim White"/>
<link wikidata="Q723849" start="5516" end="5529" title="greatest hits" label="greatest hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="5530" end="5541" title="compilation album" label="compilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q718843" start="5549" end="5569" title="Parts of the Process" label="Parts of the Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q535972" start="5710" end="5724" title="Big Daddy Kane" label="Big Daddy Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934622" start="6398" end="6410" title="The Antidote (Morcheeba album)" label="The Antidote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012202" start="6418" end="6430" title="Daisy Martey" label="Daisy Martey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049760" start="6453" end="6472" title="Noonday Underground" label="Noonday Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023581" start="7077" end="7086" title="Dive Deep" label="Dive Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q463246" start="7322" end="7333" title="Judie Tzuke" label="Judie Tzuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350475" start="7350" end="7364" title="Thomas Dybdahl" label="Thomas Dybdahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167270" start="7476" end="7490" title="Cool Calm Pete" label="Cool Calm Pete"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="8369" end="8372" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q40629" start="8505" end="8512" title="Myspace" label="Myspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006407" start="8958" end="8977" title="Blood Like Lemonade" label="Blood Like Lemonade"/>
<link wikidata="Q14927587" start="9449" end="9461" title="Head Up High (Morcheeba album)" label="Head Up High"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312785" start="11411" end="11423" title="Duke Garwood" label="Duke Garwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953791" start="11428" end="11437" title="Brad Barr" label="Brad Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q919794" start="11994" end="12002" title="Meltdown (festival)" label="Meltdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339207" start="12020" end="12037" title="South Bank Centre" label="South Bank Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q229498" start="12049" end="12059" title="Chaka Khan" label="Chaka Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328660" start="12427" end="12445" title="Middle of the road (music)" label="Middle of the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395950" start="12532" end="12542" title="Schoolly D" label="Schoolly D"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="12547" end="12555" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="274994" wikidata="Q272384" url="?curid=274994" title="John Thurso">
<text>John Archibald Sinclair, 3rd Viscount Thurso (born 10 September 1953), known also as John Thurso, is a Scottish businessman, Liberal Democrat politician and hereditary peer who is notable for having served in the House of Lords both before and after a period in the House of Commons. 

Born to the Sinclair family, Lord Thurso was educated at Eton College before entering management roles in the tourism and hospitality industry. He first joined Parliament in the House of Lords as a hereditary peer in 1995 and served until 1999, when he was among the majority of hereditary peers who were removed from Parliament following the House of Lords Act 1999.

Thurso was elected Member of Parliament (MP) for Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross at the 2001 general election, becoming the fifth generation of the Sinclair family to represent the Caithness area in the House of Commons. He held the seat until he was defeated at the 2015 general election by the Scottish National Party (SNP) candidate, Paul Monaghan. During his time serving in the Commons, Lord Thurso was chair of the Finance and Services Committee from 2010 to 2015. In 2016, Thurso returned to the House of Lords after winning a by-election to fill a vacancy among the remaining Liberal Democrat hereditary peers. He became chair of VisitScotland in 2016 and later became Lord Lieutenant of Caithness in 2017.

==Education and early career==

Thurso was born as John Archibald Sinclair to the high-profile Sinclair family and was educated in the Scottish town of Thurso and then at Eton College. He joined the Savoy Group as a management trainee in 1972, and worked for many years in the tourism and hospitality industry. He was a manager at the Lancaster Hotel in Paris (1981–1985) and founded the hotel at Cliveden (1985–1992) before becoming CEO of Granfel Holdings, owners of East Sussex National Golf Course (1992–1995). From 1995 until his election to Parliament in 2001, he was CEO of the Champneys Group. During his time in this job he featured in the TV documentary &quot;Trouble at the Top – Shape up with Lord Thurso&quot;.
==Initial period in the House of Lords==
Following his father&#x27;s death in 1995, he took his seat in the House of Lords as the 3rd Viscount Thurso, where he became spokesman on tourism and later on food matters. Thurso spoke many times in the House of Lords in favour of Lords reform. His automatic right as a hereditary peer to sit in the House of Lords was abolished in 1999, and he did not attempt to remain in that capacity.

==House of Commons==
At the 2001 general election, he was elected to the House of Commons as the MP for Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross.

He served as Liberal Democrat Scotland spokesperson under Charles Kennedy, but was sacked by Sir Menzies Campbell. He has publicly gone against party policy by declaring his support for nuclear power, and by his criticism of 24-hour drinking and wind power.

Lord Thurso was sworn of the Privy Council in 2014. He lost his Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross seat at the 2015 general election to Paul Monaghan of the Scottish National Party (SNP). However, Lord Thurso had a good result in comparison with many Liberal Democrat candidates. Only four Scottish Liberal Democrat candidates were closer to winning their seats, including Alistair Carmichael, who was the only Liberal Democrat candidate in Scotland to retain his seat at that year&#x27;s general election.

== Return to the House of Lords and later career ==
Following the 2015 general election, Thurso became a board member of the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority. In April 2016, he won a by-election to fill a vacancy in the House of Lords following the death of Lord Avebury. He won the support of all of the three members who were eligible to vote. In 2017, Thurso was appointed as Lord Lieutenant of Caithness.

Thurso holds the presidencies of The Tourism Society and the Academy of Food and Wine Service. He is a fellow of the Confederation of Tourism and Hospitality (HCIMA) (FIH) and served as its Patron for six years, until June 2003. He was President of the British International Spa Association. On 7 March 2016, it was announced that Lord Thurso would become the chair of VisitScotland.

== Personal life ==
Thurso comes from a family of Liberal parliamentarians. The former constituency of Caithness and Sutherland had been held by his grandfather, Archibald Sinclair, from 1922 until 1945. Archibald Sinclair was the 1st Viscount Thurso and a Liberal Party leader. Thurso has been married to Marion for 26 years and they have a daughter and two sons. The family live at Thurso, Caithness.

As a patron of the Bluebell Railway 50th Anniversary Appeal, on 24 April 2009, at the railway&#x27;s Horsted Keynes station Thurso carried out the ceremonial renaming of the Battle of Britain class locomotive named after his grandfather, Sir Archibald Sinclair, Secretary of State for Air during that battle.

==Arms==
==See also==
*Liberal Democrat Frontbench Team
*Clan Sinclair

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*John Thurso MP official site
*Profile at the Liberal Democrats
*Profile at the Scottish Liberal Democrats


|-


|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q272384" start="0" end="44" title="John Thurso" label="John Archibald Sinclair, 3rd Viscount Thurso"/>
<link wikidata="Q272384" start="85" end="96" title="John Thurso" label="John Thurso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250438" start="125" end="141" title="Scottish Liberal Democrats" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q808719" start="157" end="172" title="hereditary peer" label="hereditary peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="213" end="227" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="266" end="282" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975370" start="298" end="313" title="Sinclair family" label="Sinclair family"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="343" end="355" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="446" end="456" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q808719" start="484" end="499" title="hereditary peer" label="hereditary peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q120826" start="629" end="652" title="House of Lords Act 1999" label="House of Lords Act 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="674" end="694" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238840" start="704" end="741" title="Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q864668" start="842" end="851" title="Caithness" label="Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="928" end="949" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="957" end="980" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059607" start="998" end="1011" title="Paul Monaghan (politician)" label="Paul Monaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q104900406" start="1082" end="1112" title="Finance and Services Committee" label="Finance and Services Committee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1235" end="1278" title="List of excepted hereditary peers#Elected by the Liberal Democrats hereditary peers" label="remaining Liberal Democrat hereditary peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936279" start="1299" end="1312" title="VisitScotland" label="VisitScotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679531" start="1338" end="1366" title="Lord Lieutenant of Caithness" label="Lord Lieutenant of Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975370" start="1472" end="1487" title="Sinclair family" label="Sinclair family"/>
<link wikidata="Q526576" start="1529" end="1535" title="Thurso" label="Thurso"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="1548" end="1560" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464716" start="1774" end="1782" title="Cliveden" label="Cliveden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070199" start="1962" end="1971" title="Champneys" label="Champneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846448" start="2047" end="2093" title="Trouble at the Top" label="Trouble at the Top – Shape up with Lord Thurso"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="2209" end="2223" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307434" start="2375" end="2387" title="Lords reform" label="Lords reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q808719" start="2414" end="2429" title="hereditary peer" label="hereditary peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="2562" end="2583" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238840" start="2638" end="2675" title="Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q332950" start="2736" end="2751" title="Charles Kennedy" label="Charles Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q248021" start="2771" end="2791" title="Sir Menzies Campbell" label="Sir Menzies Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="2864" end="2877" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543067" start="2903" end="2919" title="Licensing Act 2003" label="24-hour drinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="2924" end="2934" title="wind power" label="wind power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="2966" end="2979" title="Privy Council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238840" start="3001" end="3038" title="Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="3051" end="3072" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059607" start="3076" end="3089" title="Paul Monaghan (politician)" label="Paul Monaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="3097" end="3120" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="3191" end="3207" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q269124" start="3313" end="3332" title="Alistair Carmichael" label="Alistair Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050931" start="3400" end="3408" title="Orkney and Shetland (UK Parliament constituency)" label="his seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848097" start="3573" end="3618" title="Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority" label="Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003750" start="3644" end="3655" title="By-elections to the House of Lords" label="by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q337106" start="3719" end="3731" title="Eric Lubbock, 4th Baron Avebury" label="Lord Avebury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679531" start="3840" end="3868" title="Lord Lieutenant of Caithness" label="Lord Lieutenant of Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="3974" end="3980" title="fellow" label="fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159842" start="3988" end="4028" title="Confederation of Tourism and Hospitality" label="Confederation of Tourism and Hospitality"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="4061" end="4067" title="Patron" label="Patron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936279" start="4240" end="4253" title="VisitScotland" label="VisitScotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017872" start="4359" end="4383" title="Caithness and Sutherland (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Caithness and Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786520" start="4418" end="4436" title="Archibald Sinclair, 1st Viscount Thurso" label="Archibald Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q9372491" start="4491" end="4506" title="Viscount Thurso" label="Viscount Thurso"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="4513" end="4526" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187487" start="4679" end="4695" title="Bluebell Railway" label="Bluebell Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q15225335" start="4761" end="4783" title="Horsted Keynes railway station" label="Horsted Keynes station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869272" start="4834" end="4857" title="SR West Country and Battle of Britain classes" label="Battle of Britain class"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786520" start="4898" end="4920" title="Sir Archibald Sinclair" label="Sir Archibald Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477296" start="4922" end="4948" title="Secretary of State for Air" label="Secretary of State for Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540616" start="4993" end="5025" title="Liberal Democrat Frontbench Team" label="Liberal Democrat Frontbench Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975370" start="5027" end="5040" title="Clan Sinclair" label="Clan Sinclair"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="274999" wikidata="Q4858532" url="?curid=274999" title="Barb">
<text>Barb or the BARBs or &quot;variation&quot; may refer to:
==People==
* Barb (name), a list of people and fictional characters with the given name or surname
* Barb, a term used by fans of Nicki Minaj to refer to themselves
* The Barbs, a band

==Places==
* Barb, Ontario, Canada
* DeKalb, Illinois, USA; nicknamed &quot;Barb City&quot;

==Animals==
* Barb (feather), the branches issuing from the rachis of feathers
* Barb (fish), common name for a range of freshwater fish
* Barb horse, a breed from North Africa
* Barb (pigeon), a breed of domestic pigeon
* Australian Kelpie or barb, a breed of dog 
* The Barb (1863–1888), Australian Thoroughbred racehorse

==Implements==
* Barding or barb, a type of armor for horses
* A backward-facing point on a fish hook or similar implement, rendering extraction from the victim&#x27;s flesh more difficult
* A type of pipe fitting called barb, used to connect hosing (the ridges face backward, making insertion easy and removal difficult)
* Barb, a shortened version of barbiturate, a drug that acts as a depressant for the central nervous system

==Other uses==
* , two US Navy submarines
* Wind barbs for each station on a map of reported weather conditions
* Broadcasters&#x27; Audience Research Board, which compiles television ratings in the United Kingdom
* &quot;Berkeley Barb&quot; or &quot;The Barb&quot;, an underground newspaper of the late 1960s

==See also==
* Barb wire (disambiguation)
* Barbes (disambiguation)
* Barbe (disambiguation)
* Sainte-Barbe (disambiguation)
* Barbara (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4858532" start="0" end="4" title="Barb" label="Barb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858532" start="8" end="17" title="Barb" label="the BARBs"/>
<link wikidata="Q20898950" start="70" end="81" title="Barb (name)" label="Barb (name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q162202" start="187" end="198" title="Nicki Minaj" label="Nicki Minaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238957" start="224" end="233" title="The Barbs" label="The Barbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128766" start="256" end="269" title="Barb, Ontario" label="Barb, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q580478" start="280" end="296" title="DeKalb, Illinois" label="DeKalb, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="350" end="364" title="Barb (feather)" label="Barb (feather)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423230" start="417" end="428" title="Barb (fish)" label="Barb (fish)"/>
<link wikidata="Q251505" start="475" end="485" title="Barb horse" label="Barb horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896571" start="515" end="528" title="Barb (pigeon)" label="Barb (pigeon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q37520" start="559" end="576" title="Australian Kelpie" label="Australian Kelpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715591" start="604" end="612" title="The Barb" label="The Barb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377950" start="678" end="685" title="Barding" label="Barding"/>
<link wikidata="Q205276" start="753" end="762" title="fish hook" label="fish hook"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="882" end="886" title="Piping_and_plumbing_fittings#Barb" label="barb"/>
<link wikidata="Q206348" start="1014" end="1025" title="barbiturate" label="barbiturate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338549" start="1136" end="1145" title="Wind barb" label="Wind barb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972121" start="1206" end="1248" title="Broadcasters&amp;#x27; Audience Research Board" label="Broadcasters&amp;#x27; Audience Research Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891985" start="1314" end="1327" title="Berkeley Barb" label="Berkeley Barb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944713" start="1418" end="1444" title="Barb wire (disambiguation)" label="Barb wire (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q355413" start="1447" end="1470" title="Barbes (disambiguation)" label="Barbes (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q807783" start="1473" end="1495" title="Barbe (disambiguation)" label="Barbe (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q256612" start="1498" end="1527" title="Sainte-Barbe (disambiguation)" label="Sainte-Barbe (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q225874" start="1530" end="1554" title="Barbara (disambiguation)" label="Barbara (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="275002" wikidata="Q231360" url="?curid=275002" title="Gertrude Bell">
<text>Gertrude Margaret Lowthian Bell (14 July 1868 – 12 July 1926) was an English writer, traveller, political officer, administrator, and archaeologist. She spent much of her life exploring and mapping the Middle East, and became highly influential to British imperial policy-making as an Arabist due to her knowledge and contacts built up through extensive travels. During her lifetime, she was highly esteemed and trusted by British officials such as High Commissioner for Mesopotamia Percy Cox, giving her great influence. She participated in both the 1919 Paris Peace Conference (briefly) and the 1921 Cairo Conference, which helped decide the territorial boundaries and governments of the post-War Middle East as part of the partition of the Ottoman Empire. Bell believed that the momentum of Arab nationalism was unstoppable, and that the British government should ally with nationalists rather than stand against them. Along with T. E. Lawrence, she advocated for independent Arab states in the Middle East following the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, and supported the installation of Hashemite monarchies in what is today Jordan and Iraq.

Bell was raised in a privileged environment that allowed her an education at Oxford University, to travel the world, and to make the acquaintance of people who would become influential policy-makers later. In her travels, she became an accomplished mountain climber and equestrian. She expressed great affection for the Middle East, visiting Qajar Iran, Syria-Palestine, Mesopotamia, Asia Minor, and Arabia. She participated in archaeological digs during a time period of great ferment and new discoveries, and personally funded a dig at Binbirkilise in Asia Minor. She travelled through the Ha&#x27;il region in the northern part of the Arabian Peninsula during an extensive trip in 1913–1914, and was one of very few Westerners to have seen the area at the time. The outbreak of World War I in August 1914, and the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s entry into the war a few months later on the side of Germany, upended the status quo in the Middle East. She briefly joined the Arab Bureau in Cairo, where she worked with T. E. Lawrence. At the request of family friend Lord Hardinge, Viceroy of India, she joined the British administration in Ottoman Mesopotamia in 1917, where she served as a political officer and as the Oriental Secretary to three High Commissioners: the only woman in such high-ranking civil roles in the British Empire. Bell also supported the cause of the largely urban Sunni population in their attempts to modernise Iraq.

She spent much of the rest of her life in Baghdad and was a key player in the nation-building of what would eventually become the Kingdom of Iraq. She met and befriended a large number of Iraqis in both the cities and the countryside, and was a confidante and ally of Iraq&#x27;s new King Faisal. Toward the end of her life, she was sidelined from Iraqi politics. Perhaps seeing that she still needed something to occupy her, Faisal appointed her the Honorary Director of Antiquities of Iraq, where she returned to her original love of archaeology. In that role, she helped modernize procedures and catalogue findings, all of which helped prevent unauthorized looting of artifacts. She supported education for Iraqi women, served as president of the Baghdad library (the future Iraq National Library), and founded the Iraq Museum as a place to display the country&#x27;s archaeological treasures. She died in 1926 of an overdose of sleeping pills in what was possibly a suicide, although she was in ill health regardless.

Bell wrote extensively. She translated a book of Persian poetry; published multiple books describing her travels, adventures, and excavations; and sent a steady stream of letters back to England during World War I that influenced government thinking in an era when few English people were familiar with the contemporary Middle East.

==Early life==
Gertrude Bell was born on 14 July 1868 in Washington New Hall—now known as Dame Margaret Hall—in Washington, County Durham, England. Her family was wealthy, which enabled both her higher education and her travels. Her grandfather was the ironmaster Sir Isaac Lowthian Bell, an industrialist and a Liberal Member of Parliament between 1875 and 1880. Mary ( Shield) Bell, the daughter of John Shield of Newcastle-on-Tyne and Gertrude&#x27;s mother, died in 1871 while giving birth to a son, Maurice Bell (later the 3rd Baronet). Gertrude Bell was just three at the time, and the death led to a lifelong close relationship with her father, Sir Hugh Bell, 2nd Baronet, a progressive capitalist and mill owner who made sure his workers were well paid. Throughout her life, Gertrude consulted on matters great and small with her father, her personal role model. In particular, Hugh shared his knowledge of government and access to highly placed officials with Gertrude.

When Gertrude was seven years old, her father remarried, providing her a stepmother, Florence Bell (née Olliffe), and eventually, three half-siblings. Florence Bell was a playwright and author of children&#x27;s stories, as well as the author of a study of Bell factory workers. She instilled concepts of duty and decorum in Gertrude. She also recognized her intelligence and contributed to her intellectual development by ensuring she received an excellent schooling. Florence Bell&#x27;s activities with the wives of Bolckow Vaughan ironworkers in Eston, near Middlesbrough, may have helped influence her step-daughter&#x27;s later promotion of education for Iraqi women. Some biographies suggest the loss of her mother Mary caused underlying childhood trauma, revealed through periods of depression and risky behaviour. While this loss surely marked her, Gertrude and Florence had a positive and lifelong relationship.

From 1883 to 1886, Gertrude Bell attended Queen&#x27;s College in London, a prestigious school for girls. At the age of 17, she then studied at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford University. History was one of the few subjects women were allowed to study, due to the many restrictions imposed on them at the time. She specialised in modern history, and she was the first woman to graduate in Modern History at Oxford with a first class honours degree, a feat she achieved in only two years. Eleven people graduated that year. Nine were recorded because they were men, and the other two were Bell and Alice Greenwood. However, the two women were not awarded degrees. It was not until decades later that Oxford treated women equally with men in this respect, retroactively awarding degrees to Bell and others in 1920.

==Personal life==
Bell never married or had children. After graduating from Oxford, she spent two and a half years, from 1890 to 1892, attending the London social rounds of balls and banquets where eligible young men and women paired off, but failed to find a match. After arriving in Persia in 1892, she courted Henry Cadogan, a mid-ranking British diplomat in Tehran, but was refused permission to marry him after her father discovered that Cadogan was deeply in debt and not her social equal. Cadogan died in 1893; Bell received the news via telegram. She befriended British colonial administrator Sir Frank Swettenham on a visit to Singapore with her brother Hugo in 1903 and maintained a correspondence with him until 1909. She had a &quot;brief but passionate affair&quot; with Swettenham following his retirement to England in 1904. She had an unconsummated affair with Major Charles Doughty-Wylie, a married man, with whom she exchanged love letters from 1913 to 1915. Doughty-Wylie died in April 1915 during the Gallipoli Campaign, a loss which devastated Bell.

==Travels and writings==
Bell&#x27;s uncle, Sir Frank Lascelles, was British minister (similar to ambassador) at Tehran, Persia. Bell travelled to Persia to visit him, arriving in May 1892. She stayed for around six months and loved the experience; she called Persia &quot;paradise&quot; in a letter home. She described her experiences in her book &quot;Persian Pictures&quot;, which was published in 1894. She spent much of the next decade travelling around the world, mountaineering in Switzerland, and developing a passion for archaeology and languages. She became fluent in Arabic, Persian (Farsi), French, German, Italian, and Turkish. In 1897, she published a well-regarded translation from Persian into English of the poems of The Divān of Hafez; her work was later praised by Edward Denison Ross, E. Granville Browne, and others. Her horse riding skills, practised from a young age, would aid her in her travels.

In 1899, Bell again went to the Middle East. She visited Palestine and Syria that year and in 1900, on a trip from Jerusalem to Damascus, she became acquainted with the Druze living in Jabal al-Druze. 

Between 1899 and 1904, she climbed a number of mountains, including the La Meije and Mont Blanc, and recorded 10 new paths or first ascents in the Bernese Alps in Switzerland. One Alpine peak in the Bernese Oberland, the Gertrudspitze, was named after her after she and her guides, Ulrich and Heinrich Fuhrer, first traversed it in 1901. However, she failed in an attempt of the Finsteraarhorn in August 1902, when inclement weather including snow, hail and lightning forced her to spend &quot;forty eight hours on the rope&quot; with her guides, clinging to the rock face in terrifying conditions that nearly cost her her life. She did some further climbing in the Rocky Mountains during a trip through North America in 1903, but eased up on her mountaineering in later years.

In 1905, she returned to the region of Syria. She met Mark Sykes, then a British traveller. The two quarrelled and shared a mutual dislike of each other that would last until 1912, when they made up. She concluded her trip visiting archaeological sites in Asia Minor and visiting Constantinople. She published her observations of the Middle East in the 1907 book &quot;Syria: The Desert and the Sown&quot;. In it she vividly described, photographed, and detailed her trip to Greater Syria including Damascus, Jerusalem, Beirut, Antioch, Alexandretta, and the lands of the Druze and of the Bedouin. &quot;The Desert and the Sown&quot; was well received in the western world; the book received positive reviews and was a success. A notable epithet of Bell&#x27;s came from her trip to Syria, where one particular compliment from a Bani Sakher tribesman she recorded became part of her later public image: &quot;Mashallah! Bint aarab.&quot; Literally, it meant &quot;As God wills it, a daughter of the Arabs,&quot; but she translated it as being called a &quot;daughter of the desert.&quot;

In March 1907, Bell journeyed back to Asia Minor (Anatolia) and began to work with Sir William M. Ramsay, an archaeologist and New Testament scholar. The pair and their staff performed excavations of destroyed buildings and churches that dated from the Byzantine era in Binbirkilise, which she funded and planned. The results were chronicled in the book &quot;A Thousand and One Churches&quot;.

In January 1909, Bell left for Mesopotamia. She visited the Hittite city of Carchemish, photographed the relief carvings in Halamata Cave, mapped and described the ruin of Ukhaidir, and travelled on to Babylon and Najaf. In Carchemish, she consulted with the two archaeologists on site, T. E. Lawrence and Reginald Campbell Thompson. She struck up a friendship with Lawrence, and the two would trade letters in the following years. Both Bell and Lawrence had attended Oxford and earned a First Class Honours in Modern History, both spoke fluent Arabic, and both travelled extensively in the Arabian desert and established ties with the local tribes. In 1910, Bell visited the Munich exhibition &quot;Masterpieces of Muhammadan Art&quot;. In a letter to her stepmother, she recounts how she had the research room to herself and spoke to some Syrians from Damascus who were part of the ethnographic section of the exhibition. She wrote a book on her journey and the archaeological work, &quot;Amurath to Amurath&quot;, as well as a journal article.

In 1913, she completed her last and most arduous Arabian journey, travelling about 1800 miles from Damascus to the politically volatile Ha&#x27;il, back up across the Arabian peninsula to Baghdad and from there back to Damascus. She was only the second foreign woman after Lady Anne Blunt to visit Ha&#x27;il. Unbeknownst to outsiders, the Rashidi dynasty had been ravaged by both war with Ibn Saud&#x27;s forces and internecine rivalries; the Emir and oldest dynasty member was only 16 years old; assassinations and disputes had killed others of the bloodline. Bell was held prisoner in the city for eleven days before being released. She wrote afterward that &quot;In Hayil, murder is like the spilling of milk.&quot; At the conclusion of her trip in Baghdad, Bell met the influential Naqib, Abd Al-Rahman Al-Gillani, who would be an important political figure later after the end of Ottoman rule. Bell&#x27;s travels resulted in her being elected a Fellow of the Geographical Society in 1913; she was awarded a medal from them in 1914, then another in 1918.

Throughout her travels Bell established close relations with local inhabitants and tribes across the Middle East. While she could meet with the wives and daughters of local notables without it being a breach of propriety, a possibility denied male travellers, she did not take advantage of this much; she was only mildly curious about the lives of Arab women. Her main focus was on meeting and knowing the influential in Arab society, the male shaikhs and leaders.

==War and political career==
===Outbreak of war===
The British entered World War I in August 1914, and the Ottoman Empire entered the war in late October to early November. At the suggestion of Wyndham Deedes, the British War Office asked Bell for her assessment of the situation in Ottoman Syria, Mesopotamia, and Arabia. In response she wrote a letter detailing her thoughts on the degree of British sympathies in the region.

Bell volunteered with the Red Cross, serving from November 1914–November 1915; first in Boulogne, France, and then later back in London. She was part of the Wounded &amp; Missing Enquiry Department (W&amp;MED) that attempted to coordinate information between the British Army, French hospitals, and worried families about the status of soldiers and casualties of the war.

Coincidentally, Judith Doughty-Wylie, the wife of the man with whom Bell was having an unconsummated affair, was also stationed in Boulogne in this period. The two met and exchanged pleasantries. Bell asked Charles Doughty-Wylie in a letter to discourage his wife from any further meetings.

===Cairo, Delhi, and Basra===

In November 1915, Bell was summoned to Cairo in the British protectorate of Egypt; she arrived on 30 November. The Cairo detachment of British officials, headed by Colonel (later Brigadier General) Gilbert Clayton and renowned archaeologist and historian Lt. Cmdr. David Hogarth, was called the Arab Bureau. Here she met T. E. Lawrence again, who had joined the Arab Bureau in December 1914. The Bureau set about organising and processing Bell&#x27;s own, Lawrence&#x27;s, and Capt. W. H. I. Shakespear&#x27;s data about the location and disposition of Arab tribes of the Sinai and Gulf region. They also mapped the region, including its sources of water. This information would later be of use to Lawrence during the Arab Revolt as to which tribes could be encouraged to join the British against the Ottoman Empire.

Bell&#x27;s stay in Cairo was short; she was soon sent to British India, arriving in February 1916, likely at the suggestion of journalist-turned-diplomat Valentine Chirol. Her task in Delhi was to better coordinate the Arab Bureau with the Government of India and mediate their differences; according to Bell, &quot;there was no kind of touch between us except rather bad tempered written telegrams!&quot; Lord Hardinge, Viceroy of India and family friend of the Bells, was skeptical of the Arab Bureau&#x27;s recent moves and promises of an independent Arab state, fearing that directly challenging the Ottoman Sultan&#x27;s religious role as caliph could stir up unrest among India&#x27;s substantial minority of Muslims. Bell&#x27;s knowledge of the issues impressed Lord Hardinge, and she was soon sent on to Basra (captured by the British at the start of the war in November 1914) in March 1916 to act as a liaison between India and Cairo. At the time, the British were still recovering from recent setbacks in the Mesopotamian campaign. She joined the staff of Chief Political Officer Percy Cox as one of the few Westerners who knew the area.

Cox found her an office in his headquarters, and she split her time between there and the Military GHQ Basra. She travelled in the region between Basra and Baghdad, assessed the stance and opinions of the local inhabitants, and wrote reports and drew maps that would aid the British Army in their eventual advance on Baghdad. Bell was unpaid at first, but Lord Chelmsford arranged for her to be given a formal paid position in June 1916. She became the only female political officer in the British forces and received the title of Percy Cox&#x27;s Oriental Secretary. During her Basra work, she struck up close working relationships with fellow political officers Reader Bullard and the young St. John Philby.
Bell met Ibn Saud in Basra in late November–December 1916, as Cox and India were courting his support against the Ottoman-supporting Ibn Rashid. She was impressed with him and wrote an article in the &quot;Arab Bulletin&quot; extolling his abilities as a &quot;politician, ruler, and raider.&quot; Ibn Saud was apparently less impressed with her; according to a later account by Philby, he mimicked her feminine and higher-pitched speech as an impression and joke to later Nejd audiences. She would later, in 1920, presciently warn Lawrence that he was overestimating Sharif Hussein&#x27;s position after war with Ibn Saud broke out, and that Ibn Saud was likely to defeat the Hejaz if the struggle continued.

=== Armenian genocide===

While in the Middle East, Gertrude Bell reported on the Armenian genocide. Contrasting the killings with previous massacres, she wrote that earlier killings &quot;were not comparable to the massacres carried out in 1915 and the succeeding years.&quot; Bell also reported that in Damascus, &quot;Ottomans sold Armenian women openly in the public market.&quot; In an intelligence report, Bell quoted a statement by a Turkish prisoner-of-war:
===Creation of Iraq===
After British troops took Baghdad, on 11 March 1917, Bell was summoned by Cox to the city. She was also given the honour of Commander of the Order of the British Empire. After Cox left Mesopotamia in 1918 for England and then Persia, control fell to Arnold Wilson, the Acting British Civil Commissioner in Mesopotamia. Initially, Bell and Wilson got along; a memorandum Bell wrote in February 1919, &quot;Self-Determination in Mesopotamia&quot;, did not show major differences with Wilson. Cox and Wilson&#x27;s wartime provisional government drew on British India for inspiration, replicating its legal code and bureaucratic structure, and Bell&#x27;s assessment was that this was keeping the Iraqi people content. Bell visited France and England in 1919, attending the Paris Peace Conference for a short time in Wilson&#x27;s stead. At Paris, plans for the dismantling of the Ottoman Empire came into shape, as negotiations over which territories should be distributed to who took place. Famously, the Sykes–Picot Agreement, negotiated by the same Mark Sykes whom Bell had met 15 years earlier, allocated northern Syria to French influence, although the French were persuaded to withdraw their claims on Mosul vilayet to Syria&#x27;s east. This left the British and Arabs with southern Syria, Mosul, Baghdad, and Basra to divide.

Bell spent September–October 1919 visiting Egypt, Palestine, and Hashemite-ruled Syria before returning to Baghdad in November 1919.
In 1919, Mesopotamia was still under a provisional military government that largely reported to the government of British India. Over the course of 1919, Bell became convinced that an independent Arab government in Mesopotamia backed by British advisors was the correct path to follow. She saw the provisional Hashemite government in Syria, while corrupt, seemingly return life to a peaceful normal state; meanwhile, affairs in Egypt saw the Egyptian Revolution of 1919 against the British. Bell believed that the &quot;spirit of 1919&quot; would spread to Mesopotamia as well if the British dawdled in honouring the promise of self-determination. She spent nearly a year writing what was later considered a masterly official report, &quot;Review of the Civil Administration of Mesopotamia&quot;. Civil Commissioner Wilson disagreed with Bell on the topic, and the two had a falling out. Wilson, of the India school, preferred an Arab government to be under direct influence of British officials who would retain real control, as he felt, from experience, that Mesopotamian populations were not yet ready to govern and administer the country efficiently and peacefully. Troubles arose; Shia tribes in central Iraq rose in revolt in the summer of 1920, and made common cause with Sunnis. Wilson blamed Sharifan anti-British propaganda for the revolt. Bell blamed Wilson for the unrest in the region, saying his approach was insufficiently deferential to local wishes.

On 11 October 1920, Percy Cox returned to Baghdad, replacing the discredited Wilson. Cox asked Bell to continue as his Oriental Secretary and to act as liaison with the forthcoming Arab government. Cox promptly restored much of the earlier Ottoman government structure and began to appoint more Iraqis to lead in the local provincial governments, albeit backed by powerful British advisors. Back in the British Isles, the British public was weary of constant war, the Irish War of Independence was being fought, and the British Empire was deeply in debt following the ruinous Great War. British officials in London, in particular the new Secretary of State for War and Air, Winston Churchill, wanted to reduce expenses in the colonies, including the cost of quashing revolts. British officials realised that their policy of direct governance was adding to costs. While the revolt of 1920 was successfully suppressed, it had cost 50 million pounds, hundreds of British and Indian lives, and thousands of Arab lives to do so. It was clear that Iraq would be cheaper as a self-governing state. Churchill convened a conference in Cairo to resolve the future of British administration of the region now that the war was finished.

=== 1921 Cairo Conference===


Bell, Cox and Lawrence were among a select group of &quot;Orientalists&quot; convened by Churchill to attend the conference in Cairo to determine the internal boundaries of the British mandates from within the territory Britain had claimed during the Partitioning of the Ottoman Empire. Few British officials had any experience in Arab or Kurdish affairs; Cox trusted Bell, and Bell was thus unusually influential and gave significant input in these discussions. The British government had reluctantly allowed France to take control of Syria as part of negotiations of the Treaty of Sèvres, leading to the creation of the French Mandate for Syria and Lebanon. This complicated earlier British promises to its allies in the Arab Revolt against the Ottomans, as they had presumed they would lead a new pan-Arab state centred in Damascus; but the French saw the Hashemites and their allies as potential rivals for power, and thus had no interest in allowing a Hashemite monarchy in Syria.

Various possibilities existed for these lands, including a continued direct mandate (the British Mandate for Mesopotamia), independence on various terms, or even ceding the discontented northern territories back to the new Turkish state. The school of thought that favoured independence with British direction and alliance became known as the &quot;Cairo School&quot;, against the &quot;India School&quot; that favoured direct rule by Britons. Throughout the conference, Bell, Cox, and Lawrence favoured the Cairo School approach, and worked to promote the establishment of the independent countries of Transjordan and Iraq. They also supported the Sharifian Solution: that these states be presided over by the sons of the instigator of the Arab Revolt, Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca. In this proposal, Abdullah and Faisal would serve as the kings of the new countries (the eventual Monarchy of Jordan and Monarchy of Iraq). Bell thought that Faisal&#x27;s status as an outsider would enable him to hold together the new country of Iraq as someone not beholden to any one group, but rather a unifying symbol. In theory, Shias would respect him because of his lineage from Muhammad; Sunnis would follow him because he was Sunni from a respected family. In practice, pan-Arabism and Sharifism would prove more appealing to the Sunni population in Iraq than the Shia population. Bell was also influenced by a strain of British thought that romantically considered the desert Arabs of the Hejaz as &quot;pure&quot; Arabs, and thus naturally suited to possessing legitimacy and respect; the success of Faisal in the Arab Revolt at assembling a coalition of disparate tribes acted as proof to this school.

The Ottomans had divided the region into the strategically important for the British Basra vilayet in the south, the central Baghdad vilayet, and the northern Kurdish-dominated Mosul vilayet. The three had little cultural or economic interdependency under Ottoman rule. The territory of the new Iraq was an undecided matter before the conference. The question of what to do with oil-rich Mosul in particular became known as the Mosul question. Bell advocated for expansive Iraqi borders that would include all three of the Ottoman territories including Mosul. In this, she was defeated at the conference; Churchill, Hubert Young, Lawrence, and others feared that putting Kurds under an Arab ruler might make them sympathetic to Turkey and disloyal to Iraq, while establishing an independent buffer state of Southern Kurdistan or Upper Mesopotamia would ensure the Kurds would see any Turkish incursion as unwelcome rather than a liberation. They insisted that the Southern Kurds only be included in Iraq if they directly asked to be. Bell would eventually get her way after the conference, though. In the process of the largely performative nationwide referendum to endorse Faisal of 1921, the referendum takers were able to find enough pro-Faisal members of Kurdish elite to satisfy the new British government of late 1922 to allow the inclusion of Mosul as part of Iraq after all. The Kurdish elite had extracted certain promises for autonomy, but these promises would be largely ignored. Bell wrote a letter in 1924 responding to an article likely from Arnold Wilson that argued Mosul would be happier under Turkish rule; Bell argued that based on the elite representatives to the Constituent Assembly, Mosul still wished to be part of Iraq. Negotiations and occasional warfare with Kemalist Turkey would continue until 1926, when the Treaty of Ankara recognized Mosul as part of Iraq. Lawrence would later write that he often feared and sometimes hoped that the over-large state Bell had built would collapse.

Against the wishes of the Arab-sympathetic Bell, the British would eventually decide to keep the British Mandate for Palestine to be run directly by themselves, rather than make it part of Transjordan. Bell opposed the Zionist movement; she wrote that she regarded the Balfour Declaration with &quot;the deepest mistrust&quot; and that &quot;It&#x27;s like a nightmare in which you foresee all the horrible things which are going to happen and can&#x27;t stretch out your hand to prevent them&quot;. In a letter to her mother she wrote that &quot;the country is wholly unsuited to the ends the Jews have in view; a poor land, incapable of great development and with a solid two thirds of its population Mohammedan Arabs who look on Jews with contempt,&quot; and described the Balfour Declaration as &quot;a wholly artificial scheme divorced from all relation to facts and I wish it the ill-success it deserves&quot;.

===Advisor to Faisal===


The Sharifan solution prevailed, and Faisal was presented to Iraq as the new king. The main local candidate for leadership who had opposed the selection of Faisal, Sayyid Talib, was arrested and exiled in April 1921 after being invited to tea with Percy Cox&#x27;s wife, at Bell&#x27;s suggestion and with Cox&#x27;s assent; Bell viewed Talib as a potential rebel if left unchecked.

Bell served in the Iraq British High Commission advisory group throughout the 1920s and was an integral part of the administration of Iraq in Faisal&#x27;s first years. Upon Faisal&#x27;s arrival in 1921, Bell advised him on local questions, including matters involving tribal geography, tribal leadership, and local business. Faisal was crowned king of Iraq on 23 August 1921. Referred to in Iraqi Arabic as &quot;al-Khatun&quot; (a Lady of the Court), Bell was a confidante of Faisal and helped ease his passage into the role. Bell played the role of mediator between Faisal&#x27;s government, British officials, and local notables. She took a special interest in public relations: arranging receptions, parties, and meetings; discussing the state of affairs with both the British and Arab elite of Baghdad; and transferring requests and complaints to the government. She also suggested designs for both the flag of Iraq and Faisal&#x27;s personal flag.

The new Iraqi government had to mediate between the various groups of Iraq: Shias, Sunnis, Kurds, Jews, and Assyrian Christians. Keeping these groups content was essential for political balance in Iraq and for British imperial interests. An important project for both the British and the new Iraqi government was creating a new identity for these people so that they would identify themselves as one nation. One of the main issues that faced Faisal was establishing his legitimacy among the Shia population. There was little enthusiasm for Faisal when he landed at the Shia port of Basra. Faisal&#x27;s administration, while reserving certain positions for Shiites as a token, was pan-Arabist and Sunni-dominated, a position that Bell endorsed. Sunni elites made it clear that they would consider any reduction of their traditional privileges during Ottoman rule, as compared to the Shiites or Kurds, a betrayal. Bell thought that a Shia-dominated government would likely devolve into a theocracy. Bell had difficulty making close relationships with the most important Shia leaders; she wrote that she was &quot;cut off from them because their tenets forbid them to look upon an unveiled woman and my tenets don&#x27;t permit me to veil.&quot;

Bell did not find working with the new king to be easy; she wrote in one 1921 letter that &quot;You may rely upon one thing — I&#x27;ll never engage in creating kings again; it&#x27;s too great a strain.&quot;

===National Library of Iraq===
Muriel Forbes advocated for the creation of a new library in Baghdad in 1919–20 and founded the Baghdad Peace Library (&quot;Maktabat al-Salam&quot;). Bell energetically promoted the library and subsequently served on its Library Committee as president from 1921 to 1924. This included participating in fund-raising events, soliciting free copies of books from British publishers for library use, and publishing articles in the library&#x27;s Review. The library started as a private, subscription library, but due to financial difficulties, it was taken over by the Ministry of Education in 1924 and changed into a public library. In 1926, it was one of only two public libraries in the country. It became known as the Baghdad Public Library in 1929, and was renamed in 1961 to the National Library of Iraq.

===Director of Antiquities ===

In October 1922, King Faisal appointed Bell as Honorary Director of Antiquities, a task suited to her experience and love of archaeology. Several notable excavations took place during Bell&#x27;s tenure, with Bell involved in the cataloguing and distribution of antiquities. Leonard Woolley conducted extensive excavations of the city of Ur from 1922–1934. In 1924, Bell personally invited Assyriologist Edward Chiera to conduct archaeological excavations in ancient Nuzi, near Kirkuk, Iraq, where hundreds of inscribed clay tablets had been discovered and deciphered, now known as the Nuzi Tablets.

====1924 Antiquities legislation====
The state of approvals for archaeological digs during Ottoman Empire rule had been loose and unorganized; digs happened without being registered to any authority; and there was no governing body with the authority to oversee or enforce the few regulations that did exist. Bell&#x27;s chief role as Director of Antiquities was to draw up proposed legislation that would clarify the status of existing digs, regulate the granting of new permits, adjudicate ownership of discovered artefacts, and allow for the creation of a Department of Antiquities to enforce the law. Bell&#x27;s initial proposals were considered overly friendly to British interests by Sati&#x27; al-Husri, Faisal&#x27;s Director of Education and an Arab nationalist. Al-Husri slowed passage of the law, but Bell&#x27;s law passed in 1924 after revisions; it largely followed the standard model elsewhere in the world, but notably reserved extensive power to the Director (that is, herself) to judge whether discovered antiquities would go in the national museum and stay as property of the state, or be allowed for export. It also placed the Department of Antiquities under the Ministry of Public Works, away from al-Husri.

Bell&#x27;s law was a hybrid that bridged the gap between the chaos of Ottoman-era archaeology and later laws that would more directly enforce Iraqi sovereignty on the matter. Foreign archaeologists continued legally exporting antiquities from Iraq, but in a more restricted manner. Simply organizing, tracking, and regulating archaeological digs seems to have hurt the black market trade in looted antiquities.

====Baghdad Archaeological Museum====
As Director of Antiquities, Bell was responsible for storing excavated antiquities for personal review and examination. Her initial storeroom, called the Babylonian Stone Room, was soon filling up, however. She requested a dedicated building to act as a museum in March 1923, but was initially rejected. After sustained lobbying effort over the next years, carefully ensuring that the elites of Iraqi government and society saw the latest excavations from Ur and were invested in the project at parties and events, she finally secured a location for her museum plan on the ground floor of a stationery and printing building in March 1926. This became the Baghdad Archaeological Museum, later renamed the Iraq Museum; it opened in June 1926, shortly before Bell&#x27;s death.

As part of her role as Director, Bell helped establish procedures that were becoming standard around the world: carefully keeping a ledger of excavations and finds, as well as detailed descriptions of material, dimensions, and other comments; applying a formal numbering system to track them; and sending photographs of unusual finds off to the British Museum for further analysis. She did this with only a small but hard-working staff; the Department of Antiquities only consisted of Abdulqadir Pachachi, Salim Lawi and her, from 1924–26. Bell and the department helped preserve Iraqi culture and history, which included the important relics of Mesopotamian civilizations, and the museum kept them in their country of origin. Bell&#x27;s will bequeathed £50,000 to the Iraq Museum and £6,000 to the British Museum to establish the &quot;British School of Archaeology in Iraq&quot; in London (later renamed to &quot;The British Institute for the Study of Iraq&quot;), which continued to fund and aid excavation projects (adjusted for inflation, around £2.1 million and £250,000 in 2021, respectively).

==Final years==
The stress of authoring a prodigious output of books, correspondence, intelligence reports, reference works, and white papers; of recurring bronchitis attacks brought on by years of heavy cigarette smoking; of bouts with malaria; and finally, of coping with Baghdad&#x27;s summer heat all took a toll on her health. Somewhat frail to start with, she became emaciated over the course of the 1920s, and suffered a drastic collapse of her health in 1924. Bell briefly returned to Britain in 1925, where she faced continued ill health. She did take the opportunity to correspond with Lawrence, who sought her advice on his forthcoming book &quot;Seven Pillars of Wisdom&quot;. Her family&#x27;s fortune had begun to decline due to a wave of post-World War I coal strikes in Britain that would culminate in the general strike of 1926 and economic depression in Europe; the Bells began preparation to move out of their expensive mansion at Rounton to reduce costs. She returned to Baghdad and soon developed pleurisy. While she recovered, she heard that her younger half brother Hugo had died of typhoid.

Many of Bell&#x27;s dear friends left Iraq in the early 1920s, most notably Percy Cox, who retired in 1923. In late 1922, she struck up a lasting friendship with Kinahan Cornwallis, a fellow British advisor in Iraq. She signaled an openness to a romantic involvement to the much younger Cornwallis, but was rejected, and their relationship stayed a professional friendship.

Bell suffered psychologically from 1923 to 1926, and may have been depressed. The new High Commissioner of the mandate installed in 1923, Henry Dobbs, kept Bell as his Oriental Secretary but consulted her less frequently than Percy Cox had. Bell was no longer consulted by Faisal as much after his first year in office either, and he had not lived up to her impossibly high expectations. While she had thrown herself into her new position as Director of Antiquities with gusto, she still disliked being sidelined from the high affairs of state. Over the course of two days in 1925, her beloved pet dog as well as Kinahan Cornwallis&#x27;s dog, whom she had looked after and cared for as well, both died.

On 12 July 1926, Bell was discovered dead of an overdose of allobarbital sleeping pills. It is unknown whether the overdose was an intentional suicide or an accidental misdose. She had asked her maid to wake her in the morning, suggesting an accident, but she had also requested for Cornwallis to look after her new dog in case anything happened to her the previous day, and had recently written a philosophical letter to her mother on how her lonely existence cannot extend forever, suggesting foreknowledge of her death. She was buried at the Anglican cemetery in Baghdad&#x27;s Bab al-Sharji district the same day. Her funeral was a major event, attended by a large crowd. It was said King Faisal watched the procession from his private balcony as they carried her coffin to the cemetery. Back in Great Britain, King George V personally wrote a letter of condolences to her parents Hugh and Florence.

==Views and positions==
Bell&#x27;s upper-class background and training in history led her to hold views that were considered old-fashioned for the time, seeming to pine for an older, nobler aristocratic age. Her historical training did aid in understanding the Middle East; many Britons of the time were essentially ignorant and uninterested in the history of the region after the era of early Christianity and the late Roman Empire. It did mean that she phrased her appeals toward Arab nationalists in the style of recreating a lost Golden Age of the early Caliphates, rather than using more modern arguments. She was simultaneously an Iraqi nationalist and a British imperialist; Bell saw no contradiction in this, although fissures between the interests of the Iraqi state and the interests of the British Empire developed almost immediately.

From an early age, Bell was outspoken and independent despite being raised in a deferential society; she was willing to verbally contest respected professors and experts during her schooling. This sometimes manifested as arrogance, especially to British people she perceived as non-experts. She was willing to back down when sparring with fellow Arabists; T. E. Lawrence writes of one incident in 1911 where she criticized the methods used at the dig at Carchemish before being reprimanded and convinced otherwise by Lawrence and Thompson. She occasionally had a contrarian bent, seemingly enjoying supporting tough causes. Bell had a rationalist perspective, and espoused atheist views. She unsuccessfully attempted to convince her half-brother Hugo not to enter the Church as a clergyman. Another contrarian position she adopted was taking an anti-suffragist position when momentum was building toward women&#x27;s suffrage among women of higher education such as herself. She was a founding member of the Women&#x27;s National Anti-Suffrage League in 1908 and was president of its northern branch. It seems that her stance may have arisen from both her parents being anti-suffragists, as well as a belief that women could already be successful under the existing system without the vote. She appears to have softened on this stance later in her life after Parliament granted suffrage to women in 1918; Vita Sackville-West wrote that after visiting her in 1925, she had welcomed the move for women&#x27;s rights, and had shifted from the Liberal views of her father to considering being a Labour voter.

Bell&#x27;s voluminous letters document her changing and at times contradictory beliefs on the plausibility of an Arab state, the best degree of British involvement, and the challenges involved. T. E. Lawrence once remarked that she &quot;changed her direction every time like a weathercock&quot; (although, in the same statement, he wrote that she was a &quot;wonderful person&quot;). At different times, she wrote both in favour of, and against an independent Arab state, direct British rule, and the Sharifan solution. Later, she wished for Faisal to be both an independent ruler with legitimacy to Iraqis and great personal authority, yet also a ruler who simultaneously agreed with British requests and priorities: an impossible position. Still, she grasped the dangers of British involvement better than many of her contemporaries. Bell&#x27;s 1920 report on the region showed striking ambivalence on the wisdom and capacity of the imperial project, depicting the tribal culture of the countryside as a centuries-long tradition that had outlasted Turkish rule and would not easily bend to outside intervention. According to a report she wrote in the Arab Bulletin:
==Legacy==
===Later influence===
The boundary lines of Iraq that emerged during the partition of the Ottoman Empire, the 1921 Cairo Conference, and the 1922 addition of Southern Kurdistan still hold today for the modern state of Iraq. The inclusion of the Kurdish-dominated Mosul vilayet in Iraq is still considered a mistake by many historians and commentators. Bell supported this inclusion of traditionally Kurdish lands in a state dominated by Arabs, however, against the advice of some of her contemporaries including T. E. Lawrence, Edward Noel, and E. B. Soane. More generally, Bell had extensive contact and personal friendships with many Arabs, but comparatively limited contact with Kurds, perhaps leading to her unfounded optimism on the wisdom of including Kurdish lands in Iraq. As part of her role in the Iraqi government, she supported suppression of Kurdish revolts of the 1920s, and did not particularly advocate for any privileges or autonomy for the region. The division of the Kurds between Iraq, Syria, Turkey, and Iran led to their oppression in all four countries. Saad Eskander wrote that Bell is more fondly remembered by Iraqi Arabs than Iraqi Kurds as a result.

Bell proposed that many aspects of government be decentralized, both because it was the only feasible way to maintain a heterogeneous multi-ethnic and multi-religion state, and due to a certain degree of parochial romanticisation of classical Arab culture. Under her Tribal Criminal and Civil Disputes Regulation, local shaikhs in the countryside had wide authority to manage tax collection and the judiciary on their own; the national government only had such authority in the major cities. Later rulers would favor a strong, centralized government and find this decentralization intrusive; Bell&#x27;s law was later repealed by the new Iraqi Republic government after the overthrow of the monarchy in 1958.

Bell&#x27;s work in archaeology and her tenure as Director of Antiquities is generally well-regarded. Her photographs, notes, and detailed plans of sites she visited from 1909–1914 are &quot;priceless documentation&quot; that preserved knowledge of many monuments and buildings since damaged or destroyed. A memorial plaque dedicated to Bell was installed at the Archaeological Museum in 1930, after King Faisal requested her memory be honored in the project to which she had devoted so much effort. However, the reputation of non-Iraqi archaeologists later suffered due to her corrupt successor as Director of Antiquities, Richard Cooke. Cooke was forced to resign in a scandal after he was caught using his position to take and smuggle antiquities for his own personal fortune. After several short-lived successors to Cooke, Sati&#x27; al-Husri, Bell&#x27;s political rival, took over as Director of Antiquities in 1934. He succeeded in advocating for a new law that revised Bell&#x27;s 1924 law on Antiquities. The revised 1936 legislation gave the Iraqi government additional power in the division of antiquities between archaeologists and the government.

Bell&#x27;s work with the future National Library of Iraq and the library of the National Museum of Iraq was praised as helping establish the basis for libraries that would go on to be among the best in the Middle East by the 1980s. Ian Johnson praised it as a step toward bringing back a tradition of scholarship from the Abbasid Caliphate; the region had become an intellectual backwater under Ottoman rule.

===Posthumous commentary===
Many of Bell&#x27;s compatriots wrote admiring articles, reports, and lectures upon receiving news of her death, including Vita Sackville-West, Leo Amery, Arnold Wilson, Percy Cox, Henry Dobbs, and others. An obituary written by her peer D. G. Hogarth expressed the respect British officials held for her. Hogarth wrote:

Bell&#x27;s 1920 white paper, &quot;Review of the Civil Administration of Mesopotamia&quot;, possibly the first white paper composed by a woman, is considered important and influential; H. V. F. Winstone called it her &quot;finest political work&quot;. Winstone also wrote that despite the later fall of the Kingdom of Iraq, Bell&#x27;s &quot;real work&quot; had been her earlier role as an archaeologist, scholar, author, translator, and adventurer, a legacy that would last long after the Iraqi monarchy was forgotten.

Elie Kedourie, an Iraqi Jew who left the country to become a conservative British historian, denounced Faisal as a &quot;pathetic incompetent&quot;, Lawrence as a &quot;fanatic&quot;, and Bell for her &quot;sentimental enthusiasm&quot; and &quot;fond foolishness&quot; in her advocacy of an Arab state. He blamed them for unleashing Arab nationalism in a region where it had been previously unknown. Kedourie admired large multi-ethnic empires and favoured, in retrospect, Arnold Wilson&#x27;s solution of direct British rule that he believed would better protect minority rights; the Iraqi Jewish community would greatly shrink in the 1940s and 50s in the face of oppression from the hostile government.

Karl E. Meyer and Shareen Blair Brysac described Bell as &quot;one of the few representatives of His Majesty&#x27;s Government remembered by the Arabs with anything resembling affection&quot; in an overview of British policy-making following World War I.

===Posthumous tributes===
King Faisal dedicated a section of the Baghdad Archaeological Museum as a memorial to Bell in January 1930.

A stained-glass window dedicated to her memory, made by Douglas Strachan, was erected in St Lawrence&#x27;s Church, East Rounton, North Yorkshire. It depicts Magdalen College, Oxford, and Khadimain, Baghdad. The inscription commemorates her as &quot;Versed in the learning of the east and of the west, Servant of the State, Scholar, Poet, Historian, Antiquary, Gardener, Mountaineer, Explorer, Lover of Nature of Flowers and of Animals, Incomparable Friend Sister Daughter&quot;.

In the 2010s, a team from Newcastle University released a comic version of Bell&#x27;s life, with John Miers the cartoonist.

In 2016, a campaign was launched to transform the Bell family&#x27;s former estate, Red Barns, into a memorial and museum. The family were patrons of the Arts and Crafts movement in England, and the home, located in Redcar, features wallpaper by William Morris. Although the building is Grade II* listed, it had not been maintained. A 2015 exhibition about her at the Great North Museum in Newcastle helped raise interest. The exhibition moved to the Kirkleatham Museum in Redcar after its run in Newcastle.

The Gertrude Bell archive, an extensive record of Bell&#x27;s writings held by Newcastle University, was added to the UNESCO Memory of the World Programme in 2017.

In 2019, entomologists studying wild bees in Saudi Arabia described a new genus that they named to honour Bell, as genus &quot;Belliturgula&quot;, known from the species &quot;Belliturgula najdica&quot; from central Saudi Arabia.

=== Literature ===
Olivier Guez&#x27;s novel &quot;Mesopotamia&quot;, published in 2024, is a novel in French, based on the life of Gertrude Bell.

===Film and television===
* In the 1992 ITV television film &quot;A Dangerous Man: Lawrence After Arabia&quot;, Bell is portrayed by Gillian Barge. The film covers negotiations at the 1919 Paris Peace Conference on the future of the Middle East.
* A 1993 episode of George Lucas&#x27;s &quot;The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles&quot; (later compiled in the 1996 movie-length &quot;Winds of Change&quot;) has Bell portrayed by Anna Massey. The episode features the 1919 Paris Peace Conference, and covers her friendship with T. E. Lawrence.
* In the 2015 film &quot;Queen of the Desert&quot; by Werner Herzog, Bell is portrayed by Nicole Kidman. The film chronicles much of Bell&#x27;s life.
* In the 2016 documentary &quot;Letters from Baghdad&quot;, directed by Sabine Krayenbühl and Zeva Oelbaum, quotations from Bell&#x27;s letters were read by Tilda Swinton. The documentary quotes Bell&#x27;s and her contemporaries&#x27; writings to tell the story of her life and the events she was a part of.

==Writings==
Bell wrote voluminously during her life. After her death in 1926, her stepmother Florence Bell made the first attempt to curate a selection of her writing from over 2,400 pages of letters. In 1927, Florence published two volumes of Gertrude&#x27;s collected correspondence, albeit not including her more romantic letters out of propriety, as well as omitting material she thought might be embarrassing to the Iraqi government. Since then, various collections of Bell&#x27;s letters, journal articles, reports, and wartime &quot;Arab Bulletin&quot; articles have been published.

===Selected works===
==See also==
*List of mountains of Switzerland named after people

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
** Also issued as 
* 
* 


==External links==

* The Gertrude Bell Project based at Newcastle University Library
* The Gertrude Bell Archive
* 
* 
* The Rountons: The Bell Family (photographs)
* Lifestory of Gertrude Bell, from &quot;Lives of the First World War&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q231360" start="0" end="31" title="Gertrude Bell" label="Gertrude Margaret Lowthian Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="134" end="147" title="archaeologist" label="archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="202" end="213" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q620573" start="285" end="292" title="Arabist" label="Arabist"/>
<link wikidata="Q266452" start="483" end="492" title="Percy Cox" label="Percy Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="551" end="578" title="1919 Paris Peace Conference" label="1919 Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017751" start="597" end="618" title="1921 Cairo Conference" label="1921 Cairo Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145246" start="726" end="757" title="partition of the Ottoman Empire" label="partition of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="794" end="810" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170596" start="933" end="947" title="T. E. Lawrence" label="T. E. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837704" start="1024" end="1054" title="Dissolution of the Ottoman Empire" label="collapse of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774915" start="1090" end="1099" title="Hashemite" label="Hashemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="1128" end="1134" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="1139" end="1143" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="1223" end="1240" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="1416" end="1426" title="Equestrianism" label="equestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q63158027" start="1488" end="1498" title="Qajar Iran" label="Qajar Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415123" start="1500" end="1515" title="Syria (region)" label="Syria-Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="1517" end="1528" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="1530" end="1540" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221446" start="1546" end="1552" title="Ottoman Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q863532" start="1684" end="1696" title="Binbirkilise" label="Binbirkilise"/>
<link wikidata="Q675568" start="1738" end="1748" title="Ha&amp;#x27;il" label="Ha&amp;#x27;il"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="1784" end="1801" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1927" end="1938" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328496" start="1963" end="2003" title="Ottoman entry into World War I" label="Ottoman Empire&amp;#x27;s entry into the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783152" start="2113" end="2124" title="Arab Bureau" label="Arab Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q335903" start="2205" end="2218" title="Charles Hardinge, 1st Baron Hardinge of Penshurst" label="Lord Hardinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="2626" end="2633" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752412" start="2662" end="2677" title="nation-building" label="nation-building"/>
<link wikidata="Q149805" start="2714" end="2729" title="Kingdom of Iraq" label="Kingdom of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q212486" start="2873" end="2879" title="Faisal I of Iraq" label="Faisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15624851" start="3244" end="3264" title="Archaeological looting" label="looting of artifacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q620902" start="3362" end="3383" title="Iraq National Library and Archive" label="Iraq National Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q521251" start="3402" end="3413" title="Iraq Museum" label="Iraq Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q62962" start="3516" end="3530" title="sleeping pills" label="sleeping pills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939273" start="3646" end="3670" title="The Divān of Hafez" label="a book of Persian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4031" end="4049" title="Washington, Tyne and Wear#Dame Margaret&amp;#x27;s Hall" label="Dame Margaret Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018448" start="4053" end="4063" title="Washington, Tyne and Wear" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q23082" start="4065" end="4078" title="County Durham" label="County Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303297" start="4194" end="4204" title="ironmaster" label="ironmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q377614" start="4205" end="4228" title="Lowthian Bell" label="Sir Isaac Lowthian Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="4253" end="4260" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801361" start="4445" end="4457" title="Sir Maurice Bell, 3rd Baronet" label="Maurice Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527298" start="4593" end="4619" title="Sir Hugh Bell, 2nd Baronet" label="Sir Hugh Bell, 2nd Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239638" start="5006" end="5019" title="Florence Bell (writer)" label="Florence Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q335154" start="5440" end="5455" title="Bolckow Vaughan" label="Bolckow Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910635" start="5471" end="5476" title="Eston" label="Eston"/>
<link wikidata="Q171866" start="5483" end="5496" title="Middlesbrough" label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414026" start="5886" end="5906" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s College, London" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q951946" start="5988" end="6006" title="Lady Margaret Hall" label="Lady Margaret Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="6008" end="6025" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="6260" end="6286" title="first class honours degree" label="first class honours degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917200" start="6436" end="6451" title="Alice Greenwood" label="Alice Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q128304262" start="6607" end="6650" title="First women admitted to degrees at the University of Oxford" label="awarding degrees to Bell and others in 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209641" start="7258" end="7274" title="Frank Swettenham" label="Frank Swettenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896145" start="7530" end="7535" title="Major (United Kingdom)" label="Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064143" start="7536" end="7557" title="Charles Doughty-Wylie" label="Charles Doughty-Wylie"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="7674" end="7692" title="Gallipoli Campaign" label="Gallipoli Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443635" start="7773" end="7788" title="Frank Lascelles (diplomat)" label="Frank Lascelles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7802" end="7810" title="Minister (diplomacy)#Ranks" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="7838" end="7844" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q63158027" start="7846" end="7852" title="Qajar Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="8195" end="8209" title="mountaineering" label="mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="8303" end="8309" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="8311" end="8326" title="Persian language" label="Persian (Farsi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="8328" end="8334" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="8336" end="8342" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="8344" end="8351" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="8357" end="8364" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939273" start="8459" end="8477" title="The Divān of Hafez" label="The Divān of Hafez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292041" start="8509" end="8528" title="Edward Denison Ross" label="Edward Denison Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q982047" start="8530" end="8549" title="Edward Granville Browne" label="E. Granville Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="8704" end="8713" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="8718" end="8723" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="8762" end="8771" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="8775" end="8783" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="8816" end="8821" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262056" start="8832" end="8846" title="Jabal al-Druze" label="Jabal al-Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605356" start="8925" end="8930" title="Meije" label="Meije"/>
<link wikidata="Q583" start="8935" end="8945" title="Mont Blanc" label="Mont Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q327221" start="8997" end="9009" title="Bernese Alps" label="Bernese Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q475403" start="9049" end="9065" title="Bernese Oberland" label="Bernese Oberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15127" start="9229" end="9243" title="Finsteraarhorn" label="Finsteraarhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="9516" end="9531" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415123" start="9658" end="9673" title="Syria (region)" label="region of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q332612" start="9683" end="9693" title="Mark Sykes" label="Mark Sykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="10149" end="10155" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="10157" end="10164" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q174341" start="10166" end="10178" title="Alexandretta" label="Alexandretta"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="10218" end="10225" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207869" start="10367" end="10374" title="epithet" label="epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199384" start="10458" end="10469" title="Bani Sakher" label="Bani Sakher"/>
<link wikidata="Q860239" start="10538" end="10547" title="Mashallah" label="Mashallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="10756" end="10766" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q326308" start="10805" end="10822" title="William M. Ramsay" label="William M. Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="10845" end="10858" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="10971" end="10980" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q863532" start="10988" end="11000" title="Binbirkilise" label="Binbirkilise"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="11145" end="11156" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="11174" end="11181" title="Hittites" label="Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q283680" start="11190" end="11200" title="Carchemish" label="Carchemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q106371911" start="11238" end="11251" title="Halamata Cave" label="Halamata Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q771059" start="11286" end="11294" title="Ukhaidir" label="Ukhaidir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="11316" end="11323" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q168193" start="11328" end="11333" title="Najaf" label="Najaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q170596" start="11401" end="11415" title="T. E. Lawrence" label="T. E. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918460" start="11420" end="11446" title="Reginald Campbell Thompson" label="Reginald Campbell Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="11602" end="11621" title="British undergraduate degree classification" label="First Class Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q675568" start="12298" end="12308" title="Ha&amp;#x27;il" label="Ha&amp;#x27;il"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="12350" end="12357" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q451969" start="12435" end="12450" title="Lady Anne Blunt" label="Lady Anne Blunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q169949" start="12502" end="12517" title="Rashidi dynasty" label="Rashidi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096893" start="12949" end="12954" title="Naqib al-ashraf" label="Naqib"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464750" start="12956" end="12980" title="Abd Al-Rahman Al-Gillani" label="Abd Al-Rahman Al-Gillani"/>
<link wikidata="Q691152" start="13128" end="13148" title="Royal Geographical Society" label="Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="13668" end="13674" title="Sheikh" label="shaikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328496" start="13797" end="13861" title="Ottoman entry into World War I" label="Ottoman Empire entered the war in late October to early November"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040107" start="13884" end="13898" title="Wyndham Deedes" label="Wyndham Deedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="14145" end="14154" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q81997" start="14207" end="14215" title="Boulogne-sur-Mer" label="Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="14854" end="14859" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q370173" start="14867" end="14896" title="Sultanate of Egypt" label="British protectorate of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617182" start="15013" end="15028" title="Gilbert Clayton" label="Gilbert Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556340" start="15080" end="15093" title="David George Hogarth" label="David Hogarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783152" start="15110" end="15121" title="Arab Bureau" label="Arab Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018302" start="15292" end="15317" title="William Shakespear (explorer)" label="Capt. W. H. I. Shakespear"/>
<link wikidata="Q239060" start="15533" end="15544" title="Arab Revolt" label="Arab Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5992803" start="15788" end="15804" title="Valentine Chirol" label="Valentine Chirol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="15818" end="15823" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q335903" start="16040" end="16053" title="Charles Hardinge, 1st Baron Hardinge of Penshurst" label="Lord Hardinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="16447" end="16452" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q18937" start="16654" end="16675" title="Mesopotamian campaign" label="Mesopotamian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q266452" start="16725" end="16734" title="Percy Cox" label="Percy Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q336268" start="17140" end="17155" title="Frederic Thesiger, 1st Viscount Chelmsford" label="Lord Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847320" start="17249" end="17266" title="political officer (British Empire)" label="political officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134553" start="17448" end="17462" title="Reader Bullard" label="Reader Bullard"/>
<link wikidata="Q584868" start="17477" end="17492" title="St. John Philby" label="St. John Philby"/>
<link wikidata="Q151509" start="17503" end="17511" title="Ibn Saud" label="Ibn Saud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473086" start="17627" end="17637" title="Saud bin Abdulaziz Al Rashid" label="Ibn Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427167" start="18099" end="18116" title="Saudi conquest of Hejaz" label="war with Ibn Saud"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631371" start="18271" end="18304" title="Witnesses and testimonies of the Armenian genocide" label="reported on the Armenian genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="18835" end="18862" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795314" start="18944" end="18957" title="Arnold Wilson" label="Arnold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="19465" end="19487" title="Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920)" label="Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q211674" start="19698" end="19719" title="Sykes–Picot Agreement" label="Sykes–Picot Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q146600" start="20092" end="20113" title="Arab Kingdom of Syria" label="Hashemite-ruled Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993171" start="20602" end="20629" title="Egyptian Revolution of 1919" label="Egyptian Revolution of 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q616851" start="21346" end="21388" title="Iraqi revolt of 1920" label="Shia tribes in central Iraq rose in revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774915" start="21461" end="21469" title="Hashemites" label="Sharifan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="22096" end="22121" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="22302" end="22319" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="22568" end="22574" title="British pounds" label="pounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145246" start="23136" end="23170" title="Partitioning of the Ottoman Empire" label="Partitioning of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q182515" start="23458" end="23474" title="Treaty of Sèvres" label="Treaty of Sèvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q139708" start="23514" end="23543" title="Mandate for Syria and Lebanon" label="Mandate for Syria and Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824470" start="23969" end="23992" title="Mandate for Mesopotamia" label="Mandate for Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121819" start="24475" end="24486" title="Emirate of Transjordan" label="Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q64684930" start="24521" end="24539" title="Sharifian Solution" label="Sharifian Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q128906" start="24626" end="24658" title="Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca" label="Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q192780" start="24678" end="24686" title="Abdullah I of Jordan" label="Abdullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q212486" start="24691" end="24697" title="Faisal I of Iraq" label="Faisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q815910" start="24758" end="24776" title="Monarchy of Jordan" label="Monarchy of Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284551" start="24781" end="24797" title="Monarchy of Iraq" label="Monarchy of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="25047" end="25055" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862138" start="25661" end="25674" title="Basra vilayet" label="Basra vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585311" start="25701" end="25716" title="Baghdad vilayet" label="Baghdad vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969497" start="25753" end="25766" title="Mosul vilayet" label="Mosul vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284161" start="26004" end="26018" title="Mosul question" label="Mosul question"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927692" start="26192" end="26204" title="Hubert Winthrop Young" label="Hubert Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q63941296" start="26717" end="26764" title="1921 Iraqi monarchy referendum" label="nationwide referendum to endorse Faisal of 1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084997" start="27414" end="27430" title="Treaty of Ankara (1926)" label="Treaty of Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="27688" end="27717" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="British Mandate for Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="27810" end="27826" title="Zionist movement" label="Zionist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q187152" start="27860" end="27879" title="Balfour Declaration" label="Balfour Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221536" start="28699" end="28711" title="Talib al-Naqib" label="Sayyid Talib"/>
<link wikidata="Q56232" start="29312" end="29324" title="Iraqi Arabic" label="Iraqi Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q162781" start="29829" end="29841" title="flag of Iraq" label="flag of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q44405" start="30863" end="30872" title="theocracy" label="theocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172317" start="31108" end="31112" title="Hijab" label="veil"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999319" start="31363" end="31376" title="Muriel Jessie Forbes" label="Muriel Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q620902" start="32146" end="32170" title="Iraq National Library and Archive" label="National Library of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q356134" start="32480" end="32495" title="Leonard Woolley" label="Leonard Woolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699" start="32543" end="32545" title="Ur" label="Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q156859" start="32595" end="32608" title="Assyriologist" label="Assyriologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342291" start="32609" end="32622" title="Edward Chiera" label="Edward Chiera"/>
<link wikidata="Q584605" start="32672" end="32676" title="Nuzi" label="Nuzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173310" start="32683" end="32689" title="Kirkuk" label="Kirkuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570005" start="32725" end="32736" title="clay tablet" label="clay tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945418" start="32791" end="32803" title="Nuzi texts" label="Nuzi Tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473945" start="33497" end="33516" title="Sati&amp;#x27; al-Husri" label="Sati&amp;#x27; al-Husri"/>
<link wikidata="Q521251" start="35192" end="35203" title="Iraq Museum" label="Iraq Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q173022" start="36523" end="36533" title="bronchitis" label="bronchitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="36604" end="36611" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q24323" start="37025" end="37048" title="Seven Pillars of Wisdom" label="Seven Pillars of Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745155" start="37189" end="37211" title="1926 United Kingdom general strike" label="general strike of 1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945680" start="37317" end="37324" title="East Rounton" label="Rounton"/>
<link wikidata="Q55998" start="37385" end="37393" title="pleurisy" label="pleurisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="37473" end="37480" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116169" start="37645" end="37663" title="Kinahan Cornwallis" label="Kinahan Cornwallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="37925" end="37934" title="Depression (mood)" label="depressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163347" start="37996" end="38007" title="Henry Dobbs" label="Henry Dobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q418905" start="38623" end="38635" title="allobarbital" label="allobarbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q62962" start="38636" end="38650" title="sleeping pills" label="sleeping pills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896966" start="39144" end="39166" title="Bab Al-Sharqi" label="Bab al-Sharji district"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="39383" end="39391" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="39951" end="39968" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q283680" start="40770" end="40780" title="Carchemish" label="Carchemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774471" start="41161" end="41176" title="Anti-suffragism" label="anti-suffragist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031002" start="41324" end="41366" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Anti-Suffrage League" label="Women&amp;#x27;s National Anti-Suffrage League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435868" start="41675" end="41719" title="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage in the United Kingdom" label="Parliament granted suffrage to women in 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q235505" start="41721" end="41740" title="Vita Sackville-West" label="Vita Sackville-West"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42201" end="42212" title=":wikt:weathercock" label="weathercock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145246" start="43177" end="43208" title="partition of the Ottoman Empire" label="partition of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969497" start="43367" end="43380" title="Mosul vilayet" label="Mosul vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395554" start="44181" end="44194" title="Saad Eskander" label="Saad Eskander"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041595" start="44921" end="44946" title="Iraqi Republic (1958–68)" label="Iraqi Republic government"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="46477" end="46494" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q333573" start="46737" end="46746" title="Leo Amery" label="Leo Amery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556340" start="46831" end="46844" title="D. G. Hogarth" label="D. G. Hogarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q223729" start="46932" end="46943" title="white paper" label="white paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628610" start="47101" end="47118" title="H. V. F. Winstone" label="H. V. F. Winstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033585" start="47437" end="47450" title="Elie Kedourie" label="Elie Kedourie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48022" end="48044" title="History of the Jews in Iraq#Modern Iraq" label="Iraqi Jewish community"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371729" start="48143" end="48156" title="Karl E. Meyer" label="Karl E. Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489571" start="48161" end="48181" title="Shareen Blair Brysac" label="Shareen Blair Brysac"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302003" start="48590" end="48606" title="Douglas Strachan" label="Douglas Strachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945680" start="48650" end="48662" title="East Rounton" label="East Rounton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23086" start="48664" end="48679" title="North Yorkshire" label="North Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q330369" start="49295" end="49319" title="Arts and Crafts movement" label="Arts and Crafts movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193749" start="49357" end="49363" title="Redcar" label="Redcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q182589" start="49387" end="49401" title="William Morris" label="William Morris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49428" end="49444" title="Listed building#Categories of listed building" label="Grade II* listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647057" start="49509" end="49527" title="Great North Museum" label="Great North Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="49531" end="49540" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415752" start="49592" end="49603" title="Kirkleatham" label="Kirkleatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q837164" start="49729" end="49749" title="Newcastle University" label="Newcastle University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="49768" end="49774" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q473858" start="49775" end="49804" title="Memory of the World Register" label="Memory of the World Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q19297602" start="50065" end="50077" title="Olivier Guez" label="Olivier Guez"/>
<link wikidata="" start="50260" end="50298" title="A Dangerous Man: Lawrence After Arabia" label="A Dangerous Man: Lawrence After Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524561" start="50327" end="50340" title="Gillian Barge" label="Gillian Barge"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="50460" end="50472" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q685962" start="50486" end="50520" title="The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles" label="The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50568" end="50595" title="List of The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles episodes#Film versions" label="&amp;quot;Winds of Change&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q270049" start="50619" end="50630" title="Anna Massey" label="Anna Massey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407746" start="50752" end="50783" title="Queen of the Desert (film)" label="&amp;quot;Queen of the Desert&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q44131" start="50787" end="50800" title="Werner Herzog" label="Werner Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q37459" start="50823" end="50836" title="Nicole Kidman" label="Nicole Kidman"/>
<link wikidata="Q30643660" start="50916" end="50936" title="Letters from Baghdad" label="Letters from Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q200534" start="51041" end="51054" title="Tilda Swinton" label="Tilda Swinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19348446" start="51821" end="51872" title="List of mountains of Switzerland named after people" label="List of mountains of Switzerland named after people"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="275006" wikidata="Q751705" url="?curid=275006" title="Autocannon">
<text>An autocannon, automatic cannon or machine cannon is a fully automatic gun that is capable of rapid-firing large-caliber ( or more) armour-piercing, explosive or incendiary shells, as opposed to the smaller-caliber kinetic projectiles (bullets) fired by a machine gun. Autocannons have a longer effective range and greater terminal performance than machine guns, due to the use of larger/heavier munitions (most often in the range of , but bigger calibers also exist), but are usually smaller than tank guns, howitzers, field guns, or other artillery. When used on its own, the word &quot;autocannon&quot; typically indicates a non-rotary weapon with a single barrel. When multiple rotating barrels are involved, such a weapon is referred to as a &quot;rotary autocannon&quot; or &quot;rotary cannon&quot;, or if it uses a single with a rotating cylinder with multiple chambers, it is known as a &quot;revolver autocannon&quot; or &quot;revolver cannon&quot;, both of these systems are commonly used as aircraft guns and anti-aircraft guns.

Autocannons are heavy weapons that are unsuitable for use by infantry. Due to the heavy weight and recoil, they are typically installed on fixed mounts, wheeled carriages, ground combat vehicles, aircraft, or watercraft, and are almost always crew-served, or even remote-operated with automatic target recognition/acquisition (e.g. sentry guns and naval CIWS). As such, ammunition is typically fed from a belt system to reduce reloading pauses or for a faster rate of fire, but magazines remain an option. Common types of ammunition, among a wide variety, include HEIAP, HEDP and more specialised armour-piercing (AP) munitions, mainly composite rigid (APCR) and discarding sabot (APDS) rounds.

Capable of generating extremely rapid firepower, autocannons overheat quickly if used for sustained fire, and are limited by the amount of ammunition that can be carried by the weapons systems mounting them. Both the US 25 mm M242 Bushmaster and the British 30 mm RARDEN have relatively slow rates of fire so as not to deplete ammunition too quickly. The Oerlikon KBA 25 mm has a relatively mid-high rate of fire 650 rounds per minute but can be electronically programmed to 175-200 rounds per minute. The rate of fire of a modern autocannon ranges from 90 rounds per minute, in the case of the British RARDEN, to 2,500 rounds per minute with the GIAT 30. Rotary systems with multiple barrels can achieve over 10,000 rounds per minute (the Russian GSh-6-23, for example). Such extremely high rates of fire are effectively employed by aircraft in aerial dogfights and close air support on ground targets via strafing attacks, where the target dwell time is short and weapons are typically operated in brief bursts.

== History ==
=== Early developments ===
The first modern autocannon was the British QF 1-pounder, also known as the &quot;pom-pom&quot;. This was essentially an enlarged version of the Maxim gun, which was the first successful fully automatic machine gun, requiring no outside stimulus in its firing cycle other than holding the trigger. The pom-pom fired gunpowder-filled explosive shells at a rate of over 200 rounds a minute: much faster than conventional artillery while possessing a much longer range and more firepower than the infantry rifle.

In 1913, Reinhold Becker and his &quot;Stahlwerke Becker&quot; firm designed the 20mm Becker cannon, addressing the German Empire&#x27;s perceived need for heavy-calibre aircraft armament. The Imperial Government&#x27;s Spandau Arsenal assisted them in perfecting the ordnance. Although only about 500+ examples of the original Becker design were made during World War I, the design&#x27;s patent was acquired by the Swiss Oerlikon Contraves firm in 1924, with the Third Reich&#x27;s &quot;Ikaria-Werke&quot; firm of Berlin using Oerlikon design patents in creating the MG FF wingmount cannon ordnance. The Imperial Japanese Navy&#x27;s Type 99 cannon, adopted and produced in 1939, was also based on the Becker/Oerlikon design&#x27;s principles.

During the First World War, autocannons were mostly used in the trenches as anti-aircraft guns. The British used pom-pom guns as part of their air defences to counter the German Zeppelin airships that made regular bombing raids on London. However, they were of little value, as their shells neither ignited the hydrogen of the Zeppelins nor caused sufficient loss of gas (and hence lift) to bring them down. Attempts to use the guns in aircraft failed, as the weight severely limited both speed and altitude, thus making successful interception impossible. The more effective QF 2 pounder naval gun would be developed during the war to serve as an anti-aircraft and close range defensive weapon for naval vessels.

=== Second World War ===
Autocannons would serve to a much greater extent and effect during the Second World War. The German Panzer II light tank, which was one of the most numerous in German service during the invasion of Poland and the campaign in France, used a 20 mm autocannon as its main armament. Although ineffective against tank armour even during the early years of the war, the cannon was effective against light-skinned vehicles as well as infantry and was also used by armoured cars. Larger examples, such as the 40 mm Vickers S, were mounted in ground attack aircraft to serve as an anti-tank weapon, a role to which they were suited as tank armour is often lightest on top.

The Polish 20 mm 38 Fk auto cannon was expensive to produce, but an exception. Unlike the Oerlikon, it was effective against all the tanks fielded in 1939, largely because it was built as an upgrade to the Oerlikon, Hispano-Suiza, and Madsen. It even proved capable of knocking out early Panzer IIIs and IVs, albeit with great difficulty. Only 55 were produced by the time of the Polish Defensive War. However it was in the air war that these weapons played their most important part in the conflict.

During the First World War, rifle-calibre machine guns became the standard weapons of military aircraft. In the Second, several factors brought about their replacement by autocannon. During the inter-war years, aircraft underwent extensive evolution and the all-metal monoplane, pioneered as far back as the end of 1915, almost entirely replaced wood and fabric biplanes. At the same time as they began to be made from stronger materials, the machines also increased in speed, streamlining, power and size, and it began to be apparent that correspondingly more powerful weapons would be needed to counter them. Conversely, they were becoming much better able to carry exactly such larger and more powerful guns; the technology of which was in the meantime also developing, providing significantly improved rates of fire and reliability.

When the Second World War did break out, it was swiftly realised that the power of contemporary aircraft allowed armour plate to be fitted to protect the pilot and other vulnerable areas. This innovation proved highly effective against rifle-calibre machine gun rounds, which tended to ricochet off harmlessly. Similarly the introduction of self sealing fuel tanks provided reliable protection against these small projectiles. These new defenses, synergistically with the general robustness of new aircraft designs and of course their sheer speed, which made simply shooting them accurately in the first place far more difficult, entailed that it took a lot of such bullets and a fair amount of luck to cause them critical damage; but potentially a single cannon shell with a high-explosive payload could instantly sever essential structural elements, penetrate armour or open up a fuel tank beyond the capacity of self-sealing compounds to counter, even from fairly long range. (Instead of explosives, such shells could carry incendiaries, also highly effective at destroying planes, or a combination of explosives and incendiaries.) Thus by the end of the war, the fighter aircraft of almost all the belligerents mounted cannon of some sort, the only exception being the United States which in most cases favoured the Browning AN/M2 &quot;light-barrel&quot; .50 calibre heavy machine gun. A fighter equipped with these intermediate weapons in sufficient numbers was adequately armed to fulfill most of the Americans&#x27; combat needs aloft, as they tended to confront enemy fighters and other small planes far more often than large bombers; and as, in the earlier phases of the war, the Japanese aircraft they dealt with were not only unusually lightly built but went without either armour plate or self-sealing tanks in order to reduce their weight. Nevertheless, the U.S. also adopted planes fitted with autocannon, such as the Lockheed P-38 Lightning, despite experiencing technical difficulties with developing and manufacturing these large-calibre automatic guns.

Weapons such as the Oerlikon 20 mm, the Bofors 40 mm and various German Rheinmetall autocannons would see widespread use by both sides during the Second World War; not only in an anti-aircraft role, but as a weapon for use against ground targets as well. Heavier anti-aircraft cannon had difficulty tracking fast-moving aircraft and were unable to accurately judge altitude or distance, while machine guns possessed insufficient range and firepower to bring down aircraft consistently. Continued ineffectiveness against aircraft despite the large numbers installed during the second World War led, in the West, to the removal of almost all shipboard anti-aircraft weapons in the early post-war period. This was only reversed with the introduction of computer-controlled systems.

The German &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; deployed small numbers of the experimental &quot;Bordkanone&quot; series of heavy aircraft cannon in 37, 50 and 75 mm calibres, mounted in gun pods under the fuselage or wings. The 37 mm BK 3,7 cannon, based on the German Army&#x27;s 3.7 cm FlaK 43 anti-aircraft autocannon was mounted in pairs in underwing gun pods on a small number of specialized Stuka &quot;Panzerknacker&quot; (tank buster) aircraft. The BK 5 cm cannon, based on the 5 cm KwK 39 cannon of the Panzer III, was installed in Ju 88P bomber destroyers, which also used other &quot;Bordkanone&quot; models, and in the Messerschmitt 410 &quot;Hornisse&quot; (Hornet) bomber destroyer. 300 examples of the BK 5 cannon were built, more than all other versions. The PaK 40 semi-automatic 7.5 cm calibre anti-tank gun was the basis for the BK 7,5 in the Junkers Ju 88 P-1 heavy fighter and Henschel Hs 129 B-3 twin engined ground attack aircraft.

The German Mauser MK 213 was developed at the end of the Second World War and is regarded as the archetypal modern revolver cannon. With multiple chambers and a single barrel, autocannons using the revolver principle can combine a very high rate of fire and high acceleration to its maximum firing rate with low weight, at cost of a reduced sustained rate of fire compared to rotary cannon. They are, therefore, used mainly in aircraft for AA purposes, in which a target is visible for a short period of time.

=== Modern era ===
The development of guided missiles was thought to render cannons unnecessary, and a full generation of western fighter aircraft was built without them. In contrast, all Eastern Bloc aircraft kept their guns. During the Vietnam War, however, the United States Air Force realized that cannons were useful for firing warning shots and for attacking targets that did not warrant the expenditure of a (much more expensive) missile, and, more importantly, as an additional weapon if the aircraft had expended all its missiles or enemy aircraft were inside of the missiles&#x27; minimum target acquisition range in a high-G close range engagement. This was particularly important with the lower reliability of early air-to-air missile technology, such as that employed during the Vietnam War. As a consequence, fighters at the time had cannons added back in external &quot;gun pods&quot;, and virtually all fighter aircraft retain autocannons in integral internal mounts to this day.

After the Second World War, autocannons continued to serve as a versatile weapon in land, sea, and air applications. Examples of modern autocannons include the 25 mm Oerlikon KBA mounted on the IFV Freccia, the M242 Bushmaster mounted on the M2/M3 Bradley, updated versions of the Bofors 40 mm gun, and the Mauser BK-27. The 20 mm M61A1 is an example of an electrically powered rotary autocannon. Another role that has come into association with autocannons are that of close-in weapon systems on naval vessels, which are used to destroy anti-ship missiles and low flying aircraft.

== See also ==
* Chain gun
* Gast gun
* Infantry support gun
* List of autocannon
* Recoil operation
* Revolver cannon
* Rotary cannon
* MG 18 TuF

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Department of the Army. &quot;Ballistic Data Performance of Ammunition&quot;, TM 9-1907. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1948. .
* Williams, Anthony G. &quot;The Development of Automatic Cannon, Heavy Machine Guns and Their Ammunition for Armies, Navies and Air Forces&quot;. Shrewsbury, Eng.: Airlife Publishing Ltd., 2000. . .

== External links ==

* Extensive documentation of Luftwaffe autocannons</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q751705" start="3" end="13" title="Autocannon" label="autocannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q751705" start="15" end="31" title="Autocannon" label="automatic cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q751705" start="35" end="49" title="Autocannon" label="machine cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9180311" start="55" end="70" title="automatic firearm" label="fully automatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q110155210" start="71" end="74" title="gun" label="gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q170417" start="113" end="120" title="caliber" label="caliber"/>
<link wikidata="Q868534" start="132" end="147" title="armour-piercing" label="armour-piercing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="149" end="158" title="explosive" label="explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670272" start="162" end="172" title="incendiary ammunition" label="incendiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="173" end="179" title="shell (projectile)" label="shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q113427895" start="215" end="233" title="kinetic projectile" label="kinetic projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q174583" start="236" end="242" title="bullet" label="bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="256" end="267" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q96377031" start="295" end="310" title="effective range" label="effective range"/>
<link wikidata="Q198944" start="323" end="343" title="terminal ballistics" label="terminal performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="396" end="404" title="munition" label="munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241267" start="498" end="506" title="tank gun" label="tank gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q180126" start="509" end="517" title="howitzer" label="howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330892" start="520" end="529" title="field gun" label="field gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="541" end="550" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q487192" start="660" end="666" title="gun barrel" label="barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966482" start="786" end="799" title="rotary cannon" label="rotary cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q971822" start="937" end="952" title="revolver cannon" label="revolver cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="1103" end="1111" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q749601" start="1141" end="1147" title="recoil" label="recoil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1181" end="1192" title="weapon mount#Static mount" label="fixed mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163915" start="1195" end="1211" title="gun carriage" label="wheeled carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4009273" start="1214" end="1235" title="ground combat vehicle" label="ground combat vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q216916" start="1238" end="1246" title="military aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="1251" end="1261" title="warship" label="watercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862123" start="1285" end="1296" title="crew-served weapon" label="crew-served"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982902" start="1306" end="1321" title="teleoperation" label="remote-operated"/>
<link wikidata="Q621974" start="1327" end="1355" title="automatic target recognition" label="automatic target recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685884" start="1356" end="1367" title="target acquisition" label="acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955484" start="1374" end="1384" title="sentry gun" label="sentry gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054730" start="1396" end="1400" title="close-in weapon system" label="CIWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853245" start="1447" end="1451" title="ammunition belt" label="belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q753454" start="1502" end="1514" title="rate of fire" label="rate of fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q148958" start="1520" end="1528" title="magazine (firearms)" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11222437" start="1606" end="1611" title="high-explosive incendiary/armor-piercing ammunition" label="HEIAP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1613" end="1617" title="high-explosive anti-tank warhead#High-explosive dual purpose" label="HEDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q868534" start="1639" end="1654" title="armor-piercing shot and shell" label="armour-piercing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1695" end="1699" title="Shell (projectile)#APCR" label="APCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q73116" start="1723" end="1727" title="Armour-piercing discarding sabot" label="APDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409574" start="1776" end="1785" title="firepower" label="firepower"/>
<link wikidata="Q138729" start="1958" end="1979" title="M242 Bushmaster" label="25 mm M242 Bushmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131718" start="1996" end="2008" title="RARDEN" label="30 mm RARDEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880981" start="2093" end="2105" title="Oerlikon KBA" label="Oerlikon KBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q753454" start="2295" end="2312" title="rounds per minute" label="rounds per minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485567" start="2385" end="2392" title="GIAT 30" label="GIAT 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q195415" start="2486" end="2494" title="GSh-6-23" label="GSh-6-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q471145" start="2584" end="2590" title="aerial combat" label="aerial"/>
<link wikidata="Q830494" start="2591" end="2599" title="dogfight" label="dogfight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="2605" end="2622" title="close air support" label="close air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430863" start="2645" end="2653" title="strafing" label="strafing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958882" start="2838" end="2850" title="QF 1 pounder pom-pom" label="QF 1-pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q282352" start="2939" end="2948" title="Maxim gun" label="Maxim gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q124072" start="3297" end="3302" title="rifle" label="rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q813702" start="3386" end="3404" title="Becker Type M2 20 mm cannon" label="20mm Becker cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="3421" end="3434" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228100" start="3525" end="3540" title="Spandau Arsenal" label="Spandau Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11069710" start="3728" end="3746" title="Oerlikon Contraves" label="Oerlikon Contraves"/>
<link wikidata="Q680704" start="3875" end="3880" title="MG FF cannon" label="MG FF"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="3912" end="3934" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151524" start="3942" end="3956" title="Type 99 cannon" label="Type 99 cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4064" end="4079" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="4129" end="4146" title="anti-aircraft gun" label="anti-aircraft gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="4196" end="4207" title="air defence" label="air defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q191413" start="4231" end="4239" title="Zeppelin" label="Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="4284" end="4290" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297890" start="4629" end="4651" title="QF 2 pounder naval gun" label="QF 2 pounder naval gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4864" end="4880" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q151068" start="4893" end="4902" title="Panzer II" label="Panzer II"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="4979" end="4997" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="5006" end="5024" title="Battle of France" label="campaign in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q649062" start="5250" end="5263" title="Armored car (military)" label="armoured cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936462" start="5300" end="5309" title="Vickers S" label="Vickers S"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="5327" end="5349" title="ground attack aircraft" label="ground attack aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5469" end="5480" title="Nkm wz.38 FK#Penetration Capacity" label="20 mm 38 Fk"/>
<link wikidata="Q627537" start="6228" end="6237" title="monoplane" label="monoplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q315769" start="6264" end="6279" title="Junkers J 1" label="the end of 1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q223818" start="6322" end="6329" title="biplane" label="biplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q323227" start="7084" end="7092" title="ricochet" label="ricochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q930931" start="7139" end="7162" title="Self-sealing fuel tank" label="self sealing fuel tanks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8118" end="8157" title="Browning M2#.50 Browning AN/M2" label="Browning AN/M2 &amp;quot;light-barrel&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195448" start="8170" end="8187" title="heavy machine gun" label="heavy machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8891" end="8905" title="Oerlikon 20 mm cannon" label="Oerlikon 20 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q115472839" start="8911" end="8923" title="Bofors 40 mm Automatic Gun L/60" label="Bofors 40 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q161544" start="8943" end="8954" title="Rheinmetall" label="Rheinmetall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="9668" end="9677" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q820248" start="9823" end="9830" title="gun pod" label="gun pod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658024" start="9871" end="9877" title="BK 37" label="BK 3,7"/>
<link wikidata="Q23936240" start="9918" end="9932" title="3.7 cm FlaK 43" label="3.7 cm FlaK 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q26795" start="10034" end="10039" title="Junkers Ju 87" label="Stuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835806" start="10094" end="10108" title="BK 5 cannon" label="BK 5 cm cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q259676" start="10123" end="10134" title="5 cm KwK 39" label="5 cm KwK 39"/>
<link wikidata="Q151475" start="10149" end="10159" title="Panzer III" label="Panzer III"/>
<link wikidata="Q155661" start="10178" end="10184" title="Junkers Ju 88" label="Ju 88P"/>
<link wikidata="Q196730" start="10185" end="10201" title="bomber destroyer" label="bomber destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175219" start="10268" end="10306" title="Messerschmitt Me 410" label="Messerschmitt 410 &amp;quot;Hornisse&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q259122" start="10412" end="10418" title="PaK 40" label="PaK 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q155661" start="10499" end="10512" title="Junkers Ju 88" label="Junkers Ju 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q655135" start="10535" end="10550" title="Henschel Hs 129" label="Henschel Hs 129"/>
<link wikidata="Q655580" start="10604" end="10617" title="Mauser MK 213" label="Mauser MK 213"/>
<link wikidata="Q971822" start="10708" end="10723" title="revolver cannon" label="revolver cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170382" start="10791" end="10799" title="revolver" label="revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="11292" end="11304" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="11342" end="11353" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="11368" end="11391" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685884" start="11703" end="11721" title="target acquisition" label="target acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880981" start="12267" end="12279" title="Oerlikon KBA" label="Oerlikon KBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784933" start="12295" end="12306" title="Freccia IFV" label="IFV Freccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q138729" start="12312" end="12316" title="M242" label="M242"/>
<link wikidata="Q473430" start="12343" end="12356" title="M2 Bradley" label="M2/M3 Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035263" start="12382" end="12398" title="Bofors 40 mm Automatic Gun L/70" label="Bofors 40 mm gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q834801" start="12408" end="12420" title="Mauser BK-27" label="Mauser BK-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q725972" start="12432" end="12437" title="M61A1" label="M61A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054730" start="12571" end="12593" title="close-in weapon system" label="close-in weapon system"/>
<link wikidata="Q643532" start="12639" end="12656" title="anti-ship missile" label="anti-ship missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059048" start="12701" end="12710" title="Chain gun" label="Chain gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420900" start="12713" end="12721" title="Gast gun" label="Gast gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141166" start="12724" end="12744" title="Infantry support gun" label="Infantry support gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014414" start="12747" end="12765" title="List of autocannon" label="List of autocannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2203443" start="12768" end="12784" title="Recoil operation" label="Recoil operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q971822" start="12787" end="12802" title="Revolver cannon" label="Revolver cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966482" start="12805" end="12818" title="Rotary cannon" label="Rotary cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841306" start="12821" end="12830" title="MG 18 TuF" label="MG 18 TuF"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="275009" wikidata="Q32501" url="?curid=275009" title="Culture of the United Kingdom">
<text>The culture of the United Kingdom is influenced by its combined nations&#x27; history, its Christian religious life, its interaction with the cultures of Europe, the individual cultures of England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, and the impact of the British Empire. The culture of the United Kingdom may also colloquially be referred to as British culture. Although British culture is a distinct entity, the individual cultures of England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are diverse. There have been varying degrees of overlap and distinctiveness between these four cultures.

British literature is particularly esteemed. The modern novel was developed in Britain, and playwrights, poets, and authors are among its most prominent cultural figures. Britain has also made notable contributions to music, cinema, art, architecture and television. The UK is also the home of the Church of England, Church of Scotland, Church in Wales, the state church and mother church of the Anglican Communion, the third-largest Christian denomination. Britain contains some of the world&#x27;s oldest universities, has made many contributions to philosophy, science, technology and medicine, and is the birthplace of many prominent scientists and inventions. The Industrial Revolution began in the UK and had a profound effect on socio-economic and cultural conditions around the world.

British culture has been influenced by historical and modern migration, the historical invasions of Great Britain, and the British Empire. As a result of the British Empire, significant British influence can be observed in the language, law, culture and institutions of its former colonies, most of which are members of the Commonwealth of Nations. A subset of these states form the Anglosphere, and are among Britain&#x27;s closest allies. British colonies and dominions influenced British culture in turn, particularly British cuisine.

Sport is an important part of British culture, and numerous sports originated in their organised, modern form in the country including cricket, football, boxing, tennis and rugby. The UK has been described as a &quot;cultural superpower&quot;, and London has been described as a world cultural capital. A global opinion poll for the BBC saw the UK ranked the third most positively viewed nation in the world (behind Germany and Canada) in 2013 and 2014.

==History==
Throughout its history, the culture of Great Britain has primarily consisted of the separate native traditions of England, Scotland and Wales. With regard to cultural influences, prior to the expansion of the British Empire, the island had been most notably influenced by French culture (via the Normans), Scandinavian culture (via the Vikings) and Italian culture (via the Romans).

The arrival of Celtic and Germanic tribes influenced Britain&#x27;s early development. The Celtic peoples introduced unique languages, traditions, and social structures. Subsequently, the migrations of Germanic tribes, such as the Anglo-Saxons, further influenced Britain&#x27;s cultural landscape. The ancient Roman occupation of Britain, lasting almost 400 years, also impacted the linguistic and cultural identity of Great Britain.

Following the expansion of the British Empire, England, Scotland and Wales absorbed different peoples from around the world, and, post-World War II, Britain developed a more diverse cultural landscape through higher levels of immigration. Furthermore, following the Fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and EU enlargement in 2004 and 2007, the UK experienced a significant rise in immigration from Eastern Europe. Today, the UK has a sizable immigrant population, and encompasses the cultures of British people from various backgrounds, with South Asian, Continental European, African and Caribbean descent being most prevalent.

==Language==

First spoken in early medieval England, the English language is the &quot;de facto&quot; official language of the UK, and is spoken monolingually by an estimated 95% of the British population. Seven other languages are recognised by the British Government under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages – Welsh, Scottish Gaelic, Scots, Cornish, Irish, Ulster Scots, and British Sign Language.

In Wales, all pupils at state schools must either be taught through the medium of Welsh or study it as an additional language until age 16, and the Welsh Language Act 1993 and the Government of Wales Act 1998 provide that the Welsh and English languages should be treated equally in the public sector, so far as is reasonable and practicable. Irish and Ulster Scots enjoy limited use alongside English in Northern Ireland, mainly in publicly commissioned translations. The Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act, passed by the Scottish Parliament in 2005, recognised Gaelic as an official language of Scotland and required the creation of a national plan for Gaelic to provide strategic direction for the development of the Gaelic language. The Cornish language is a revived language that became extinct as a first language in Cornwall in the late 18th century.

===Regional accents===
Dialects and regional accents vary heavily amongst the four countries of the United Kingdom, as well as within the countries themselves. This is partially the result of the long history of immigration to the UK, for example Northern English dialects contain many words with Old Norse roots. Scottish English, Welsh English, and Hiberno-Irish are varieties of English distinct from both English English and the native languages of those countries. Received Pronunciation is the Standard English accent in England and Wales, while in Scotland Scottish Standard English is a distinct dialect. Although these accents have a high social prestige, since the 1960s a greater permissiveness toward regional English varieties has taken hold in education.

The great variety of British accents is often noted, with nearby regions often having highly distinct dialects and accents, for example there are large differences between Scouse and Mancunian despite Liverpool and Manchester being only 35 miles (56 km) apart. Dialectal English is often found in literature, for example Emily Brontë&#x27;s novel &quot;Wuthering Heights&quot; contains Yorkshire dialect.

==Arts==
===Literature===

The United Kingdom inherited the literary traditions of England, Scotland and Wales. These include Arthurian literature and its Welsh origins, Norse-influenced Old English literature, the works of English authors Geoffrey Chaucer and William Shakespeare, and Scots works such as John Barbour&#x27;s &quot;The Brus.&quot; 

====Augustan Age====
The early 18th century period of British literature is known as the Augustan Age and included the development of the novel. Daniel Defoe&#x27;s &quot;Robinson Crusoe&quot; (1719) and &quot;Moll Flanders&quot; (1722) are often seen as the first English novels. Alongside these works, poetry also flourished, with notable examples such as The Rape of the Lock (1712) by Alexander Pope, a mock-heroic poem that satirized the social mores of the time. However, the development of the novel took place in a wider literary context that included the rise of prose satires – which reached a high point with &quot;Gulliver&#x27;s Travels &quot; (1729) by Anglo-Irish writer Jonathan Swift, and earlier foreign works like the Spanish &quot;Don Quixote&quot;. Other novels by Jonathan Swift include &quot;A Tale of a Tub&quot; (1704), &quot;An Argument Against Abolishing Christianity&quot; (1712), and A Modest Proposal (1729). With the publishing of these books, he gained literary fame and formed lifelong friendships with Alexander Pope, John Gay, and John Arbuthnot, who, with Swift, created the Martinus Scriblerus Club in 1713. Other novels made at this time are: &quot;Tom Jones&quot; (1749), by Henry Fielding; &quot;Pamela&quot; (1740) and &quot;&quot; (1748), by Samuel Richardson; Laurence Sterne – The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman (1759–1767). &quot;Pamela&quot; is hailed as one of the first true novels in English literature while &quot;Clarissa&quot; is regarded as Richardson&#x27;s magnum opus and one of the greatest novels in the English language. The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman is an experimental novel.

Also linked to the Augustan period is Samuel Johnson&#x27;s &quot;A Dictionary of the English Language&quot;. Published in 1755, it was viewed as the pre-eminent British Dictionary until the completion of the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; 150 years later. Each word defined in detail, with descriptions of their various uses and numerous literary quotes as illustrations. This was the first dictionary of its kind, containing 40,000 words and nearly 114,000 quotes packed together with Johnson&#x27;s personal touch. It is among the most influential dictionaries, or among most authoritative, in the history of the English language and considered to be a monumental achievement in lexicography. A group of London booksellers contracted Johnson to write a dictionary for the sum of 1,500 guineas (£1,575), equivalent to about £ in 2025. Johnson took seven years to complete the work, although he had claimed he could finish it in three. A warm reception greeted Johnson&#x27;s Dictionary as it was the first dictionary that could be read with pleasure. The definitions full of wit and depth of thought supported by passages from beloved poets and philosophers, meant a reader could be content spending an evening poring over its pages. Johnson&#x27;s choice of structure and format has certainly shaped future English dictionaries and lexicons and the role they play in language development.

Richard Steele, another famous author known for comedies and pamphlets during the Augustan Period, began his literary career with The Christian Hero (1701), a moral pamphlet that was criticized due to his personal lifestyle, followed by the successful comedy The Funeral later that year. In 1703, he wrote The Lying Lover, an early sentimental comedy that failed on stage. In 1705, he collaborated with Joseph Addison on The Tender Husband and contributed the prologue to John Vanbrugh’s The Mistake. Steele&#x27;s major breakthrough came in 1709 with the creation of The Tatler, a tri-weekly periodical in which he wrote the majority of the essays under the pseudonym Isaac Bickerstaff, aiming to expose societal vices and promote simplicity. Despite its success, The Tatler was shut down in 1711 due to political pressure, prompting Steele and Addison to co-found The Spectator in 1711 and The Guardian in 1713, solidifying Steele&#x27;s role as a leading figure in early British journalism.

====Romantic Period====

The Romantic Period was marked by a revival of poetry and a focus on emotion, nature, and individualism, responding to the growing rationalism of the Enlightenment. This era gave rise to many literary works that explored the tension between reason and imagination. William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s Lyrical Ballads (1798) is considered a landmark collection, emphasizing the beauty of nature and the primacy of emotion, and marking the official start of the Romantic Movement. Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein (1818), one of the earliest science fiction novels, delves into themes of creation, responsibility, and the consequences of unchecked scientific ambition, framed within Gothic conventions. Jane Austen’s Pride and Prejudice (1813) offered a brilliant social satire, critiquing class structures and the courtship rituals of Regency England, and remains one of the most beloved novels in British Literature. Lord Byron’s Don Juan (1819–1824) is a satirical epic poem that details the adventures of the legendary lover, displaying Byron&#x27;s wit, irony, and irreverence toward societal norms.

Sir Walter Scott’s Waverley (1814), widely considered the first historical novel, vividly recreates the Jacobite Rebellion of 1745, cementing Scott&#x27;s place as a major figure in British literature. William Blake’s Songs of Innocence and of Experience (1794) blends art and poetry to explore themes of innocence, experience, and societal corruption, providing a unique vision of the Romantic spirit. Percy Bysshe Shelley’s Prometheus Unbound (1820), a lyrical drama, explores themes of rebellion, tyranny, and human freedom, standing as one of his most radical and imaginative works. Robert Burns, the famed Scottish poet, revived interest in Scots literature with works such as Auld Lang Syne, which celebrated the vernacular tradition. Lastly, Mary Wollstonecraft’s A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792) stands as one of the earliest and most influential works of feminist philosophy, advocating for women&#x27;s education and equal rights in a male-dominated society.

Although primarily associated with the Victorian Era, Lewis Carroll’s Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland (1865) emerged from the later part of this broader Romantic tradition, blending imaginative fantasy with playful wordplay. This whimsical novel follows young Alice&#x27;s journey through a dreamlike world populated by peculiar characters, exploring themes of logic, absurdity, and identity. Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland remains a pioneering work of literary nonsense, captivating readers with its inventive narrative and surreal exploration of the boundaries between reality and imagination.

====Victorian Era====

The late Georgian Era and Victorian era saw a renewed focus on the novel. A key theme of these novels was social commentary. Early in the period Jane Austen satirised the lifestyle of the gentry and nobility, while the later novels of Charles Dickens often used humour and keen observations to criticise poverty and social stratification. One of his novels, Oliver Twist describes Victorian Times and the sordid lives of criminals and exposes the cruel treatment of the many orphans in London. Another novel by Charles Dickens, Great Expectations (1861), is a bildungsroman that follows the life of Pip, an orphan navigating ambition, love, and personal growth while critiquing social mobility and class divisions. Charlotte Brontë’s Jane Eyre (1847) blends Gothic romance with social commentary, focusing on a young woman&#x27;s quest for independence against the rigid structures of Victorian society. The three Brontë sisters and George Eliot commented on Northern England and the Midlands respectively, though all four women wrote under male pen names during their lifetimes, partly to deflect anti-feminist criticism. Nevertheless, openly female authors achieved considerable success in the period, such as the predominantly religious poems of Elizabeth Barrett Browning and Christina Rossetti. George Eliot’s Middlemarch (1871–1872), often regarded as one of the greatest English novels, explores themes of politics, marriage, and ambition in the setting of a provincial English town.

Elizabeth Gaskell’s North and South (1854–1855) contrasts the industrial north with the agricultural south, addressing issues such as class conflict, industrialization, and gender roles. Thomas Hardy’s Tess of the d’Urbervilles (1891) offers a tragic critique of Victorian society&#x27;s treatment of women, sexuality, and class, while Oscar Wilde’s The Picture of Dorian Gray (1890) examines themes of aestheticism, morality, and vanity in a Gothic narrative where the protagonist&#x27;s portrait ages as his soul corrupts. In Robert Louis Stevenson’s The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (1886), the novella delves into themes of duality, identity, and morality through the split personality of its protagonist. Arthur Conan Doyle’s The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes (1892), a group of short stories, which popularised the detective genre and introduced one of literature&#x27;s most iconic characters: Sherlock Holmes.

Rudyard Kipling&#x27;s literature exemplifies the British Empire’s influence on British literature through his works that often reflect the ethos of imperialism and colonialism. His novels The Jungle Book, which is considered to be classic piece of literature, and The Man Who Would Be King are both set in British India, showcasing the cultural and political impact of British rule in the region. His poem If— famously captures the concept of the &quot;stiff upper lip,&quot; a British ideal of stoicism and self-discipline. Additionally, The White Man’s Burden conveys a white supremacist and imperialist perspective, encouraging the colonial domination of non-European peoples under the guise of a civilizing mission. Kipling&#x27;s works, while celebrated for their literary qualities, remain controversial for their imperialist themes.

==== World War and Modern Literature ====

World War I gave rise to British war poets and writers such as Wilfred Owen, Siegfried Sassoon, and Rupert Brooke, who wrote (often paradoxically) of their expectations of war, and their experiences in the trenches. Initially idealistic and patriotic in tone, as the war progressed the tone of the movement became increasingly sombre and pacifistic. The beginning of the twentieth century also saw the Celtic Revival stimulate a new appreciation of traditional Irish literature, while the Scottish Renaissance brought modernism to Scottish literature as well as an interest in new forms in the literatures of Scottish Gaelic and Scots. The English novel developed in the 20th century into much greater variety and it remains today the dominant English literary form.

The contemporary British literary scene is marked by awards such as the Booker Prize, created in 1969, and festivals including the Welsh Hay Festival, held since 1988. The prominent status of children&#x27;s literature in the UK was demonstrated in the opening ceremony of the London 2012 Olympic Games, which contained sequence dedicated to prominent children&#x27;s literary characters. In 2003 the BBC carried out a British survey entitled &quot;The Big Read&quot; in order to find the &quot;nation&#x27;s best-loved novel&quot;, with works by English novelists J. R. R. Tolkien, Jane Austen, Philip Pullman, Douglas Adams and J. K. Rowling making up the top five on the list. More than 75% of the British public read at least one book annually. The UK is also among the largest publishers of books. , six firms in the United Kingdom rank among the world&#x27;s biggest publishers of books in terms of revenue: Bloomsbury, Cambridge University Press, Informa, Oxford University Press, Pearson, and RELX Group.

===Theatre===
From its formation in 1707 the United Kingdom has had a vibrant tradition of theatre, much of it inherited from England, Scotland and Wales. The Union of the Crowns coincided with the decline of highbrow and provocative Restoration comedy in favour of sentimental comedy, domestic tragedy such as George Lillo&#x27;s The London Merchant (1731), and by an overwhelming interest in Italian opera. Popular entertainment became more important in this period than ever before, with fair-booth burlesque and mixed forms that are the ancestors of the English music hall. These forms flourished at the expense of other forms of English drama, which went into a long period of decline. In Scotland the opposite occurred, with the emergence of specifically Scottish plays including John Home&#x27;s &quot;Douglas&quot; and the works of Walter Scott, which included original plays as well as adaptations of his &quot;Waverley&quot; novels.
The late 19th century saw revival of English theatre with arrival of Irishmen George Bernard Shaw and Oscar Wilde, who influenced domestic English drama and revitalised it. Their contemporaries Gilbert and Sullivan had a similar impact on musical theatre with their comic operas. The Shakespeare Memorial Theatre was opened in Shakespeare&#x27;s birthplace Stratford upon Avon in 1879 and Herbert Beerbohm Tree founded an Academy of Dramatic Art at Her Majesty&#x27;s Theatre in 1904.

The early twentieth century was dominated by drawing-room plays produced by the likes of Noël Coward, which were then challenged by the kitchen sink realism and absurdist drama influenced by Irishman Samuel Beckett in the 1950s and 60s. Conversely 1952 saw the first performance of Agatha Christie&#x27;s &quot;The Mousetrap&quot;, a drawing-room murder mystery that has seen over 25,000 performances and is the longest-running West End show. At the same time the performing arts theatre Sadler&#x27;s Wells, under Lilian Baylis, nurtured talent that led to the development of an opera company, which became the English National Opera (ENO); a theatre company, which evolved into the National Theatre; and a ballet company, which eventually became the English Royal Ballet. Elsewhere the Royal Shakespeare Company was founded in 1959 at Stratford-upon-Avon, and continues to mainly stage Shakespeare&#x27;s plays.

Contemporary British theatre is focused on the West End, London&#x27;s major theatre district. The Theatre Royal, Drury Lane in the City of Westminster dates back to 1663, making it the oldest London theatre, however the Theatre Royal at the Bristol Old Vic is the oldest continually-operating theatre in the English speaking world, opening in 1768. The musicals of Andrew Lloyd Webber have dominated the West End since the late 20th century, leading him to be dubbed &quot;the most commercially successful composer in history&quot;. A National Theatre of Scotland was set up in 2006.

=== Music ===

==== Classical music ====

British Baroque music was heavily influenced by continental fashions. This is exemplified by George Frideric Handel, a German-born naturalised British citizen whose choral music set British taste for the next two centuries. His operas also helped Britain challenge Italy as a centre of operatic production. Classical music attracted much attention from 1784 with the formation of the Birmingham Triennial Music Festival, which was the longest running classical music festival of its kind until the final concerts in 1912. Beyond this, the establishment of the London Philharmonic Society in 1813, Royal Academy of Music in 1822, and Irish Academy of Music in 1848 aided the professionalisation of British classical music and patronage of composers.

The Philharmonic Society was a strong supporter of the German Felix Mendelssohn, an early Romantic composer who also strongly influenced British music. In Ireland, John Field invented the nocturne and may have been an influence on Chopin and Liszt. A notable development of the mid- to late-nineteenth century was the resurgence of English-language opera and the establishment of several prominent orchestras, including the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic in 1840, Manchester-based Hallé in 1858, the Scottish Orchestra in 1891 and the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra in 1920. The most notable trend in classical music at the turn of the century was the nationalistic trend that developed. This was initially seen in works like &quot;The Masque at Kenilworth&quot;, which reconstructed an Elizabethan masque, but later took a pastoral turn under the influence of the British folk revival. Examplars of this period are Ralph Vaughan Williams&#x27; &quot;English Folk Song Suite&quot;, and Sir Alexander Mackenzie&#x27;s &quot;Scottish Rhapsodies&quot;.

Modern and contemporary classical music takes a variety of forms. Composers such as Benjamin Britten developed idiosyncratic and avant-garde styles, while the likes of William Walton produced more conventional ceremonial and patriotic music. The UK now has several major orchestras, including the BBC Symphony Orchestra, and the Philharmonia, while the establishment of the Opera North in 1977 sought to redress the balance of operatic institutions away from London. There are several classical festivals, such as Aldeburgh and Glydebourne, while the BBC Proms are an important annual fixture in the classical calendar.

==== Popular music ====

Popular commercial music in Britain can be traced back at least as far as the seventeenth-century broadside ballad, and also encompasses brass band music and music hall. Popular music in the modern sense began to emerge in the 1950s, as the American styles of jazz and rock and roll became popular. The skiffle revival was an early attempt to create a British form of American music, but it was the emergence of British rock and roll by the early 1960s that established a viable British popular music industry. Genres such as beat and British blues were re-exported to America by bands such as the Beatles and Rolling Stones, in a move that came to be called the British Invasion. The 1960s saw the development of heavy metal in Birmingham and the wider area. The development of blues rock helped differentiate rock and pop music, leading to the emergence of several sub-genres of rock in the 1970s. Glam rock was a particularly British genre that emphasised outrageous costumes, while the end of the decade saw the rise of punk, new wave, and post-punk bands. The influence of immigration could also be seen in the increased prominence of World music, particularly Jamaican music.

The 1980s were a successful decade in British pop, as a second British Invasion was witnessed and new technology enabled genres such as synthpop to form. Jazz saw a resurgence as black British musicians created new fusions such as Acid Jazz. Indie rock was a reaction to the perceived saturation of the music industry by pop, exemplified by Stock Aitken Waterman&#x27;s domination of the charts. This continued in the 1990s, as boy bands, all-female and mixed groups dominated the singles chart, while the Madchester scene helped drive alternative rock and Britpop to the mainstream. British soul saw a rise that continued into the 2000s, including the global success of Adele. Dance music also saw innovation, with genres such as dubstep and new rave emerging.

==== Folk and sub-national music ====

In contrast to the comparatively homogeneous classical and pop genres, each nation of the UK has retained a distinct tradition of folk music. The traditional folk music of England has contributed to several genres, such as sea shanties, jigs, hornpipes and dance music. It has its own distinct variations and regional peculiarities, while musical Morris dancing is an English folk dance known to have existed at least as early as the mid-15th century.

The bagpipes have long been a national symbol of Scotland, and the Great Highland Bagpipe is widely recognised. The &quot;English and Scottish Popular Ballads&quot;, are ballads of the British Isles from the later medieval period until the 19th century, demonstrating great regional variety, particularly local traditions such as the Border ballads, which include the particularly influential &quot;Ballad of Chevy Chase&quot;. British folk groups, such as Fairport Convention, have drawn heavily from these ballads.

Similarly, while the national anthem &quot;God Save the King&quot; and other patriotic songs such as &quot;Rule, Britannia!&quot; represent the United Kingdom, each of the four individual countries of the UK has its own patriotic hymns. For example, &quot;Jerusalem&quot;, &quot;Flower of Scotland&quot;, &quot;Land of My Fathers&quot;, and &quot;Danny Boy&quot; pertain exclusively to England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland respectively. These songs are often used at sporting events where each nation competes individually. 
===Cinema===
Britain has had a significant film industry for over a century. While many films focus on British culture, British cinema is also marked by its interaction and competition with American and continental European cinema.

The UK was the location of the oldest surviving moving picture, &quot;Roundhay Garden Scene&quot; (1888), which was shot in Roundhay, Leeds by French inventor Louis Le Prince, while the first British film, &quot;Incident at Clovelly Cottage&quot; was shot in 1895. The world&#x27;s first colour motion picture was shot by Edward Raymond Turner in 1902. British film production suffered in the 1920s in face of competition from American imports and a legal requirement for cinemas to show a set quota of British films, which encouraged poor-quality, low-cost productions to meet this demand. This had changed by the 1940s, when the government encouraged fewer, higher-quality films to be made&quot;.&quot; This era also saw the rise of Alfred Hitchcock, who soon moved to the US and become one of the twentieth century&#x27;s most influential directors. During World War II the Crown Film Unit established a reputation for documentaries, while Powell and Pressburger began their influential and innovative collaboration.

The post-war period was a particular high point for British filmmaking, producing &quot;The Third Man&quot; and &quot;Brief Encounter&quot;, which the British Film Institute consider the best and second-best British films respectively. Laurence Olivier&#x27;s 1948 &quot;Hamlet&quot; was the first British film to win the Academy Award for Best Picture. The 1950s saw a focus on popular domestic topics such as comedies, including the enduring &quot;Carry On&quot; series, and World War II epics such as &quot;The&quot; &quot;Dam Busters&quot;. At the end of the decade Hammer Films took advantage of relaxed censorship laws to begin their series of successful horror films. The beginning of the 1960s saw the British New Wave style develop, influenced by its French counterpart, that sought to depict a wider strata of society in a realistic manner. The 1960s also saw renewed American financial interest in British film, which particularly manifested itself in the development of historical epics, such as Best Picture winners &quot;Lawrence of Arabia&quot; and &quot;A Man for All Seasons&quot;; spy thrillers, including the first films in the &quot;James Bond&quot; franchise; and films based on &#x27;swinging London&#x27; scene.

The 1970s saw a withdrawal of American support and a retrenchment in British cinema, though the decade did see culturally important productions such as the horror &quot;The Wicker Man&quot; and Monty Python&#x27;s comedic films. The decade also saw the Commonwealth influence British film, as &quot;Pressure&quot; and &quot;A Private Enterprise&quot; are considered the first Black British and British Asian films respectively. 1981&#x27;s &quot;Chariots of Fire&quot; and 1982&#x27;s &quot;Gandhi&quot; both won the Best Picture Oscar, the latter winning eight awards, prompting a resurgence in period films. 1982 also saw the creation of Channel 4, which had a remit to promote films for minority audiences. Films with racial and LGBT themes were produced, while Channel 4&#x27;s involvement saw television stars move into feature films.

American investment again increased in the 1990s, and the success of &quot;Four Weddings and a Funeral&quot; saw romantic comedies rise in popularity. Merchant Ivory Productions, boosted by the Oscars success of the previous decade&#x27;s period pieces, continued to produce films in the same vein. American studios also began to base the production of Hollywood films in the UK, encouraged by tax incentives. 1996&#x27;s &quot;Trainspotting&quot; led to increased interest in regional, particularly Scottish, cinema. While American-funded films continued their influence in the 2010s, domestic European co-productions also received acclaim. &quot;The Queen&quot; was British-French production for which Helen Mirren won Best Actress, while the UK Film Council funded &quot;The King&#x27;s Speech&quot;, which won Best Picture in 2011. Asian British cinema has risen in prominence since 1999, when &quot;East is East&quot; was a mainstream success on a low budget.

===Broadcasting===
The UK has been at the forefront of developments in film, radio and television. Broadcasting in the UK has historically been dominated by the taxpayer-funded but independently run British Broadcasting Corporation (commonly known as the &quot;BBC&quot;), although other independent radio and television (ITV, Channel 4, Five) and satellite broadcasters (especially BSkyB which has over 10 million subscribers) have become more important in recent years. BBC television, and the other three main television channels are public service broadcasters who, as part of their licence allowing them to operate, broadcast a variety of minority interest programming. The BBC and Channel 4 are state-owned, though they operate independently.

Launched in 1955, ITV is the oldest commercial television network in the UK. Director Ridley Scott&#x27;s evocative 1973 Hovis bread television commercial captured the public imagination. Filmed on Gold Hill, Shaftesbury in Dorset, Scott&#x27;s advert was voted the UK&#x27;s favourite television advertisement of all time in 2006. Other notable British commercials include the 1989 British Airways face advertisement, the 2005 &quot;noitulovE&quot; advert for Guinness, the 2007 &quot;Gorilla&quot; advertisement by Cadbury chocolate featuring a gorilla playing drums with Phil Collins&#x27; track &quot;In the Air Tonight&quot; playing in the background, and a 2013 advert for Galaxy chocolate bar featuring a computer-generated image of Audrey Hepburn. Christmas commercials are screened from early November in the UK, with campaigns including the John Lewis Christmas advert for the department store chain.

International football tournaments, such as the World Cup, are historically the most viewed sports events among the public, while &quot;Match of the Day&quot; is the most popular weekly football show. The 1966 FIFA World Cup Final and the Funeral of Princess Diana are the two most watched television events ever in the UK. Satire has been a prominent feature in British comedy for centuries. The British satire boom of the 1960s, which consisted of writers and performers such as Peter Cook, Dudley Moore, Alan Bennett, David Frost and Jonathan Miller, has heavily influenced British television, including the sketch comedy series &quot;Monty Python&#x27;s Flying Circus&quot; created in 1969 by Monty Python. Regarded as the leading figure of the satire boom, Peter Cook was ranked number one in the &quot;Comedians&#x27; Comedian&quot; poll. The puppet show &quot;Spitting Image&quot; was a satire of the royal family, politics, entertainment, sport and British culture of the 1980s up to the mid-1990s.

&quot;Have I Got News for You&quot; and &quot;Mock the Week&quot; are the two longest running satirical panel shows. Satire also features heavily in the &quot;Grand Theft Auto&quot; video game series which has been ranked among Britain&#x27;s most successful exports. The slapstick and double entendre of Benny Hill also achieved very high ratings on British television, as did the physical humour of &quot;Mr. Bean&quot;. Popular comedy duos in television include &quot;The Two Ronnies&quot; and &quot;Morecambe and Wise&quot;, with both shows featuring memorable sketches. &quot;Jeeves and Wooster&quot; starred Hugh Laurie as Bertie Wooster, an airy, nonchalant, gormless, idle young gentleman and Stephen Fry as Jeeves, his calm, well-informed, and talented valet. Created by and starring Rik Mayall as Richie and Adrian Edmondson as Eddie, &quot;Bottom&quot; features two crude, perverted flatmates with no jobs and little money, which is noted for its chaotic, nihilistic humour and violent comedy slapstick. Steve Coogan created the character Alan Partridge, a tactless and inept television presenter who often insults his guests and whose inflated sense of celebrity drives him to shameless self-promotion. &quot;Da Ali G Show&quot; starred Sacha Baron Cohen as a faux-streetwise poseur Ali G from west London, who would conduct real interviews with unsuspecting people, many of whom are celebrities, during which they are asked absurd and ridiculous questions.

Animator Nick Park created the Wallace and Gromit characters at Aardman Animations studio in Bristol. They feature in &quot;A Grand Day Out&quot; (1989), &quot;The Wrong Trousers&quot; (1993) and &quot;A Close Shave&quot; (1995), which all have 100% positive ratings on the aggregation site Rotten Tomatoes, while &quot;A Matter of Loaf and Death&quot; was the most watched television programme in the UK in 2008. Aardman also produce the kid&#x27;s show &quot;Shaun the Sheep&quot;. One of the most popular children&#x27;s shows originating in the UK is &quot;Thomas &amp; Friends&quot; (based on &quot;The Railway Series&quot; books by Wilbert Awdry), which has become the number one licensed preschool property in the world. Other popular children&#x27;s shows include &quot;Postman Pat&quot;, &quot;Fireman Sam&quot;, &quot;Teletubbies&quot;, &quot;Bob the Builder&quot; and &quot;Peppa Pig&quot;.

First airing in 1958, &quot;Blue Peter&quot; is famous for its arts and crafts &quot;makes&quot;. The show has been a staple for generations of British children. Popular live action TV shows include &quot;The Borrowers&quot; (based on Mary Norton books on little people), &quot;The Adventures of Black Beauty&quot;, &quot;The Famous Five&quot; (based on Enid Blyton books), &quot;The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe&quot; (based on the C. S. Lewis novel), and &quot;Pride and Prejudice&quot; (starring Colin Firth as Mr. Darcy). The actor David Jason has voiced a number of popular characters in children&#x27;s animation, including &quot;The Wind in the Willows&quot; (based on the children&#x27;s book by Kenneth Grahame), &quot;Danger Mouse&quot; and &quot;Count Duckula&quot;. Other children&#x27;s shows include &quot;Where&#x27;s Wally?&quot; (a series based on books by author Martin Handford where readers are challenged to find Wally who is hidden in the group), &quot;Dennis the Menace and Gnasher&quot;, while &quot;Thunderbirds&quot; and &quot;Terrahawks&quot; by Gerry and Sylvia Anderson have been praised for creating Supermarionation.

Debuting in 1982, &quot;The Snowman&quot; (featuring the festive song &quot;Walking in the Air&quot;) is annually screened at Christmas. Shown on the BBC, the UK holds two high-profile charity telethon events, Children in Need, held annually in November, and Comic Relief, which alternates with Sports Relief, every March. The 2011 edition of Comic Relief saw the first appearance of James Corden&#x27;s Carpool Karaoke sketch when he drove around London singing songs with George Michael. British programmes dominate the list of TV&#x27;s most watched shows in the UK, with the kitchen sink dramas, ITV&#x27;s &quot;Coronation Street&quot; and BBC&#x27;s &quot;EastEnders&quot;, both often ranking high on the ratings list compiled by BARB. 
The major soap operas each feature a pub, and these pubs have become household names throughout the UK. The Rovers Return is the pub in &quot;Coronation Street&quot;, the Queen Vic (short for the Queen Victoria) is the pub in &quot;EastEnders&quot;, and the Woolpack in ITV&#x27;s &quot;Emmerdale&quot;. The pub being a prominent setting in the three major television soap operas reflects the role pubs have as the focal point of the community in many towns and villages across the UK. Espionage and detective shows have long been a staple of British television, such as the 1960s series &quot;The Avengers&quot; featuring lady spy adventurer and cultural (and feminist) icon Emma Peel.

The United Kingdom has a large number of national and local radio stations which cover a great variety of programming. The most listened to stations are the five main national BBC Radio stations. BBC Radio 1, a new music station aimed at the 16–24 age group. BBC Radio 2, a varied popular music and chat station aimed at adults is consistently highest in the ratings. BBC Radio 4, a varied talk station, is noted for its news, current affairs, drama and comedy output as well as &quot;The Archers&quot;, its long running soap opera, and other unique programmes, including &quot;Desert Island Discs&quot; (1942–present), an interview programme in which a famous guest (called a &quot;castaway&quot;) chooses eight pieces of music, a book and a luxury item that they would take with them to a desert island. Currently presented by Lauren Laverne, it is the longest running music radio programme in British history.

The idea for a Christmas message was conceived by one of the founders of the BBC. Delivered annually by the monarch, it was first broadcast on BBC Radio in 1932. An alternative Christmas message was first broadcast on Channel 4 in 1993. Broadcast from 1951 to 1960, radio comedy &quot;The Goon Show&quot;, starring Peter Sellers, Spike Milligan and Harry Secombe, mixed ludicrous plots with surreal humour, puns, catchphrases and an array of bizarre sound effects. The show has exerted considerable influence on British comedy and culture. As a film star Sellers in particular became influential to film actors by using different accents and guises and assuming multiple roles in the same film. Comedian Marty Feldman co-created the acclaimed BBC Radio comedy programme &quot;Round the Horne&quot; in 1965. The long running radio comedy &quot;Just a Minute&quot; first aired on BBC Radio 4 in 1967. Panellists must talk for sixty seconds on a given subject, &quot;without hesitation, repetition or deviation&quot;. Guests over the years have included Stephen Fry, Eddie Izzard and Sue Perkins. First broadcast on BBC Radio 4 in 1978, the science fiction comedy radio series &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot; was innovative in its use of music and sound effects. The BBC, as a public service broadcaster, also runs minority stations such as BBC Asian Network, BBC Radio 1Xtra and BBC Radio 6 Music, and local stations throughout the country. Rock music station Absolute Radio, and sports station Talksport, are among the biggest commercial radio stations in the UK.

* List of radio stations in the United Kingdom
* List of television stations in the United Kingdom

===Print===

Freedom of the press was established in Great Britain in 1695. Popular national newspapers include &quot;The Times&quot;, &quot;Financial Times, The Guardian, The Daily Telegraph and The Independent.&quot;

Founded by publisher John Walter in 1785, &quot;The Times&quot; is the first newspaper to have borne that name, lending it to numerous other papers around the world, and is the originator of the widely used Times Roman typeface, created by Victor Lardent and commissioned by Stanley Morison in 1931. Newspaper and publishing magnate Alfred Harmsworth played a major role in &quot;shaping the modern press&quot; – Harmsworth introduced or harnessed &quot;broad contents, exploitation of advertising revenue to subsidize prices, aggressive marketing, subordinate regional markets, independence from party control&quot; – and was called &quot;the greatest figure who ever strode down Fleet Street.&quot; &quot;The Economist&quot; was founded by James Wilson in 1843, and the daily &quot;Financial Times&quot; was founded in 1888. Founding &quot;The Gentleman&#x27;s Magazine&quot; in 1731, Edward Cave coined the term &quot;magazine&quot; for a periodical, and was the first publisher to successfully fashion a wide-ranging publication. Founded by Thomas Gibson Bowles, &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; featured caricatures of famous people for which it is best known today.

A pioneer of children&#x27;s publishing, John Newbery made children&#x27;s literature a sustainable and profitable part of the literary market. &quot;The History of Little Goody Two-Shoes&quot; was published by Newbery in 1765. Founded by Sir Allen Lane in 1935, Penguin Books revolutionised publishing in the 1930s through its inexpensive paperbacks, bringing high-quality paperback fiction and non-fiction to the mass market. Formed in 1940, Puffin Books is the children&#x27;s imprint of Penguin Books. Barbara Euphan Todd&#x27;s scarecrow story, &quot;Worzel Gummidge&quot;, was the first Puffin story book in 1941.

The &quot;Guinness Book of Records&quot; was the brainchild of Sir Hugh Beaver. On 10 November 1951 he became involved in an argument over which was the fastest game bird in Europe, and realised that it was impossible to confirm in reference books. Beaver knew that there must be numerous other questions debated throughout the world, but there was no book with which to settle arguments about records. He realised that a book supplying the answers to this sort of question might prove successful. His idea became reality when an acquaintance of his recommended University friends Norris and Ross McWhirter who were then commissioned to compile what became &quot;The Guinness Book of Records&quot; in August 1954. E. L. James&#x27; erotic romance trilogy &quot;Fifty Shades of Grey&quot;, &quot;Fifty Shades Darker&quot;, and &quot;Fifty Shades Freed&quot;, have sold over 125 million copies globally, and set the record in the United Kingdom as the fastest selling paperback.

Copyright laws originated in Britain with the Statute of Anne (also known as the Copyright Act 1709), which outlined the individual rights of the artist. A right to benefit financially from the work is articulated, and court rulings and legislation have recognised a right to control the work, such as ensuring that the integrity of it is preserved. The Statute of Anne gave the publishers rights for a fixed period, after which the copyright expired.

===Visual arts===
From the creation of the United Kingdom, the English school of painting is mainly notable for portraits and landscapes, and indeed portraits in landscapes. Among the artists of this period are Joshua Reynolds (1723–1792), George Stubbs (1724–1806), and Thomas Gainsborough (1727–1788).

Pictorial satirist William Hogarth pioneered Western sequential art, and political illustrations in this style are often referred to as &quot;Hogarthian&quot;. Following the work of Hogarth, political cartoons developed in England in the latter part of the 18th century under the direction of James Gillray. Regarded as being one of the two most influential cartoonists (the other being Hogarth), Gillray has been referred to as the father of the political cartoon, with his satirical work calling the king (George III), prime ministers and generals to account.

The late 18th century and the early 19th century was perhaps the most radical period in British art, producing William Blake (1757–1827), John Constable (1776–1837) and J. M. W. Turner (1775–1851), three of the most influential British artists, each of whom have dedicated spaces allocated for their work at the Tate Britain. Named after Turner, the Turner Prize (created in 1984) is an annual award presented to a British visual artist under the age of 50.

The Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood (PRB) achieved considerable influence after its foundation in 1848 with paintings that concentrated on religious, literary, and genre subjects executed in a colourful and minutely detailed style. PRB artists included John Everett Millais, Dante Gabriel Rossetti and subsequently Edward Burne-Jones. Also associated with it was the designer William Morris, whose efforts to make beautiful objects affordable (or even free) for everyone led to his wallpaper and tile designs to some extent defining the Victorian aesthetic and instigating the Arts and Crafts movement.

Visual artists from the UK in the 20th century include Lucian Freud, Francis Bacon, David Hockney, Bridget Riley, and the pop artists Richard Hamilton and Peter Blake. Also prominent amongst 20th-century artists was Henry Moore, regarded as the voice of British sculpture, and of British modernism in general. Sir Jacob Epstein was a pioneer of modern sculpture. In 1958 artist Gerald Holtom designed the protest logo for the British Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND), the peace movement in the UK, which became a universal peace symbol. As a reaction to abstract expressionism, pop art emerged in England at the end of the 1950s. The 1990s saw the Young British Artists, Damien Hirst and Tracey Emin.
The auction was revived in 17th- and 18th-century England when auctions by candle began to be used for the sale of goods and leaseholds, some of which were recorded in Samuel Pepys&#x27;s diary in 1660. Headquartered in King Street, London, Christie&#x27;s, the world&#x27;s largest auction house, was founded in 1766 by auctioneer James Christie in London. Known for his thickly impasted portrait and figure paintings, Lucian Freud was widely considered the pre-eminent British artist of his time. Freud was depicted in Francis Bacon&#x27;s 1969 oil painting, &quot;Three Studies of Lucian Freud&quot;, which was sold for $142.4 million in November 2013, the highest price attained at auction to that point.
Randolph Caldecott, Walter Crane, Kate Greenaway, John Tenniel, Aubrey Beardsley, Roger Hargreaves, Arthur Rackham, John Leech, George Cruikshank and Beatrix Potter were notable book illustrators. Posters have played a significant role in British culture. Designed by Alfred Leete in 1914 as a recruitment poster for the British Army, &quot;Lord Kitchener Wants You&quot; is the most famous British recruitment poster ever produced and an iconic and enduring image of World War I. Produced by the British government in 1939 for World War II, the &quot;Keep Calm and Carry On&quot; motivational poster is now seen as &quot;not only as a distillation of a crucial moment in Britishness, but also as an inspiring message from the past to the present in a time of crisis&quot;.

In the late 1960s, British graphic designer Storm Thorgerson co-founded the graphic art group Hipgnosis, who have designed many iconic single and album covers for rock bands. His works were notable for their surreal elements, with perhaps the most famous being the cover for Pink Floyd&#x27;s &quot;The Dark Side of the Moon&quot;. Designed and photographed by Brian Duffy, the &quot;Aladdin Sane&quot; album cover features a lightning bolt across his face which is regarded as one of the most iconic images of David Bowie. The subversive political artwork of Banksy (pseudonym of English graffiti artist whose identity is concealed) can be found on streets, walls and buildings in the UK and the rest of the world. Arts institutions include the Royal College of Art, Royal Society of Arts, New English Art Club, Slade School of Art, Royal Academy, and the Tate Gallery (founded as the National Gallery of British Art).

;Design

In 2006, 37 years after its first test flight, Concorde was named the winner of the Great British Design Quest organised by the BBC and the Design Museum. A total of 212,000 votes were cast with Concorde beating other British design icons such as the Mini, mini skirt, Jaguar E-Type, Tube map and the Supermarine Spitfire. The Spitfire featured in Christopher Nolan&#x27;s 2017 action-thriller film &quot;Dunkirk&quot;.

Sir Morien Morgan led research into supersonic transport in 1948 that culminated in the Concorde passenger aircraft. In November 1956 he became chairman of the newly formed Supersonic Transport Aircraft Committee which funded research into supersonic transport at several British aviation firms though the 1950s. By the late 1950s, the committee had started the process of selecting specific designs for development, and after the forced merger of most aviation firms in 1960, selected the Bristol Type 223, designed by Archibald Russell, as the basis for a transatlantic design.

The Brit Awards statuette for the BPI&#x27;s annual music awards, which depicts Britannia, the female personification of Britain, is regularly redesigned by some of the best known British designers, stylists and artists, including Dame Vivienne Westwood, Damien Hirst, Tracey Emin, Sir Peter Blake, Zaha Hadid and Sir Anish Kapoor.

===Performing arts, carnivals, parades===

Large outdoor music festivals in the summer and autumn are popular, such as Glastonbury (the largest greenfield festival in the world), V Festival, Reading and Leeds Festivals. The UK was at the forefront of the illegal, free rave movement from the late 1980s, which led to pan-European culture of teknivals mirrored on the British free festival movement and associated travelling lifestyle. The most prominent opera house in England is the Royal Opera House at Covent Gardens. The Proms, a season of orchestral classical music concerts held at the Royal Albert Hall, is a major cultural event held annually. The Royal Ballet is one of the world&#x27;s foremost classical ballet companies, its reputation built on two prominent figures of 20th-century dance, &quot;prima ballerina&quot; Margot Fonteyn and choreographer Frederick Ashton. Irish dancing is popular in Northern Ireland and among the Irish diaspora throughout the UK; its costumes feature patterns taken from the medieval Book of Kells.

A staple of British seaside culture, the quarrelsome couple Punch and Judy made their first recorded appearance in Covent Garden, London in 1662. The various episodes of Punch and Judy are performed in the spirit of outrageous comedy – often provoking shocked laughter – and are dominated by the anarchic clowning of Mr. Punch. Regarded as British cultural icons, they appeared at a significant period in British history, with Glyn Edwards stating: &quot;[Pulcinella] went down particularly well with Restoration British audiences, fun-starved after years of Puritanism. We soon changed Punch&#x27;s name, transformed him from a marionette to a hand puppet, and he became, really, a spirit of Britain – a subversive maverick who defies authority, a kind of puppet equivalent to our political cartoons.&quot;

The circus is a traditional form of entertainment in the UK. Chipperfield&#x27;s Circus dates back more than 300 years in Britain, making it one of the oldest family circus dynasties. Philip Astley is regarded as the father of the modern circus. Following his invention of the circus ring in 1768, Astley&#x27;s Amphitheatre opened in London in 1773. As an equestrian master Astley had a skill for trick horse-riding, and when he added tumblers, tightrope-walkers, jugglers, performing dogs, and a clown to fill time between his own demonstrations – the modern circus was born. The Hughes Royal Circus was popular in London in the 1780s. Pablo Fanque&#x27;s Circus Royal, among the most popular circuses of Victorian England, showcased William Kite, which inspired John Lennon to write &quot;Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite!&quot; on The Beatles&#x27; album &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot;. Joseph Grimaldi, originator of whiteface clown make-up, is considered the father of modern clowning.

The Edinburgh Festival Fringe is the world&#x27;s largest arts festival. Established in 1947, it takes place in Scotland&#x27;s capital during three weeks every August alongside several other arts and cultural festivals. The Fringe mostly attracts events from the performing arts, particularly theatre and comedy, although dance and music also feature. The Notting Hill Carnival is an annual event that has taken place on the streets of Notting Hill, London since 1966. Led by the British African-Caribbean community, the carnival has attracted around one million people, making it Britain&#x27;s biggest street festival and one of the largest in the world. 
Also of note is the extensive impact of Irish culture for St. Patrick&#x27;s Day. The largest St Patrick&#x27;s Day Parade takes place in Digbeth, Birmingham, where there is a strong Irish community.
Pantomime (often referred to as &quot;panto&quot;) is a British musical comedy stage production, designed for family entertainment. It is performed in theatres throughout the UK during the Christmas and New Year season. The art originated in the 18th century with John Weaver, a dance master and choreographer at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane in London. In 19th-century England it acquired its present form, which includes songs, slapstick comedy and dancing, employing gender-crossing actors, combining topical humour with a story loosely based on a well-known fairy tale. It is a participatory form of theatre, in which the audience sing along with parts of the music and shout out phrases to the performers, such as &quot;It&#x27;s behind you&quot;.

Pantomime story lines and scripts are almost always based on traditional children&#x27;s stories: some of the popular British stories featured include &quot;Jack and the Beanstalk&quot;, &quot;Peter Pan&quot;, &quot;Babes in the Wood&quot;, &quot;Goldilocks and the Three Bears&quot; and &quot;Dick Whittington and His Cat&quot;. Plot lines are almost always adapted for comic or satirical effect, and characters and situations from other stories are often interpolated into the plot. For example, &quot;Jack and the Beanstalk&quot; might include references to English nursery rhymes involving characters called &quot;Jack&quot;, such as &quot;Jack and Jill&quot;. Famous people regularly appear in Pantos, such as Ian McKellen. McKellen has also appeared at gay pride marches, with Manchester Pride one of 15 annual gay pride parades in the UK; the largest in Brighton attracts over 300,000.

Music hall is a British theatrical entertainment popular from the early Victorian era to the mid-20th century. The precursor to variety shows of today, music hall involved a mixture of popular songs, comedy, speciality acts and variety entertainment. Music hall songs include &quot;I&#x27;m Henery the Eighth, I Am&quot;, &quot;Hokey cokey&quot;, &quot;I Do Like To be Beside the Seaside&quot; and &quot;The Laughing Policeman&quot;. British performers who honed their skills at pantomime and music hall sketches include Charlie Chaplin, Stan Laurel, George Formby, Gracie Fields, Dan Leno, Gertrude Lawrence, Marie Lloyd and Harry Champion. British music hall comedian and theatre impresario Fred Karno developed a form of sketch comedy without dialogue in the 1890s, and Chaplin and Laurel were notable music hall comedians who worked for him. Laurel stated, &quot;Fred Karno didn&#x27;t teach Charlie [Chaplin] and me all we know about comedy. He just taught us most of it&quot;. Film producer Hal Roach stated; &quot;Fred Karno is not only a genius, he is the man who originated slapstick comedy. We in Hollywood owe much to him.&quot; Examples of variety shows that evolved from the music hall include the &quot;Royal Variety Performance&quot; (first performed in 1912), which was broadcast on BBC radio from the 1920s, and then on television since the 1950s. Annually held in December (often at the London Palladium) and performed in front of members of the British Royal Family, many famous acts have performed at the &quot;Royal Variety&quot; show over the century, and since 2007 one act of the show has been selected by the British public through the ITV television talent show &quot;Britain&#x27;s Got Talent&quot;.

===Architecture===
The architecture of the United Kingdom includes many features that precede the creation of the United Kingdom in 1707, from as early as Skara Brae and Stonehenge to the Giant&#x27;s Ring, Avebury and Roman ruins. In most towns and villages the parish church is an indication of the age of the settlement. Many castles remain from the medieval period, such as Windsor Castle (longest-occupied castle in Europe), Stirling Castle (one of the largest and most important in Scotland), Bodiam Castle (a moated castle), and Warwick Castle. Over the two centuries following the Norman conquest of England of 1066, and the building of the Tower of London, castles such as Caernarfon Castle in Wales and Carrickfergus Castle in Ireland were built.
English Gothic architecture flourished from the 12th to the early 16th century, and famous examples include Westminster Abbey, the traditional place of coronation for the British monarch, which also has a long tradition as a venue for royal weddings; and was the location of the funeral of Princess Diana, Canterbury Cathedral, one of the oldest and most famous Christian structures in England; Salisbury Cathedral, which has the tallest church spire in the UK; and Winchester Cathedral, which has the longest nave and greatest overall length of any Gothic cathedral in Europe. Tudor architecture is the final development of Medieval architecture in England, during the Tudor period (1485–1603). In the United Kingdom, a listed building is a building or other structure officially designated as being of special architectural, historical or cultural significance. About half a million buildings in the UK have &quot;listed&quot; status.

In the 1680s, Downing Street was built by Sir George Downing, and its most famous address 10 Downing Street, became the residence of the Prime Minister in 1730. One of the best-known English architects working at the time of the foundation of the United Kingdom was Sir Christopher Wren. He was employed to design and rebuild many of the ruined ancient churches of London following the Great Fire of London. His masterpiece, St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral, was completed in the early years of the United Kingdom. Buckingham Palace, the London residence of the British monarch, was built in 1705. Both St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral and Buckingham Palace use Portland stone, a limestone from the Jurassic period quarried in the Jurassic Coast in Portland, Dorset, which is famous for its use in British and world architecture.

In the early 18th century Baroque architecture – popular in Europe – was introduced, and Blenheim Palace was built in this era. However, Baroque was quickly replaced by a return of the Palladian form. The Georgian architecture of the 18th century was an evolved form of Palladianism. Many existing buildings such as Woburn Abbey and Kedleston Hall are in this style. Among the many architects of this form of architecture and its successors, neoclassical and romantic, were Robert Adam, Sir William Chambers, and James Wyatt.
The aristocratic stately home continued the tradition of the first large gracious unfortified mansions such as the Elizabethan Montacute House and Hatfield House. Many of these houses are the setting for British period dramas, such as &quot;Downton Abbey&quot;. During the 18th and 19th centuries in the highest echelons of British society, the English country house was a place for relaxing, hunting in the countryside. Many stately homes have become open to the public: Knebworth House, now a major venue for open air rock and pop concerts – Freddie Mercury&#x27;s final live performance with Queen took place at Knebworth on 9 August 1986, Alton Towers, the most popular theme park in the UK, and Longleat, the world&#x27;s first safari park outside Africa.

In the early 19th century the romantic Gothic revival began in England as a reaction to the symmetry of Palladianism. Notable examples of Gothic revival architecture are the Houses of Parliament and Fonthill Abbey. By the middle of the 19th century, as a result of new technology, one could incorporate steel as a building component: one of the greatest exponents of this was Joseph Paxton, architect of the Crystal Palace. Paxton also built such houses as Mentmore Towers, in the still popular retrospective Renaissance styles. In this era of prosperity and development British architecture embraced many new methods of construction, but such architects as August Pugin ensured that traditional styles were retained.

Following the building of the world&#x27;s first seaside pier in July 1814 in Ryde, Isle of Wight off the south coast of England, the pier became fashionable at seaside resorts in the UK during the Victorian era, peaking in the 1860s with 22 being built. Providing a walkway out to sea, the seaside pier is regarded as among the finest Victorian architecture, and is an iconic symbol of the British seaside holiday. By 1914, there were over 100 piers around the UK&#x27;s coasts. Today there are 55 seaside piers in the UK. Tower Bridge (half a mile from London Bridge) opened in 1895.

At the beginning of the 20th century a new form of design, arts and crafts, became popular; the architectural form of this style, which had evolved from the 19th-century designs of such architects as George Devey, was championed by Edwin Lutyens. Arts and crafts in architecture is characterised by an informal, non-symmetrical form, often with mullioned or lattice windows, multiple gables and tall chimneys. This style continued to evolve until World War II. After that war, reconstruction went through a variety of phases, but was heavily influenced by Modernism, especially from the late 1950s to the early 1970s. Many bleak town centre redevelopments—criticised for featuring hostile, concrete-lined &quot;windswept plazas&quot;—were the fruit of this interest, as were many equally bleak public buildings, such as the Hayward Gallery.
Many Modernist-inspired town centres are today being redeveloped: Bracknell town centre is an example. However, in the immediate post-War years many thousands (perhaps hundreds of thousands) of council houses in vernacular style were built, giving working-class people their first experience of private gardens and indoor sanitation. Many towns also feature statues or sculptures dedicated to famous natives. Modernism remains a significant force in British architecture, although its influence is felt predominantly in commercial buildings. The two most prominent proponents are Lord Rogers of Riverside and Norman Foster. Rogers&#x27; best known London buildings are probably Lloyd&#x27;s Building and the Millennium Dome, while Foster created the &#x27;Gherkin&#x27; and the City Hall. The Turner Prize winning artist Sir Anish Kapoor is an acclaimed contemporary British sculptors. A notable design is his ArcelorMittal Orbit sculpture at the Olympic Park in London.

Described by &quot;The Guardian&quot; as the &#x27;Queen of the curve&#x27;, Zaha Hadid liberated architectural geometry with the creation of highly expressive, sweeping fluid forms of multiple perspective points and fragmented geometry that evoke the chaos and flux of modern life. A pioneer of parametricism, and an icon of neo-futurism, with a formidable personality, her acclaimed work and ground-breaking forms include the aquatic centre for the London 2012 Olympics. In 2010 and 2011 she received the Stirling Prize, the UK&#x27;s most prestigious architectural award, and in 2015 she became the first woman to be awarded the Royal Gold Medal from the Royal Institute of British Architects. Completed in 2012, the Shard London Bridge is the tallest building in the UK. Other major skyscrapers under construction in London include 22 Bishopsgate, and Heron Tower. Modernist architect Nicholas Grimshaw designed the Eden Project in Cornwall, which is the world&#x27;s largest greenhouse.

===Comics===

British comics in the early 20th century typically evolved from illustrated penny dreadfuls of the Victorian era (featuring Sweeney Todd, Dick Turpin and &quot;Varney the Vampire&quot;). A growing consumer culture and an increased capacity for travel throughout the UK via the invention of railway (in 1825) created both a market for cheap popular literature, and the ability for it to be circulated on a large scale. Created in the 1830s, &quot;The Guardian&quot; described penny dreadfuls as &quot;Britain&#x27;s first taste of mass-produced popular culture for the young&quot;. Introducing familiar features in vampire fiction, &quot;Varney&quot; is the first story to refer to sharpened teeth for a vampire. After adult comics had been published – most notably &quot;Ally Sloper&#x27;s Half Holiday&quot; (1880s) featuring Ally Sloper who has been called the first regular character in comics, – more juvenile British comics emerged, with the two most popular, &quot;The Beano&quot; and &quot;The Dandy&quot;, released by DC Thomson (based in Dundee, Scotland) in the 1930s. By 1950 the weekly circulation of both reached two million. Explaining the popularity of comics during this period, Anita O&#x27;Brien, director curator at London&#x27;s Cartoon Museum, states: &quot;When comics like the &quot;Beano&quot; and &quot;Dandy&quot; were invented back in the 1930s – and through really to the 1950s and 1960s – these comics were almost the only entertainment available to children.&quot;

In 1954 &quot;Tiger&quot; comics introduced &quot;Roy of the Rovers&quot;, the hugely popular football based strip recounting the life of Roy Race and the team he played for, Melchester Rovers. The stock media phrase &quot;real &#x27;Roy of the Rovers&#x27; stuff&quot; is often used by football writers, commentators and fans when describing displays of great skill, or surprising results that go against the odds, in reference to the dramatic storylines that were the strip&#x27;s trademark. Other comic books, graphic novels, and sequential art of various genres also flourished. These included fantasy and science fiction like &quot;Eagle&quot;, &quot;Valiant&quot;, &quot;Warrior&quot;, and &quot;2000 AD&quot;. Other popular titles were war comics inspired by British military history like &quot;Commando&quot;, &quot;War Picture Library&quot;, and &quot;The Victor&quot;.

Created by Emma Orczy in 1903, the Scarlet Pimpernel is the alter ego of Sir Percy Blakeney, a wealthy English fop who transforms into a formidable swordsman and a quick-thinking escape artist, establishing the &quot;hero with a secret identity&quot; into popular culture. The Scarlet Pimpernel first appeared on stage (1903) and then in novel (1905), and became very popular with the British public. He exhibits characteristics that became standard superhero conventions in comic books, including the penchant for disguise, use of a signature weapon (sword), ability to out-think and outwit his adversaries, and a calling card (he leaves behind a scarlet pimpernel at his interventions). Drawing attention to his alter ego Blakeney he hides behind his public face as a meek, slow thinking foppish playboy, and he establishes a network of supporters, The League of the Scarlet Pimpernel, that aid his endeavours.

In the 1980s, a resurgence of British writers and artists gained prominence in mainstream comic books, which was dubbed the &quot;British Invasion&quot; in comic book history. These writers and artists brought with them their own mature themes and philosophy such as anarchy, controversy and politics common in British media, but were never before seen in American comics. These elements would pave the way for mature and &quot;darker and edgier&quot; comic books that would jump start the Modern Age of Comics. Writers included Alan Moore, famous for his &quot;V for Vendetta&quot;, &quot;From Hell&quot;, &quot;Watchmen&quot;, &quot;Marvelman&quot;, and &quot;The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen&quot;; &quot;Watchmen&quot; was described as &quot;paving the way for a current cultural obsession&quot; in comics; Neil Gaiman and his critically acclaimed and best-selling &quot;The Sandman&quot; mythos and &quot;Books of Magic&quot;; Warren Ellis creator of &quot;Transmetropolitan&quot; and &quot;Planetary&quot;; and others such as Alan Grant, Grant Morrison, Dave Gibbons, Alan Davis, and Mark Millar who created &quot;Wanted&quot; and &quot;Kick-Ass&quot;.

Prominent comic book artists include Steve Dillon, Simon Bisley, Dave McKean, Glen Fabry, John Ridgway and Sean Phillips. The comic book series &quot;Hellblazer&quot;, set in Britain and starring the Liverpudlian magician John Constantine, paved the way for British writers such as Jamie Delano, Mike Carey and Denise Mina.

==Folklore==
=== Robin Hood and the ballad tradition ===
Much of the folklore of the United Kingdom pre-dates the 18th century. Though some of the characters and stories are present throughout all of the UK, most belong to specific countries or regions. Common folkloric beings include pixies, giants, elves, bogeymen, trolls, goblins and dwarves. While many legends and folk-customs are thought to be ancient, such as the tales of Offa of Angeln and Weyland Smith, others date from after the Norman invasion of England, such as Robin Hood and his Merry Men of Sherwood and their battles with the Sheriff of Nottingham. Richard the Lionheart, Christian leader of the Third Crusade, came to be seen as a contemporary and supporter of Robin Hood. A plaque features Richard marrying Robin and Maid Marian outside Nottingham Castle.

During the High Middle Ages tales originated from Brythonic traditions, notably the Arthurian legend. Deriving from Welsh source; King Arthur, Excalibur and Merlin, while the Jersey poet Wace introduced the Knights of the Round Table. These stories are most centrally brought together within Geoffrey of Monmouth&#x27;s (&quot;History of the Kings of Britain&quot;). Another early figure from British tradition, King Cole, may have been based on a real figure from Sub-Roman Britain. Many of the tales make up part of the wider Matter of Britain, a collection of shared British folklore.

The Loch Ness Monster is a cryptid that is reputed to inhabit Loch Ness in the Scottish Highlands. The legendary monster has been affectionately referred to by the nickname &quot;Nessie&quot; since the 1950s. The leprechaun figures large in Irish folklore. A mischievous fairy-type creature in emerald green clothing who when not playing tricks spends all its time busily making shoes, the leprechaun is said to have a pot of gold hidden at the end of the rainbow, and if ever captured by a human it has the magical power to grant three wishes in exchange for release. In mythology, English fairy tales such as &quot;Jack and the Beanstalk&quot; and &quot;Jack the Giant Killer&quot; helped form the modern perception of giants as stupid and violent, while the dwarf Tom Thumb is a traditional hero in English folklore.

English fairy tale &quot;Goldilocks and the Three Bears&quot; is one of the most popular fairy tales in the English language. Some folk figures are based on semi- or actual historical people whose story has been passed down centuries: Lady Godiva, for instance, was said to have ridden naked on horseback through Coventry; the heroic English figure Hereward the Wake resisted the Norman invasion; Herne the Hunter is an equestrian ghost associated with Windsor Forest and Great Park, and Mother Shipton is the archetypal witch. The chivalrous bandit, such as Dick Turpin, is a recurring character.

=== Pirates ===
Published in 1724, &quot;A General History of the Pyrates&quot; by Captain Charles Johnson provided the standard account of the lives of many pirates in the Golden Age. It influenced pirate literature of Scottish novelists Robert Louis Stevenson (&quot;Treasure Island&quot;) and J. M. Barrie. Many famous English pirates from the Golden Age hailed from the West Country in south west England—the stereotypical West Country &quot;pirate accent&quot; was popularised by West Country native Robert Newton&#x27;s portrayal of Stevenson&#x27;s Long John Silver in film. The concept of &quot;walking the plank&quot; was popularised by Barrie&#x27;s &quot;Peter Pan&quot;, where Captain Hook&#x27;s pirates helped define the archetype. Davy Jones&#x27; Locker, where sailors or ships&#x27; remains are consigned to the bottom of the sea, is first recorded by Daniel Defoe in 1726. Johnson&#x27;s 1724 book gave a mythical status to famous English pirates such as Blackbeard and Calico Jack—Jack&#x27;s Jolly Roger flag design features a skull with crossed swords.

=== Superstitions ===

The Gremlin is part of Royal Air Force folklore dating from the 1920s, with &quot;gremlin&quot; being RAF slang for a mischievous creature that sabotages aircraft, meddling in the plane&#x27;s equipment. Legendary figures from 19th-century London whose tales have been romanticised include Sweeney Todd, the murderous barber of Fleet Street (accompanied with Mrs. Lovett who sells pies made from Todd&#x27;s victims), and serial killer Jack the Ripper. On 5 November, people in Britain celebrate Guy Fawkes Night by making bonfires and lighting fireworks in commemoration of the foiling of Guy Fawkes&#x27; Gunpowder Plot, which became an annual event after the Observance of 5th November Act 1605 was passed. Guy Fawkes masks are an emblem for anti-establishment protest groups.

=== Traditional non-religious holidays ===
Halloween is a traditional and much celebrated holiday in Scotland and Ireland on the night of 31 October. The name &quot;Halloween&quot; is first attested in the 16th century as a Scottish shortening of the fuller &quot;All-Hallows-Even&quot;, and according to some historians has its roots in the Gaelic festival Samhain, when the Gaels believed the border between this world and the otherworld became thin, and the dead would revisit the mortal world. In 1780, Dumfries poet John Mayne makes note of pranks at Halloween; &quot;What fearfu&#x27; pranks ensue!&quot;, as well as the supernatural associated with the night, &quot;Bogies&quot; (ghosts). Robert Burns&#x27; 1785 poem &quot;Halloween&quot; is recited by Scots at Halloween, and Burns was influenced by Mayne&#x27;s composition.

In Scotland and Ireland, traditional Halloween customs include guising — children disguised in costume going from door to door requesting food or coins – which had become common practice by the late 19th century; (the Halloween masks, worn by children, are known as &quot;false faces&quot; in Ireland.) turnips hollowed out and carved with faces to make lanterns, and holding parties where games such as apple bobbing are played. Agatha Christie&#x27;s mystery novel &quot;Hallowe&#x27;en Party&quot; is about a girl who is drowned in an apple-bobbing tub. Other practices in Ireland include lighting bonfires, and having firework displays. Further contemporary imagery of Halloween is derived from Gothic and horror literature (notably Shelley&#x27;s &quot;Frankenstein&quot; and Stoker&#x27;s &quot;Dracula&quot;), and classic horror films (such as Hammer Horrors). Mass transatlantic Irish and Scottish migration in the 19th century popularised Halloween in North America.

Witchcraft has featured in the British Isles for millennia. The use of a crystal ball to foretell the future is attributed to the druids. In medieval folklore King Arthur&#x27;s magician, the wizard Merlin, carried around a crystal ball for the same purpose. John Dee, consultant to Elizabeth I, frequently used a crystal ball to communicate with the angels. Probably the most famous depiction of witchcraft in literature is in Shakespeare&#x27;s 1606 play &quot;Macbeth&quot;, featuring the three witches and their cauldron. The ghost of Anne Boleyn is a frequently reported ghost sighting in the UK. Differing accounts include seeing her ghost ride up to Blickling Hall in a coach drawn by a headless horseman, with her own head on her lap.

Neopagan witchcraft began in England in the early 20th century with notable figures such as Aleister Crowley and the father of Wicca Gerald Gardner, before expanding westward in the 1960s. Settling down near the New Forest in Hampshire, Gardner joined an occult group through which he claimed to have encountered the New Forest coven into which he was initiated in 1939. Believing the coven to be a survival of the pre-Christian Witch-Cult, he decided to revive the faith, supplementing the coven&#x27;s rituals with ideas borrowed from ceremonial magic and the writings of Crowley to form the Gardnerian tradition of Wicca. Moving to London in 1945, following the repeal of the Witchcraft Act 1735 Gardner became intent on propagating Wicca, attracting media attention and writing &quot;Witchcraft Today&quot; (1954) and &quot;The Meaning of Witchcraft&quot; (1959). Crowley (the founder of Thelema) was described as &quot;the most notorious occultist magician of the 20th century&quot;, and he remains an influential figure over Western esotericism and the counter-culture. His motto of &quot;Do What Thou Wilt&quot; is inscribed on the vinyl of Led Zeppelin&#x27;s album &quot;Led Zeppelin III&quot;, and he is the subject of Ozzy Osbourne&#x27;s single &quot;Mr Crowley&quot;.

==National parks, museums, libraries, and galleries==

===Heritage administration===

Each country has its own body responsible for heritage matters.

English Heritage is the government body with a broad remit of managing the historic sites, artefacts and environments of England. It is currently sponsored by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport. The charity National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty has a contrasting role. Seventeen of the UNESCO World Heritage Sites are in England. Some of the best known of these include Hadrian&#x27;s Wall, Stonehenge, Avebury and Associated Sites, Tower of London, Jurassic Coast, Westminster, Saltaire, Ironbridge Gorge, and Studley Royal Park. The northernmost point of the Roman Empire, Hadrian&#x27;s Wall, is the largest Roman artefact anywhere: it runs a total of 73 miles in northern England.

Historic Environment Scotland is the executive agency of the Scottish Government, responsible for historic monuments in Scotland, such as Stirling Castle. The Old and New Town of Edinburgh is a notable Scottish World Heritage site. Balmoral Castle is the main Scottish residence of the British monarch. The Wallace Monument in Stirling contains artifacts believed to have belonged to Sir William Wallace, including the Wallace Sword. The Rob Roy Way, named after Scottish folk hero and outlaw Rob Roy MacGregor, is a long-distance footpath that runs for 92 miles. A statue of Robert the Bruce and a large monument and visitor centre (operated by the National Trust for Scotland) is located in Bannockburn near the site of the Battle of Bannockburn.
Many of Wales&#x27; great castles, such as the Castles and Town Walls of King Edward in Gwynedd and other monuments, are under the care of Cadw, the historic environment service of the Welsh Government. Welsh actor Sir Anthony Hopkins donated millions to the preservation of Snowdonia National Park. The five most frequently visited Welsh castles are Caernarfon Castle, Conwy Castle, Caerphilly Castle, Harlech Castle and Beaumaris Castle. The Northern Ireland Environment Agency promotes and conserves the natural and built environment in Northern Ireland, and the Giant&#x27;s Causeway on the north-east coast is one of the natural World Heritage sites. Tintagel Castle is a popular tourist destination in Cornwall, with the castle associated with the legend of King Arthur since the 12th century. There are 15 National Parks, including the Lake District in England, Snowdonia in Wales, and Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park in Scotland

===Museums and galleries===
The British Museum in London with its collection of more than seven million objects, is one of the largest and most comprehensive in the world, and sourced from every continent, illustrating and documenting the story of human culture from its beginning to the present. On display since 1802, the Rosetta Stone is the most viewed attraction. The Natural History Museum, London was established by Richard Owen (who coined the term &quot;dinosaur&quot;) to display the national collection of dinosaur fossils and other biological and geological exhibits. The National Museums of Scotland bring together national collections in Scotland. Amgueddfa Cymru – National Museum Wales comprises eight museums in Wales. National Museums Northern Ireland has four museums in Northern Ireland including the Ulster Museum.

The Titanic Belfast museum, a visitor attraction in the Titanic Quarter, east Belfast, Northern Ireland on the regenerated site of the shipyard where was built, was opened to the public in 2012. The architecture is a tribute to &quot;Titanic&quot; itself, with the external facades a nod to the enormous hull of the ocean liner.

The first Madame Tussauds wax museum opened in London in 1835, and today displays waxworks of famous people from various fields, including royalty (Princess Diana), historical figures (Henry VIII), sport (David Beckham), music (Freddie Mercury), literature (Charles Dickens), politics (Winston Churchill), television (Gordon Ramsay), and cinema (Michael Caine) among others.

The most senior art gallery is the National Gallery in Trafalgar Square, which houses a collection of over 2,300 paintings dating from the mid-13th century to 1900. The Tate galleries house the national collections of British and international modern art; they also host the famously controversial Turner Prize. The National Galleries of Scotland are the five national galleries of Scotland and two partner galleries. The National Museum of Art, Wales, opened in 2011.

===Libraries===
The British Library in London is the national library and is one of the world&#x27;s largest research libraries, holding over 150 million items in all known languages and formats; including around 25 million books. The library has two of the four remaining copies of the original Magna Carta (the other two copies are held in Lincoln Castle and Salisbury Cathedral) and has a room devoted solely to them. The British Library Sound Archive has over six million recordings (many from the BBC Sound Archive, including Winston Churchill&#x27;s wartime speeches.)

The National Library of Scotland in Edinburgh holds 7 million books, 14 million printed items (such as the last letter written by Mary, Queen of Scots) and over 2 million maps. The National Library of Wales is the national legal deposit library of Wales, and holds over 6.5 million books, portraits, maps and photographic images in Wales.

===Historical markers===
Blue plaques are the oldest historical marker scheme in the world. The scheme was proposed by politician William Ewart in 1863 and was initiated in 1866 by the Society of Arts. Since 1986 it has been run by English Heritage.

The first plaque was unveiled in 1867 to commemorate Lord Byron at his birthplace, 24 Holles Street, Cavendish Square, London. Events commemorated by plaques include John Logie Baird&#x27;s first demonstration of television at 22 Frith Street, Westminster, W1, London, the first sub 4-minute mile run by Roger Bannister on 6 May 1954 at Oxford University&#x27;s Iffley Road Track, and a sweet shop in Llandaff, Cardiff that commemorates the mischief by a young Roald Dahl who put a mouse in the gobstoppers jar.
==Science and technology==
From the time of the Scientific Revolution, England and Scotland, and thereafter the United Kingdom, have been prominent in world scientific and technological development. The Royal Society serves as the national academy for sciences, with members drawn from different institutions and disciplines. Formed in 1660, it is one of the oldest learned societies still in existence.

Sir Isaac Newton&#x27;s publication of the &quot;Principia Mathematica&quot; ushered in what is recognisable as modern physics. The first edition of 1687 and the second edition of 1713 framed the scientific context of the foundation of the United Kingdom. He realised that the same force is responsible for movements of celestial and terrestrial bodies, namely gravity. He is the father of classical mechanics, formulated as his three laws and as the co-inventor (with Gottfried Leibniz) of differential calculus. He also created the binomial theorem, worked extensively on optics, and created a law of cooling.
Figures from the UK have contributed to the development of most major branches of science. John Napier introduced logarithms in the early 17th century as a means to simplify calculations. Michael Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell unified the electric and magnetic forces in what are now known as Maxwell&#x27;s equations. Following his publication of &quot;A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field&quot; in 1865, Maxwell predicted the existence of radio waves in 1867. James Joule worked on thermodynamics and is often credited with the discovery of the principle of conservation of energy.

Naturalist Charles Darwin wrote &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot; and discovered the principle of evolution by natural selection. James Hutton, founder of modern geology, worked on the age of the Earth (deep time) which forms a key element of Darwin&#x27;s theory. Other important geologists include Charles Lyell, author of &quot;Principles of Geology&quot;, who also coined the term Pleistocene, and Adam Sedgwick, who proposed (and coined) the name of the Cambrian Period. William Thomson (Baron Kelvin) drew important conclusions in the field of thermodynamics and invented the Kelvin scale of absolute zero. Paul Dirac was one of the pioneers of quantum mechanics. Botanist Robert Brown discovered the random movement of particles suspended in a fluid (Brownian motion). John Stewart Bell created Bell&#x27;s Theorem. Harold Kroto discovered buckminsterfullerene.

Other 19th- and early 20th-century British pioneers in their field include Joseph Lister (antiseptic surgery), Edward Jenner (vaccination), Richard Owen (palaeontology, coined the term Dinosaur), Florence Nightingale (nursing), Sir George Cayley (aerodynamics), William Fox Talbot (photography), and Howard Carter (modern archaeology, discovered Tutankhamun).

Scholarly descriptions of dinosaur bones first appeared in the late 17th-century England. Between 1815 and 1824, William Buckland discovered fossils of &quot;Megalosaurus&quot; and became the first person to describe a dinosaur in a scientific journal. The second dinosaur genus to be identified, &quot;Iguanodon&quot;, was discovered in 1822 by Mary Ann Mantell. In 1832, Gideon Mantell discovered fossils of a third dinosaur, &quot;Hylaeosaurus&quot;. Owen recognised that the remains of the three new species that had been found so far shared a number of distinctive features. He decided to present them as a distinct taxonomic group, dinosaurs.

John Harrison invented the marine chronometer, a key piece in solving the problem of accurately establishing longitude at sea, thus revolutionising and extending the possibility of safe long-distance sea travel. The most celebrated British explorers include James Cook, Walter Raleigh, Sir Francis Drake, Henry Hudson, George Vancouver, Sir John Franklin, David Livingstone, Captain John Smith, Robert Falcon Scott, Lawrence Oates and Ernest Shackleton. The aquarium craze began in Victorian England when Philip Henry Gosse created and stocked the first public aquarium at London Zoo in 1853, and coined the term &quot;aquarium&quot; when he published &quot;The Aquarium: An Unveiling of the Wonders of the Deep Sea&quot; in 1854. Robert FitzRoy pioneered weather forecasting: the first daily weather forecasts were published in &quot;The Times&quot; in 1861.

A crucial advance in the development of the flush toilet was the S-trap invented by Alexander Cumming in 1775 – it uses the standing water to seal the outlet of the bowl, preventing the escape of foul air from the sewer. In 1824 Charles Macintosh invented the waterproof raincoat; the Mackintosh (mac) is named after him. William Sturgeon invented the electromagnet in 1824. The first commercial electrical telegraph was co-invented by Sir William Fothergill Cooke and Charles Wheatstone. They patented it in May 1837 as an alarm system, and it was first successfully demonstrated on 25 July 1837 between Euston and Camden Town in London.

Postal reformer Sir Rowland Hill is regarded as the creator of the modern postal service and the inventor of the postage stamp (Penny Black) — with his solution of pre-payment facilitating the safe, speedy and cheap transfer of letters. Hill&#x27;s colleague Sir Henry Cole introduced the world&#x27;s first commercial Christmas card in 1843. In 1851 Sir George Airy established the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, London, as the location of the prime meridian where longitude is defined to be 0° (one of the two lines that divide the Earth into the Eastern and Western Hemispheres). George Boole authored &quot;The Laws of Thought&quot; which contains Boolean algebra. Forming the mathematical foundations of computing, Boolean logic laid the foundations for the information age.
Historically, many of the UK&#x27;s greatest scientists have been based at either Oxford or Cambridge University, with laboratories such as the Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge and the Clarendon Laboratory in Oxford becoming famous in their own right. In modern times, other institutions such as the Red Brick and New Universities are catching up with Oxbridge. For instance, Lancaster University has a global reputation for work in low temperature physics.

Technologically, the UK is also amongst the world&#x27;s leaders. Historically, it was at the forefront of the Industrial Revolution, with innovations especially in textiles, the steam engine, railroads, machine tools and civil engineering. Famous British engineers and inventors from this period include James Watt, Robert Stephenson, Richard Arkwright, Henry Maudslay and the &#x27;father of Railways&#x27; George Stephenson. Maudslay&#x27;s most influential invention was the screw-cutting lathe, a machine which created uniformity in screws and allowed for the application of interchangeable parts (a prerequisite for mass production): it was a revolutionary development necessary for the Industrial Revolution. The UK has the oldest railway networks in the world, with the Stockton and Darlington Railway, opened in 1825, the first public railway to use steam locomotives. Opened in 1863, London Underground is the world&#x27;s first underground railway. Running along the East Coast Main Line between Edinburgh and London, the &quot;Flying Scotsman&quot; has been ranked the world&#x27;s most famous steam locomotive.

Engineer Isambard Kingdom Brunel, another major figure of the Industrial Revolution, was placed second in a 2002 BBC nationwide poll to determine the &quot;100 Greatest Britons&quot;. He created the Great Western Railway, as well as famous steamships including the &quot;SS Great Britain,&quot; the first propeller-driven ocean-going iron ship, and which laid the first lasting transatlantic telegraph cable. Josiah Wedgwood pioneered the industrialisation of pottery manufacture. In 1820, Scottish road builder John McAdam invented &quot;macadamisation&quot; for building roads with a smooth hard surface. In 1901, Edgar Purnell Hooley added tar to the mix and named it Tarmac (short for tarmacadam).
Probably the greatest driver behind the modern use of concrete was Smeaton&#x27;s Tower built by John Smeaton in the 1750s. The third Eddystone Lighthouse (the world&#x27;s first open ocean lighthouse), Smeaton pioneered the use of hydraulic lime in concrete. Scotsman Robert Stevenson constructed the Bell Rock Lighthouse in the early 1800s. Situated 11 miles off east Scotland, it is the world&#x27;s oldest surviving sea-washed lighthouse. Portland cement, the most common type of cement in general use around the world as a basic ingredient of concrete, was developed in England in the 19th century. It was coined by Joseph Aspdin in 1824 (he named it after Portland stone), and further developed by his son William Aspdin in the 1840s.

The UK has produced some of the most famous ships in the world: Harland and Wolff in Belfast built the as well as her sister ships and RMS &quot;Britannic&quot;; in Clydebank John Brown and Company built the , and ; ships built in England include the &quot;Mary Rose&quot; (King Henry VIII&#x27;s warship), the &quot;Golden Hind&quot; (Sir Francis Drake&#x27;s ship for the circumnavigation of the globe between 1577 and 1580), (Lord Nelson&#x27;s flagship at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805), and (ship used in Charles Darwin&#x27;s five-year voyage). Other important British ships include (James Cook&#x27;s ship in his first voyage of discovery), (first global marine research expedition: the &quot;Challenger&quot; expedition), and &quot;Discovery&quot; (carried Robert Falcon Scott and Ernest Shackleton in the Discovery Expedition, their first successful journey to the Antarctic). The Royal Navy troopship is known for the first appearance of the &quot;women and children first&quot; protocol.

Since then, the UK has continued this tradition of technical creativity. Alan Turing (leading role in the creation of the modern computer), Scottish inventor Alexander Graham Bell (the first practical telephone), John Logie Baird (world&#x27;s first working television system, first electronic colour television), Frank Whittle (co-invented the jet engine) — powered by Whittle&#x27;s turbojet engines, the Gloster Meteor was the first British jet fighter and the Allies&#x27; only jet aircraft to achieve combat operations during World War II, Charles Babbage (devised the idea of the computer), Alexander Fleming (discovered penicillin). The UK remains one of the leading providers of technological innovations, providing inventions as diverse as the World Wide Web by Sir Tim Berners-Lee, and Viagra by British scientists at Pfizer&#x27;s Sandwich, Kent. Sir Alec Jeffreys pioneered DNA fingerprinting. Pioneers of fertility treatment Patrick Steptoe and Robert Edwards, achieved conception through IVF (world&#x27;s first &quot;test tube baby&quot;) in 1978.
The prototype tank was constructed at William Foster &amp; Co. in Lincoln in 1915, with leading roles played by Major Walter Gordon Wilson who designed the gearbox and developed practical tracks and by William Tritton whose company built it. This was a prototype of the Mark I tank, the first tank used in combat in September 1916 during WWI. The First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill, was credited by Prime Minister David Lloyd George as being the driving force behind their production. Allan Beckett designed the &#x27;Whale&#x27; floating roadway, crucial to the success of the Mulberry harbour used in the invasion of Normandy in WWII. In 1918, became the world&#x27;s first aircraft carrier capable of launching and recovering naval aircraft, and in WWII, was involved in the first aerial and U-boat kills of the war, as well as the crippling of the German battleship the &quot;Bismarck&quot; in May 1941. In 1932, Cambridge engineer Francis Thomas Bacon invented the alkaline fuel cell which is used to generate power for space capsules and satellites.

Introduced in 1952, the de Havilland Comet was the world&#x27;s first commercial jet airliner. Operated by British Overseas Airways Corporation (which merged with other British operators to form today&#x27;s British Airways), on 2 May 1952 the flight registered G-ALYS took off with fare-paying passengers and inaugurated scheduled service from London to Johannesburg.

In 1952, &quot;OXO&quot; (or &quot;Noughts and Crosses&quot;), created by computer scientist Alexander S. Douglas, is regarded as a contender for the first video game. In &quot;OXO&quot;, the computer player could play perfect games of noughts and crosses against a human opponent. In the 1960s, John Shepherd-Barron invented the cash machine (ATM) and James Goodfellow invented Personal identification number (PIN) technology, and on 27 June 1967, the first cash machine was established outside a branch of Barclays Bank in Enfield, north London. Dolly the sheep, the first mammal successfully cloned from an adult somatic cell (by scientists at Roslin Institute in Edinburgh), became a celebrity in the 1990s.

===Industrial Revolution===

The Industrial Revolution began in Britain due to the social, economic and political changes in the country during the previous centuries. The stable political situation in Britain from around 1688 following the Glorious Revolution, in contrast to other European countries where absolute monarchy remained the typical form of government, can be said to be a factor in favouring Britain as the birthplace of the Industrial Revolution. Aided by these legal and cultural foundations, an entrepreneurial spirit and consumer revolution drove industrialisation in Britain. Geographical and natural resource advantages of Great Britain also contributed, with the country&#x27;s extensive coast lines and many navigable rivers in an age where water was the easiest means of transportation. Britain also had high quality coal.

Historian Jeremy Black states, &quot;an unprecedented explosion of new ideas, and new technological inventions, transformed our use of energy, creating an increasingly industrial and urbanised country. Roads, railways and canals were built. Great cities appeared. Scores of factories and mills sprang up. Our landscape would never be the same again. It was a revolution that transformed not only the country, but the world itself.&quot;

Pottery manufacturer Josiah Wedgwood was one of the most successful entrepreneurs of the Industrial Revolution. Meeting the demands of the consumer revolution and growth in wealth of the middle classes that helped drive the Industrial Revolution in Britain, Wedgwood created goods such as soft-paste porcelain tableware (bone china), which was starting to become a common feature on dining tables. Credited as a pioneer of modern marketing, Wedgwood pioneered direct mail, money back guarantees, travelling salesmen, carrying pattern boxes for display, self-service, free delivery, buy one get one free, and illustrated catalogues. Other important figures in marketing and advertising in the 18th and 19th centuries were Thomas Chippendale, the London cabinet-maker who in 1754 produced the &quot;first comprehensive trade catalogue of its kind&quot;, and Thomas J. Barratt, who became the first brand manager of a company (Pears soap) in 1865. In 1882, English actress and socialite Lillie Langtry was recruited by Barratt to become the poster-girl for Pears (which included putting her &quot;signature&quot; on the advertisements), as she became the first celebrity to endorse a commercial product.

Described as &quot;natural capitalists&quot; by the BBC, dynasties of Quakers were successful in business matters, and they contributed the Industrial Revolution in Britain. This included ironmaking by Abraham Darby I and his family; banking, including Lloyds Bank (founded by Sampson Lloyd), Barclays Bank, Backhouse&#x27;s Bank and Gurney&#x27;s Bank; life assurance (Friends Provident); pharmaceuticals (Allen &amp; Hanburys); the big three British chocolate companies (Cadbury, Fry&#x27;s and Rowntree); biscuit manufacturing (Huntley &amp; Palmers); match manufacture (Bryant and May) and shoe manufacturing (Clarks). With his role in the marketing and manufacturing of James Watt&#x27;s steam engine, and invention of modern coinage, Matthew Boulton is regarded as one of the most influential entrepreneurs in history. In 1861, Welsh entrepreneur Pryce Pryce-Jones formed the first mail order business, an idea which would change the nature of retail. Selling Welsh flannel, he created mail order catalogues, with customers able order by mail for the first time, and the goods were delivered by railway.

=== Cars ===

The UK has had a long history of car making. Some of the best known British brands are Rolls-Royce, Bentley, Aston Martin, McLaren, Jaguar, Land Rover, MG, and the Mini. Rolls-Royce was founded by Charles Stewart Rolls and Sir Frederick Henry Royce in 1906. In addition to the company&#x27;s reputation for superior engineering quality in its cars, Rolls-Royce Limited was known for manufacturing the high-powered &quot;R&quot; engines, including the iconic Rolls-Royce Merlin aero engine which was used for many World War II aircraft. Bentley Motors Limited was founded by W. O. Bentley in 1919 in Cricklewood, North London, and, like Rolls-Royce, is regarded as a British luxury automobile icon. Aston Martin was founded in 1913 by Lionel Martin and Robert Bamford, and became associated with luxury grand touring cars in the 1950s and 1960s, and with the fictional British spy James Bond. Jaguar was founded in 1922. The Jaguar E-Type sports car was released in 1961; Enzo Ferrari called it &quot;the most beautiful car ever made&quot;. Jaguar has, in recent years, manufactured cars for the British Prime Minister. The company also holds royal warrants from Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Charles. The Land Rover launched in 1948 and specialises in four-wheel-drive. Many models have been developed for the Ministry of Defence (MoD). The Mini was released by the British Motor Corporation in 1959 and became a 1960s cultural icon. The performance versions, the Mini Cooper, was a successful rally car. The distinctive two-door Mini was designed for BMC by Sir Alec Issigonis. It has been named Britain&#x27;s favourite car in a poll.

==Religion==
Forms of Christianity have dominated religious life in what is now the United Kingdom for more than 1,400 years. Anglican churches remain the largest faith group in each country of the UK except Scotland, where Anglicanism is a small minority. The Presbyterian Church of Scotland is the national church in Scotland. Following this is Roman Catholicism and religions including Islam, Hinduism, Sikhism, Judaism, and Buddhism. Today British Jews number around 300,000; the UK has the fifth largest Jewish community worldwide.
William Tyndale&#x27;s 1520s translation of the Bible was the first to be printed in English, and was a model for subsequent English translations, notably the King James Version in 1611. The Book of Common Prayer of 1549 was the first prayer book to include the complete forms of service for daily and Sunday worship in English, and the marriage and burial rites have found their way into those of other denominations and into the English language.

In 17th-century England, the Puritans condemned the celebration of Christmas. In contrast, the Anglican Church &quot;pressed for a more elaborate observance of feasts, penitential seasons, and saints&#x27; days. The calendar reform became a major point of tension between the Anglicans and Puritans.&quot; The Catholic Church also responded, promoting the festival in a more religiously orientated form. King Charles I of England directed his noblemen and gentry to return to their landed estates in midwinter to keep up their old-style Christmas generosity. Following the Parliamentarian victory over Charles I in the English Civil War, Puritan rulers banned Christmas in 1647.
Protests followed as pro-Christmas rioting broke out in several cities; and for weeks Canterbury was controlled by the rioters, who decorated doorways with holly and shouted royalist slogans. The book, &quot;The Vindication of Christmas&quot; (London, 1652), argued against the Puritans, and notes old English Christmas traditions: dinner, roast apples on the fire, card playing, dances with &quot;plow-boys&quot; and &quot;maidservants&quot;, old Father Christmas and carol singing. The Restoration of King Charles II in 1660 ended the ban.

Following the Restoration, &quot;Poor Robins Almanack&quot; contained the lines:
:Now thanks to God for Charles return
:Whose absence made old Christmas mourn
:For then we scarcely did it know
:Whether it Christmas were or no.

The diary of James Woodforde, from the latter half of the 18th century, details Christmas observance and celebrations associated with the season over a number of years.

In the early 19th century, writers imagined Tudor Christmas as a time of heartfelt celebration. In 1843, Charles Dickens wrote the novel &quot;A Christmas Carol&quot; that helped revive the &quot;spirit&quot; of Christmas and seasonal merriment. Dickens sought to construct Christmas as a family-centred festival of generosity, linking &quot;worship and feasting, within a context of social reconciliation.&quot; Superimposing his humanitarian vision of the holiday, termed &quot;Carol Philosophy&quot;, Dickens influenced many aspects of Christmas celebrated today in Western culture, such as family gatherings, seasonal food and drink, dancing, games, and a festive generosity of spirit. A prominent phrase from the tale, &quot;Merry Christmas&quot;, was popularised following its publication. The term Scrooge became a synonym for miser, with &quot;Bah! Humbug!&quot; dismissive of the festive spirit. Tiny Tim says &quot;God bless us, every one!&quot; which he offers as a blessing at Christmas dinner. Dickens repeats the phrase at the end of the story; symbolic of Scrooge&#x27;s change of heart.
The revival of the Christmas Carol began with William Sandys&#x27;s &quot;Christmas Carols Ancient and Modern&quot; (1833), with the first appearance in print of &quot;The First Noel&quot;, &quot;I Saw Three Ships&quot;, &quot;Hark the Herald Angels Sing&quot; and &quot;God Rest Ye Merry, Gentlemen&quot;. In 1843 the first commercial Christmas card was produced by Henry Cole, leading to the exchange of festive greeting cards among the public. The movement coincided with the appearance of the Oxford Movement and the growth of Anglo-Catholicism, which led a revival in traditional rituals and religious observances.

In the UK, the Christmas tree was introduced in the early 19th century, following the personal union with the Kingdom of Hanover, by Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, wife of King George III. In 1832, the future Queen Victoria wrote about her delight at having a Christmas tree, hung with lights, ornaments, and presents placed round it. After her marriage to her German cousin Prince Albert, a hugely influential image of the British royal family with their Christmas tree at Windsor Castle was published in the &quot;Illustrated London News&quot; in 1848, after which the custom became more widespread throughout Britain.

While 2001 census information suggests that over 75% of British citizens consider themselves to belong to a religion, Gallup reports that only 10% of British citizens regularly attend religious services. A 2004 YouGov poll found that 44% of British citizens believe in God, while 35% do not. Christmas and Easter are national public holidays in the UK. First broadcast over the Easter period in 1977, the two-part &quot;Jesus of Nazareth&quot; television miniseries, starring Robert Powell as Jesus, was watched by over 21 million viewers in the UK. In 1844 Sir George Williams founded YMCA (Young Men&#x27;s Christian Association) in London. The oldest and largest youth charity in the world, its aim is to support young people to belong, contribute and thrive in their communities. The Salvation Army is a Christian charity founded by William Booth and his wife Catherine in London&#x27;s East End in 1865. It seeks to bring salvation to the poor, destitute and hungry.

==Politics and government==

=== The Crown and parliament ===
The UK has a parliamentary government based on the Westminster system that has been emulated around the world – a legacy of the British Empire. The Parliament of the United Kingdom that meets in the Houses of Parliament has two houses: an elected House of Commons and an appointed House of Lords, and any Bill passed requires Royal Assent to become law. It is the ultimate legislative authority in the United Kingdom: the devolved parliaments and assemblies in Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales are not sovereign bodies and could be abolished by the UK Parliament, despite each being established following public approval as expressed in a referendum.

The UK&#x27;s two major political parties are the Labour Party and the Conservative Party, who between them won 532 out of 650 seats in the House of Commons at the most recent general election. Currently, the third biggest party in terms of seats in the Commons is the Liberal Democrats, or Lib Dems, which won 72 seats. The Scottish National Party (SNP) in Scotland is the forth largest, but only won 7 out of the 59 Scottish constituencies. There are also smaller parties in the Commons, like Reform UK and Green Party, or regional parties like Plaid Cymru (Wales), the Alliance Party of Northern Ireland, the Social Democratic and Labour Party, Democratic Unionist Party, and Sinn Féin (Northern Ireland).
A prominent part of British political culture, Prime Minister&#x27;s Questions – often referred to as &quot;PMQs&quot; – is held every Wednesday at noon when the House of Commons is sitting. The Prime Minister spends around half an hour responding to questions from Members of Parliament (MPs). In questioning the policies of government ministers, MP Amber Rudd states &quot;PMQs is central to our democracy.&quot; Due to the drama of the sessions, PMQs is among the best-known parliamentary business in the country. It is broadcast live on BBC News, Sky News and BBC Parliament television channels, as well as streamed online by many news outlets via numerous services, such as Twitch or YouTube.

The United Kingdom has an uncodified constitution, the Constitution of the United Kingdom, consisting mostly of a collection of disparate written sources, including statutes, judge-made case law, and international treaties. As there is no technical difference between ordinary statutes and constitutional law, the British Parliament can perform constitutional reform simply by passing Acts of Parliament and thus has the political power to change or abolish almost any written or unwritten element of the constitution. However, no Parliament can pass laws that future Parliaments cannot change.

=== The law ===
British constitutional documents include Magna Carta (foundation of the &quot;great writ&quot; &quot;Habeas corpus&quot; — safeguarding individual freedom against arbitrary state action), the Bill of Rights 1689 (one provision granting freedom of speech in Parliament), Petition of Right, Habeas Corpus Act 1679 and Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949. A separate but similar document, the Claim of Right Act, applies in Scotland. Jurist Albert Venn Dicey wrote that the British Habeas Corpus Acts &quot;declare no principle and define no rights, but they are for practical purposes worth a hundred constitutional articles guaranteeing individual liberty&quot;. An advocate of the &quot;unwritten constitution&quot;, Dicey stated English rights were embedded in the general English common law of personal liberty, and &quot;the institutions and manners of the nation&quot;.

According to 2016 figures from the Ministry of Justice, there is a 35% chance of people in England and Wales being summoned for jury duty over the course of their lifetime. In Scotland the percentage is higher due to Scotland having a lower population as well having juries made up of fifteen people as opposed to twelve in England and Wales.
The 17th-century English patriot John Hampden was a leading parliamentarian involved in challenging the authority of Charles I when he refused to be taxed for ship money in 1637, and was one of the Five Members whose attempted unconstitutional arrest by the King in the House of Commons in 1642 sparked the English Civil War. The wars established the constitutional rights of parliament, a concept legally established as part of the Glorious Revolution in 1688 and the subsequent Bill of Rights 1689. Since that time, no British monarch has entered the House of Commons when it is sitting. Hampden is annually commemorated at the State Opening of Parliament by the British monarch when the doors of the House of Commons are slammed in the face of the monarch&#x27;s messenger, symbolising the rights of Parliament and its independence from the monarch.

Other important British political figures include Sir Edward Coke, 17th-century jurist; the legal directive that nobody may enter a home, which in the 17th-century would typically have been male owned, unless by the owners invitation or consent, was established as common law in Coke&#x27;s &quot;Institutes of the Lawes of England&quot;. &quot;For a man&#x27;s house is his castle, et domus sua cuique est tutissimum refugium [and each man&#x27;s home is his safest refuge].&quot; It is the origin of the famous dictum, &quot;an Englishman&#x27;s home is his castle&quot;. Sir William Blackstone, 18th-century jurist, judge and politician best known for his &quot;Commentaries on the Laws of England&quot;, containing his formulation: &quot;It is better that ten guilty persons escape than that one innocent suffer&quot;, a principle that government and the courts must err on the side of innocence, Emmeline Pankhurst, leading suffragette which helped win women the right to vote, William Wilberforce, leading parliamentary abolitionist. An influential thinker in the history of liberalism, 19th century philosopher, political economist and politician John Stuart Mill justified the freedom of the individual in opposition to unlimited state and social control. A member of the Liberal Party, he was also the first Member of Parliament to call for women&#x27;s suffrage.
Robert Walpole is generally regarded as the first British Prime Minister (1721–1742). Twice Prime Minister, Sir Robert Peel, founded the Conservative party (which was expanded by Benjamin Disraeli), and created the modern police force. Margaret Thatcher was the first female British Prime Minister (1979–1990). She became known as the &quot;Iron Lady&quot;, a term coined by a Soviet journalist for her uncompromising politics and leadership style. In 1938, Neville Chamberlain believed he had secured &quot;Peace for our time&quot; with Germany, a year before WWII broke out.

English poet William Cowper wrote in 1785, &quot;We have no slaves at home – Then why abroad? Slaves cannot breathe in England; if their lungs receive our air, that moment they are free, They touch our country, and their shackles fall. That&#x27;s noble, and bespeaks a nation proud. And jealous of the blessing. Spread it then, And let it circulate through every vein.&quot; Thomas Clarkson described fellow British abolitionist Josiah Wedgwood&#x27;s 1787 anti-slavery medallion, &quot;Am I Not A Man And A Brother?&quot;, as &quot;promoting the cause of justice, humanity and freedom&quot;. Following the Slave Trade Act 1807, Britain pressed other nations to end their trade with a series of treaties, and in 1839 the world&#x27;s oldest international human rights organisation, Anti-Slavery International, was formed in London, which worked to outlaw slavery abroad; Wilberforce&#x27;s abolitionist colleague Thomas Clarkson was the organisation&#x27;s first key speaker. The 1965 suspension of the death penalty for murder had been introduced to Parliament as a private member&#x27;s bill by Sydney Silverman MP. The world&#x27;s largest human rights organisation, Amnesty International, was founded by Peter Benenson in London in 1961.

===Honours system===
The British honours system is a means of rewarding individuals&#x27; personal bravery, achievement or service to the United Kingdom. Candidates are identified by public or private bodies or by government departments or are nominated by members of the public. Nominations are reviewed by honours committees, made up of government officials and private citizens from different fields, who meet twice a year to discuss the candidates and make recommendations for appropriate honours to be awarded by the King.

Historically a knighthood was conferred upon mounted warriors. By the Late Middle Ages, the rank had become associated with the ideals of chivalry, a code of conduct for the perfect courtly Christian warrior. An example of warrior chivalry in medieval literature is Sir Gawain (King Arthur&#x27;s nephew and a Knight of the Round Table) in &quot;Sir Gawain and the Green Knight&quot; (late 14th century). Since the early modern period, the title of knight is purely honorific, usually bestowed by a monarch, often for non-military service to the country. The modern female equivalent in the UK is damehood. The ceremony often takes place at Buckingham Palace, and family members are invited to attend.

A few examples of knights are Sir Nicholas Winton: for &quot;services to humanity, in saving Jewish children from Nazi occupied Czechoslovakia&quot;, Sir Elton John: for &quot;services to music and charitable services&quot;, Sir Ridley Scott: for &quot;services to the British film industry&quot;, and Sir Richard Branson: for &quot;services to entrepreneurship&quot;. Examples of dames are: actress Dame Julie Andrews and singer Dame Shirley Bassey: both for &quot;services to the performing arts&quot;, actress Dame Joan Collins: for &quot;services to charity&quot;, and Dame Agatha Christie: for &quot;contribution to literature&quot;.

===Counties===
The suffix &quot;shire&quot; is attached to most of the names of English, Scottish and Welsh counties. Shire is a term for a division of land first used in England during the Anglo-Saxon period. Examples in England are Cheshire, Hampshire, Nottinghamshire, Oxfordshire, Staffordshire, Worcestershire and Yorkshire; in Scotland, Aberdeenshire, Perthshire, Inverness-shire and Stirlingshire; and in Wales, Carmarthenshire, Flintshire and Pembrokeshire. This suffix tends not to be found in the names of counties that were pre-existing divisions. Essex, Kent, and Sussex, for example, have never borne a &quot;-shire&quot;, as each represents a former Anglo-Saxon kingdom. Similarly Cornwall was a British kingdom before it became an English county. The term &quot;shire&quot; is also not used in the names of the six traditional counties of Northern Ireland.

=== Units of measurement ===
Use of the British imperial system of measure, particularly among the public, is widespread in the United Kingdom and is in many cases permitted by the law. Human height and weight, long distances and speed are measured in imperial units by the vast majority of Brits. A Brit would normally give their weight as &quot;12 and a half stone&quot; rather than 80 kilograms, though younger people increasingly use kilograms rather than stone. Body height is usually given in feet and inches. Younger generations tend to use more metric units of measurement, creating a generational gap, for example in short distances and item weight. Although the majority of Brits now use degrees Celsius to measure temperature, the use of Fahrenheit persists in older generations. Distances shown on road signs must be in miles and yards, while miles per hour appear on speed limit signs and car speedometers.

Britain has been transitioning to metric since 1965, when the UK Government announced financial support for metrication with a target of 10 years. When the UK joined the European Economic Community in 1973, the UK re-affirmed its commitment to metrication, but in 2007, the European Commission abandoned completely the deadline for full metrication in the UK.

=== Driving ===
By custom and law, traffic in Britain drives on the left. Research shows that countries driving on the left have a lower collision rate than those that drive on the right, and it has been suggested that this is partly because the predominantly better-performing right eye is used to monitor oncoming traffic and the driver&#x27;s wing mirror. The name of the zebra crossing is attributed to British MP and subsequent Prime Minister, James Callaghan, who in 1948 visited the Transport Research Laboratory which was working on a new idea for safe pedestrian crossings. On being shown a design he is said to have remarked that it resembled a zebra. Located in Birmingham, the Gravelly Hill Interchange&#x27;s colloquial name &quot;Spaghetti Junction&quot; was coined by journalists from the &quot;Birmingham Evening Mail&quot; on 1 June 1965. In 1971, the Green Cross Code was introduced to teach children safer road crossing habits. From 1987, Mungo Jerry&#x27;s song &quot;In the Summertime&quot; featured in drink driving adverts. The building of roundabouts (circular junctions) grew rapidly in the 1960s; there are now more than 10,000 in the UK The Cat&#x27;s eye retroreflective safety device used in road marking was invented by Percy Shaw in 1933.

==Cuisine==


British cuisine is the specific set of cooking traditions and practices associated with the United Kingdom. Historically, British cuisine meant &quot;unfussy dishes made with quality local ingredients, matched with simple sauces to accentuate flavour, rather than disguise it&quot;. International recognition of British cuisine was historically limited to the full breakfast and the Christmas dinner. However, Celtic agriculture and animal breeding produced a wide variety of foodstuffs for indigenous Celts. Anglo-Saxon England developed meat and savoury herb stewing techniques before the practice became common in Europe. The Norman conquest introduced exotic spices into Great Britain in the Middle Ages. The British Empire facilitated a knowledge of India&#x27;s food tradition of &quot;strong, penetrating spices and herbs&quot;.

Each country within the United Kingdom has its own specialities. Traditional examples of English cuisine include the Sunday roast; featuring a roasted joint, usually roast beef (a signature English national dish dating back to the 1731 ballad &quot;The Roast Beef of Old England&quot;), lamb or chicken, served with assorted boiled or roasted vegetables, Yorkshire pudding and gravy. The full English breakfast consists of bacon, grilled tomatoes, fried bread, baked beans, fried mushrooms, sausages and eggs. Black pudding and hash browns are often also included. It is usually served with tea or coffee. The Ulster version – Ulster fry – includes soda farl and potato bread, with the BBC&#x27;s Simon Majumdar calling it the UK&#x27;s best full breakfast.

Fish and chips are also regarded as a national institution: Winston Churchill called them &quot;the good companions&quot;, John Lennon smothered them in tomato ketchup, while George Orwell referred to them as a &quot;chief comfort&quot; of the working class. The meal was created in 1860 in the East End of London by a Jewish immigrant, Joseph Malin, who came up with the idea of combining fried fish with chips. A blue plaque at Oldham&#x27;s Tommyfield Market marks the 1860s origin of the fish and chip shop and fast food industries. Various meat pies are consumed such as steak and kidney pie, shepherd&#x27;s pie, cottage pie, Cornish pasty and pork pie.

A quintessential British custom, afternoon tea, is a small meal typically eaten between 4 pm and 6 pm. The most popular drink in Britain, tea became more widely drunk due to Catherine of Braganza. It is traditionally accompanied with biscuits, sandwiches, scones, cakes or pastries (such as Battenberg cake, fruit cake or Victoria sponge). In his 1946 essay &quot;A Nice Cup of Tea&quot;, author George Orwell wrote: &quot;Tea is one of the mainstays of civilisation in this country.&quot; McVitie&#x27;s are the best selling biscuit brand in the UK, and the most popular biscuits to &quot;dunk&quot; in tea, with McVitie&#x27;s chocolate digestives, rich tea and hobnobs ranked the nation&#x27;s top three favourite biscuits. Other popular British biscuits include bourbons, custard creams, Jammie Dodgers, ginger nuts and shortbread. The first documented figure-shaped biscuits (gingerbread man) was at the court of Elizabeth I in the 16th century.
The first English recipe for ice cream was published in &quot;Mrs. Mary Eales&#x27;s Receipts&quot; in London in 1718, and arguably the earliest reference to an edible ice cream cone, appears in Charles Elmé Francatelli&#x27;s 1846 &quot;The Modern Cook&quot;.
The 18th-century English aristocrat John Montagu, 4th Earl of Sandwich is best known for his links to the modern concept of the sandwich which was named after him. When he ordered his valet to bring him meat tucked between two pieces of bread, others began to order &quot;the same as Sandwich!&quot;. In the city of Leeds in 1767, Joseph Priestley made his &quot;happiest&quot; discovery when he invented carbonated water (also known as soda water), the major and defining component of most soft drinks. Carbonated lemonade was available in British refreshment stalls in 1833, with R. White&#x27;s Lemonade sold in 1845. By 1887 they sold a wide variety of soft drink flavours. Irn-Bru is the best-selling soft drink in Scotland. Invented by a Newcastle pharmacist in 1927, Lucozade is the No. 1 sports drink in the UK.

Sausages are commonly eaten as bangers and mash, in sausage rolls or as toad in the hole. Lancashire hotpot is a well-known stew. Popular cheeses include Cheddar and Wensleydale. Sweet British dishes include scones, apple pie, mince pies, spotted dick, Eccles cakes, pancakes, sponge cake, trifle, jelly, custard, sticky toffee pudding, Tunnock&#x27;s teacake, and Jaffa cakes; the best-selling cake in the UK. Marmalade is a popular British spread for toast or sandwich: a spread famous for its association with Paddington Bear, a beloved bear in British culture that featured in the critically acclaimed films &quot;Paddington&quot; (2014) and &quot;Paddington 2&quot; (2017).
Home baking has always been a significant part of British home cooking. Influential cookbooks include &quot;The Experienced English Housekeeper&quot; (1769), &quot;Modern Cookery for Private Families&quot; (1845) by food author Eliza Acton that introduced the now-universal practice of listing ingredients and giving suggested cooking times for each recipe, and Isabella Beeton&#x27;s &quot;Book of Household Management&quot; (1861). Home-made cakes and jams are part of the traditional English village fête. Filmed in bunting-draped marquees in scenic gardens, the success of the 2010s television show &quot;The Great British Bake Off&quot; (which was inspired by the village fête) is credited with spurring a renewed interest in home baking, with supermarkets and department stores in the UK reporting sharp rises in sales of baking ingredients and accessories. A popular cake to bake, Victoria sponge (named after Queen Victoria who enjoyed a slice with her tea), was created following the discovery of baking powder by English food manufacturer Alfred Bird in 1843, which enabled the sponge to rise higher in cakes.

The hot cross bun is a popular British sweet bun traditionally eaten on Good Friday, but are now eaten all year round. Treacle tart was created after the invention of golden syrup by chemists working for Abram Lyle in 1885. With its logo and green-and-gold packaging having remained almost unchanged since then, Lyle&#x27;s Golden Syrup was listed by &quot;Guinness World Records&quot; as having the world&#x27;s oldest branding and packaging. Scottish cuisine includes Arbroath smokie and haggis; Northern Irish cuisine features the Ulster fry and the pastie and Welsh cuisine is noted for Welsh rarebit (often using Worcestershire sauce) and cawl. Brown sauce is a traditional British condiment, with its best known variety HP Sauce (named after and featuring an image of the Houses of Parliament on the label) a popular spread on chicken and bacon sandwiches. The Scottish Aberdeen Angus is a popular native beef breed, accounting for almost 20% of the UK beef industry. Cavendish bananas were cultivated by Sir Joseph Paxton in the greenhouses of Chatsworth House, Derbyshire in 1836. Named after William Cavendish, they make up the vast majority of bananas consumed in the western world.
The pub is an important aspect of British culture, and is often the focal point of local communities. Referred to as their &quot;local&quot; by regulars, pubs are typically chosen for their proximity to home or work, the availability of a particular beer or ale or a good selection, good food, a social atmosphere, the presence of friends and acquaintances, and the availability of pub games such as darts or snooker. Pubs will often screen sports events, such as English Premier League and Scottish Premier League games (or for international tournaments, the FIFA World Cup). The pub quiz was established in the UK in the 1970s.

Initially created to draw in pre-literate drinkers, in 1393, Richard II introduced a law that pubs had to display a sign outdoors to make them easily visible for passing ale tasters who would assess the quality of ale sold. Most pubs still have decorated signs hanging over their doors. The owner or tenant (licensee) is known as the pub landlord or publican, while barmaids are a common feature in pubs. Alcoholic drinks served in pubs include wines and English beers such as bitter, mild, stout and brown ale. Whisky originated in Ireland and Scotland in the Middle Ages: Irish whiskey and Scotch whisky.
On Christmas Day, goose was previously served at dinner; however since appearing on Christmas tables in England in the late 16th century, the turkey has become more popular, with Christmas pudding served for dessert. The 16th-century English navigator William Strickland is credited with introducing the turkey into England, and 16th-century farmer Thomas Tusser noted that by 1573 turkeys were common in the English Christmas dinner. This custom gave rise to the humorous English idiom, &quot;like turkeys voting for Christmas&quot;. The turkey is sometimes accompanied with roast beef or ham, and is served with stuffing, gravy, roast potatoes, mashed potatoes and vegetables. Invented in London in the 1840s, Christmas crackers are an integral part of Christmas celebrations, often pulled before or after dinner, or at parties.
Chinese restaurants and takeaways (in addition to Indian) are among the most popular ethnic food in the UK. Chinese takeaways are a common sight in towns throughout the UK, and many serve a pseudo-Chinese cuisine based on western tastes (such as chicken fried rice, chips and curry sauce).

The earliest recipe for the crisp (&quot;potato chip&quot;) is in English food writer William Kitchiner&#x27;s 1822 cookbook &quot;The Cook&#x27;s Oracle&quot;. In 1920, Frank Smith of The Smiths Potato Crisps Company Ltd packaged a twist of salt with his crisps in greaseproof paper bags, which were sold around London. Crisps remained otherwise unseasoned until an important scientific development in the 1950s. After Archer Martin and Richard Synge (while working in Leeds) received a Nobel Prize for the invention of partition chromatography in 1952, food scientists began to develop flavours via a gas chromatograph, a device that allowed scientists to understand chemical compounds behind complex flavours such as cheese. In 1954, Irish crisps company Tayto produced the first seasoned crisps: Cheese &amp; Onion. Golden Wonder (Smiths&#x27; main competitor in Britain) produced their Cheese &amp; Onion version, and Smith&#x27;s countered with Salt &amp; Vinegar (tested first by their north-east England subsidiary Tudor) which launched nationally in 1967, starting a two-decade-long flavour war. The crisp market in the UK is led by Walkers (who introduced their own flavours in 1954), holding 56% of the market share.
The Quakers, founded by George Fox in 1650s England and described by the BBC as &quot;natural capitalists&quot;, had a virtual monopoly in the British chocolate industry for much of the 19th and 20th centuries, led by Cadbury of Birmingham, Fry&#x27;s of Bristol and Rowntree&#x27;s and Terry&#x27;s of York. Fry&#x27;s produced the first chocolate bar in 1847, which was then mass-produced as Fry&#x27;s Chocolate Cream in 1866. The chocolate bars Cadbury Dairy Milk, Galaxy and Kit Kat, are the three best selling bars in the UK. Cadbury Creme Eggs are the best selling confectionery item between New Year&#x27;s Day and Easter in the UK, with annual sales in excess of 200 million. Sponsored by Cadbury, the annual children&#x27;s Easter egg hunt takes place in over 250 locations in the UK. Created in Doncaster, Yorkshire, Butterscotch boiled sweets is one of the town&#x27;s best known exports. Created in Lancashire, Jelly Babies are among the British public&#x27;s favourite sweets. After Eights are a popular after dinner mint. A stick of rock (a hard cylindrical stick-shaped boiled sugar) is a traditional British seaside sweet, commonly sold at seaside resorts throughout the UK such as Brighton, Portrush and Blackpool. A &quot;99 Flake&quot; (commonly called a &quot;99&quot;) which consists of ice cream in a cone with a Cadbury Flake inserted in it, is a hugely popular British dessert.

==Sport==

Most of the major sports have separate administrative structures and national teams for each of the countries of the United Kingdom. Though each country is also represented individually at the Commonwealth Games, there is a single &#x27;Team GB&#x27; (for Great Britain) that represents the UK at the Olympic Games. With the rules and codes of many modern sports invented and codified in late 19th-century Victorian Britain, in 2012, IOC President Jacques Rogge stated; &quot;This great, sports-loving country is widely recognized as the birthplace of modern sport. It was here that the concepts of sportsmanship and fair play were first codified into clear rules and regulations. It was here that sport was included as an educational tool in the school curriculum&quot;.

=== Football ===
Both in participation and viewing, the most popular sport in the UK is association football. The sport&#x27;s origin can be traced to English public school football games. The rules were first drafted in England in 1863 by Ebenezer Cobb Morley, and the UK has the oldest football clubs in the world. England is recognised as the birthplace of club football by FIFA, with Sheffield F.C., founded in 1857, the world&#x27;s oldest football club. The home nations all have separate national teams and domestic competitions, most notably England&#x27;s Premier League and FA Cup, and the Scottish Premiership and Scottish Cup. The top three Welsh football clubs feature in the English league system. The first international football match was between Scotland and England in 1872. Referred to as the &quot;home of football&quot; by FIFA, England hosted the 1966 FIFA World Cup, and won the tournament. The British television audience for the 1966 World Cup final peaked at 32.30 million viewers, making it the most watched television event ever in the UK.

The four home nations have produced some of the greatest players in the game&#x27;s history, including, from England, Bobby Moore and Gordon Banks; from Northern Ireland, George Best and Pat Jennings; from Scotland, Kenny Dalglish and Jimmy Johnstone; and from Wales, Ian Rush and Ryan Giggs. The first recipient of the Ballon d&#x27;Or, Stanley Matthews was knighted while still a player. The English Premier League (formed in 1992 by member clubs of the old Football League First Division) is the most-watched football league in the world, and its biggest clubs include Manchester United, Liverpool, Arsenal, Chelsea, Tottenham Hotspur and Manchester City. Scotland&#x27;s Celtic and Rangers also have a global fanbase. Leicester City&#x27;s 2016 Premier League title win is regarded among the greatest sporting upsets ever.
The best-placed teams in the domestic leagues of England and Scotland qualify for Europe&#x27;s premier competition, the UEFA Champions League (European Cup). Previous winners from the UK are Liverpool, Manchester United, Nottingham Forest, Celtic, Chelsea and Aston Villa. The UEFA Champions League Anthem, written by Tony Britten and based on Handel&#x27;s &quot;Zadok the Priest&quot;, is played before each game. Henry Lyte&#x27;s Christian hymn &quot;Abide with Me&quot; is sung prior to kick-off at every FA Cup Final, a tradition since 1927.

The practice of &quot;jumpers for goalposts&quot; alludes to street/park football in the UK where jumpers would be placed on the ground and used as goalposts. This practice was referenced by singer Ed Sheeran in his DVD &quot;Jumpers for Goalposts: Live at Wembley Stadium&quot; as a nod to playing concerts at Wembley Stadium, the home of English football. Early references to dribbling come from accounts of medieval football games in England. Geoffrey Chaucer offered an allusion to such ball skills in 14th-century England. In The Knight&#x27;s Tale (from the &quot;Canterbury Tales&quot;) he uses the following line: &quot;rolleth under foot as doth a ball&quot;.

Football in Britain is renowned for the intense rivalries between clubs and the passion of the supporters, which includes a tradition of football chants, which are one of the last remaining sources of an oral folk song tradition in the UK. Chants include &quot;You&#x27;re Not Singing Any More&quot; (or its variant &quot;We Can See You Sneaking Out!&quot;), sung by jubilant fans towards the opposition fans who have gone silent (or left early). Many teams in the UK have their own club anthem or have a song closely associated with them, for example &quot;You&#x27;ll Never Walk Alone&quot; by Liverpool-based rock band Gerry and the Pacemakers, and &quot;Local Hero&quot; by Dire Straits frontman and Newcastle United fan Mark Knopfler, is played before the start of every Liverpool and Newcastle home game.

Throughout the UK, meat pies (as well as burgers and chips) is a traditional hot food eaten at football games either before kick-off or during half time. The purchase of a football programme (a pre-match magazine produced by the home team that gives details on that day&#x27;s game, including player profiles, recent form, interviews etc.) is also part of the &#x27;ritual&#x27; of attending a football match in the UK. The Football Association dropped its ban on floodlights in 1950, and night games attracted increasingly large crowds of fans–some of them unruly—as well as large television audiences. Architects built bigger stadia, and &quot;their cantilevered constructions dwarfing mean streets, supplanted the cathedral as a symbol of the city&#x27;s identity and aspirations&quot;.

=== Golf ===
The modern game of golf originated in Scotland, with the Fife town of St Andrews known internationally as the &quot;home of golf&quot;. and to many golfers the Old Course, an ancient links course dating to before 1574, is considered to be a site of pilgrimage. In 1764, the standard 18 hole golf course was created at St Andrews when members modified the course from 22 to 18 holes. Golf is documented as being played on Musselburgh Links, East Lothian, Scotland as early as 2 March 1672, which is certified as the oldest golf course in the world by Guinness World Records. The oldest known &quot;rules of golf&quot; were compiled in March 1744 in Leith.

The oldest golf tournament in the world, and the first major championship in golf, The Open Championship, first took place in Ayrshire, Scotland in 1860, and today it is played on the weekend of the third Friday in July. Golf&#x27;s first superstar Harry Vardon, a member of the fabled Great Triumvirate who were pioneers of the modern game, won the Open a record six times. Since the 2010s, three Northern Irish golfers have had major success; Graeme McDowell, Darren Clarke and four time major winner Rory McIlroy. The biennial golf competition, the Ryder Cup, is named after English businessman Samuel Ryder who sponsored the event and donated the trophy. Sir Nick Faldo is the most successful British Ryder Cup player.

=== Rugby ===

In 1845, rugby union was created when the first rules were written by pupils at Rugby School, Warwickshire. A former pupil of the school William Webb Ellis, is often fabled with the invention of running with the ball in hand in 1823. The first rugby international took place on 27 March 1871, played between England and Scotland. By 1881 both Ireland and Wales had teams, and in 1883 the first international competition the annual Home Nations Championship took place. In 1888, the Home Nations combined to form what is today called the British and Irish Lions, who now tour every four years to face a Southern Hemisphere team. The Wales team of the 1970s, which included a backline consisting of Gareth Edwards, J. P. R. Williams and Phil Bennett who were known for their feints, sidesteps and attacking running rugby, are regarded as one of the greatest teams in the game – all three players were involved in &quot;The greatest try ever scored&quot; in 1973. Jonny Wilkinson scored the winning drop goal for England in the last minute of extra time in the 2003 Rugby World Cup Final. The major domestic club competitions are the Premiership in England and the Celtic League in Ireland, Scotland, Wales and (since 2010) Italy. Of Cornish origin, the chant &quot;Oggy Oggy Oggy, Oi Oi Oi!&quot; is associated with rugby union (and its personalised variant with football); it inspired the &quot;Maggie Maggie Maggie, Out Out Out!&quot; chant by opponents of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in the 1980s. In 1895, rugby league was created in Huddersfield, West Riding of Yorkshire, as the result of a split with the other Rugby code. The Super League is the sports top-level club competition in Britain, and the sport is especially popular in towns in the northern English counties of Yorkshire, Lancashire and Cumbria. The Challenge Cup is the major rugby league cup competition.

=== Tennis ===

The modern game of tennis originated in Birmingham, England in the 1860s, and after its creation, tennis spread throughout the upper-class English-speaking population, before spreading around the world. Major Walter Clopton Wingfield is credited as being a pioneer of the game. The world&#x27;s oldest tennis tournament, the Wimbledon Championships, first occurred in 1877, and today the event takes place over two weeks in late June and early July. Created in the Tudor period in the court of Henry VIII, the English dessert Strawberries and cream is synonymous with the British summer, and is famously consumed at Wimbledon. The tournament itself has a major place in the British cultural calendar. The eight-time Slam winner and Britain&#x27;s most successful player Fred Perry is one of only seven men in history to have won all four Grand Slam events, which included three Wimbledons. Virginia Wade won three Grand Slams, the most famous of which was Wimbledon in 1977, the year of the Silver Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II (the Queen attended Wimbledon for the first time since 1962 to watch the final). The 2013 and 2016 Wimbledon champion, Scotland&#x27;s Andy Murray, is Britain&#x27;s most recent male Grand Slam winner. In 2021, Emma Raducanu became the most recent British female Grand Slam winner.

=== Boxing ===

The &#x27;Queensberry rules&#x27;, the code of general rules in boxing, was named after John Douglas, 9th Marquess of Queensberry in 1867, that formed the basis of modern boxing. Britain&#x27;s first heavyweight world champion Bob Fitzsimmons made boxing history as the sport&#x27;s first three-division world champion. The 1980s saw the emergence of heavyweight Frank Bruno who would become hugely popular with the British public. In the 1990s, Chris Eubank, Nigel Benn, Steve Collins and Michael Watson had a series of fights against each other in the super-middleweight division, drawing audiences of up to 20 million in the UK. Eubank&#x27;s eccentric personality made him one of the most recognisable celebrities in the UK along with the cocky &quot;Prince&quot; Naseem Hamed. The Nigel Benn vs. Gerald McClellan fight in 1995 drew 13 million. Other big draw fighters in the UK included Lennox Lewis, Joe Calzaghe and Ricky Hatton.

=== Cricket ===

The modern game of cricket was created in England in the 1830s when round arm bowling was legalised, followed by the historical legalisation of overarm bowling in 1864. In 1876–77, England took part in the first-ever Test match against Australia. Influential to the development of the sport, W. G. Grace is regarded as one of the greatest cricket players, devising most of the techniques of modern batting. His fame endures; &quot;Monty Python and the Holy Grail&quot; uses his image as &quot;the face of God&quot; during the sequence in which God sends the knights out on their quest for the grail. The rivalry between England and Australia gave birth to The Ashes in 1882 that has remained Test cricket&#x27;s most famous contest, and takes place every two years to high television viewing figures. The County Championship is the domestic competition in England and Wales. England have hosted the Cricket World Cup five times, and are the reigning champions, having won in 2019.

=== Horse racing ===
Originating in 17th and 18th-century England, the Thoroughbred is a horse breed best known for its use in horse racing. Horse racing was popular with the aristocrats and royalty of British society, earning it the title &quot;Sport of Kings&quot;. Named after Edward Smith-Stanley, 12th Earl of Derby, The Derby was first run in 1780. The race serves as the middle leg of the Triple Crown, preceded by the 2000 Guineas and followed by the St Leger. The name &quot;Derby&quot; has since become synonymous with great races all over the world, and as such has been borrowed many times in races abroad.

The National Hunt horse race the Grand National, is held annually at Aintree Racecourse in early April. It is the most watched horse race in the UK, attracting casual observers, and three-time winner Red Rum is the most successful racehorse in the event&#x27;s history. Red Rum is the best-known racehorse in the UK, named by 45% of Britons, with Black Beauty (from Anna Sewell&#x27;s novel) in second with 33%.

Bolton company J.W. Foster and Sons&#x27;s pioneering running spikes appear in the book, &quot;Golden Kicks: The Shoes that changed Sport&quot;. They were made famous by 1924 100 m Olympic champion Harold Abrahams who would be immortalised in &quot;Chariots of Fire&quot;, the British Oscar winning film. Foster&#x27;s grandsons formed the sportswear company Reebok in Bolton.

=== Motor sports ===
The 1950 British Grand Prix was the first Formula One World Championship race. Britain has produced some of the greatest drivers in Formula One, including Stirling Moss, Jim Clark (twice F1 champion), Graham Hill (only driver to have won the Triple Crown), John Surtees (only world champion in two and four wheels), Jackie Stewart (three-time F1 champion), James Hunt, Nigel Mansell (only man to hold F1 and IndyCar titles at the same time), Jenson Button and Lewis Hamilton (seven-time champion). The British Grand Prix is held at Silverstone every July. Also, the United Kingdom is home to some of the most prestigious teams in Formula One, including McLaren and Williams. It is also home to the headquarters of six of the ten current F1 teams, including current champions Mercedes, four-time champions Red Bull Racing, Alpine and Aston Martin.

=== National sporting events ===
Other major sporting events in the UK include the London Marathon, and The Boat Race on the River Thames. The most successful male rower in Olympic history, Steve Redgrave won gold medals at five consecutive Olympic Games. Cycling is a popular physical activity in the UK. In 1888, inventor Frank Bowden founded the Raleigh Bicycle Company, and by 1913, Raleigh was the biggest bicycle manufacturing company in the world. The Raleigh Chopper was named in the list of British design icons. In 1965 Tom Simpson became the first British world road race champion, and in 2012 Bradley Wiggins became the first British Tour de France winner. Chris Froome has subsequently won the Tour de France four times (2013, 2015, 2016 and 2017). Welsh cyclist Geraint Thomas won in 2018. Sprint specialist Mark Cavendish has won thirty Tour de France stages, putting him second on the all-time list.
In Ice Dance, many of the compulsory moves were developed by dancers from the UK in the 1930s. At the 1984 Winter Olympics, Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean won ice dancing gold with the highest-ever score for a single programme. The pair received perfect 6.0 scores from every judge for artistic impression, and twelve 6.0s and six 5.9s overall.

At the 1988 Winter Olympics, ski jumper Eddie &quot;The Eagle&quot; Edwards gained fame as an underdog. Eddie was portrayed by Taron Egerton in the 2016 biographical sports comedy-drama film &quot;Eddie the Eagle&quot;.
A great number of major sports originated in the United Kingdom, including association football, golf, tennis, boxing, rugby league, rugby union, cricket, field hockey, snooker, darts, billiards, squash, curling and badminton, all of which are popular in Britain. Another sport invented in the UK was baseball, and its early form rounders is popular among children in Britain. Snooker and darts are popular indoor games: Stephen Hendry is the seven time world snooker champion, Phil Taylor is the 16 time world darts champion. Snooker player Alex Higgins (nicknamed &quot;The Hurricane&quot;) and darts player Eric Bristow (nicknamed &quot;The Crafty Cockney&quot;) are credited with popularising each sport.

Bodybuilder Reg Park was Mr Britain in 1946 and became Mr Universe in 1951, 1958 and 1965. Gaelic football is very popular in Northern Ireland, with many teams from the north winning the All-Ireland Senior Football Championship since the early 2000s. William Penny Brookes was prominent in organising the format for the modern Olympic Games, and in 1994, then IOC President Juan Antonio Samaranch laid a wreath on Brooke&#x27;s grave, and said, &quot;I came to pay homage and tribute to Dr Brookes, who really was the founder of the modern Olympic Games&quot;.

Participation in women&#x27;s team sport (in addition to profile in the media) has seen a rapid increase in recent years. Popular women&#x27;s team sports include Netball Superleague formed in 2005, the FA WSL (women&#x27;s football) formed in 2010 (Kelly Smith is seen as a leading figure in the game), Women&#x27;s Six Nations Championship in rugby union, and Women&#x27;s Cricket Super League.

=== Sub-national sports ===
The Highland games are held throughout the year in Scotland as a way of celebrating Scottish and Celtic culture and heritage, especially that of the Scottish Highlands, with more than 60 games taking place across the country every year. Each December, the BBC Sports Personality of the Year is announced, an award given to the best British sportsperson of the year, as voted for by the British public. The public also votes for the BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year, presented to a non-British sportsperson considered to have made the most substantial contribution to a sport each year which has also captured the imagination of the British public. Recipients have included Pelé (after winning his third World Cup in 1970), Muhammad Ali (after regaining the heavyweight title in 1974), Jonah Lomu (for his performances at the 1995 Rugby World Cup), Ronaldo (for his comeback in winning the 2002 World Cup), and Roger Federer (for his record eighth Wimbledon in 2017).

==Healthcare==

Each of the four countries of the UK has a publicly funded health care system referred to as the National Health Service (NHS). The terms &quot;National Health Service&quot; or &quot;NHS&quot; are also used to refer to the four systems collectively. All of the services were founded in 1948, based on legislation passed by the Labour Government that had been elected in 1945 with a manifesto commitment to implement the Beveridge Report recommendation to create &quot;comprehensive health and rehabilitation services for prevention and cure of disease&quot;.
The NHS was born out of a long-held ideal that good healthcare should be available to all, regardless of wealth. At its launch by the then minister of health, Aneurin Bevan, on 5 July 1948, it had at its heart three core principles: That it meet the needs of everyone, that it be free at the point of delivery, and that it be based on clinical need, not ability to pay. The NHS had a prominent slot during the 2012 London Summer Olympics opening ceremony directed by Danny Boyle, being described as &quot;the institution which more than any other unites our nation&quot;, according to the programme. Cancer Research UK, Alzheimer&#x27;s Research UK and Together for Short Lives are among hundreds of health charities in the UK.

Florence Nightingale laid the foundation of modern nursing with the establishment of her nursing school at St Thomas&#x27; Hospital in London. It was the first secular nursing school in the world, now part of King&#x27;s College London. Nightingale wrote &quot;Notes on Nursing&quot; in 1859. The book served as the cornerstone of the curriculum at the Nightingale School and other nursing schools. The Nightingale Pledge is taken by many new nurses in the US (but not the UK), and the annual International Nurses Day (12 May) is celebrated around the world on her birthday. Her social reforms improved healthcare for all sections of society in the UK and around the world.

==Pets==

=== Statistics ===

In the UK, about 40% of the population own a pet. The top pets in the UK for 2018 and 2019 are:

* Dogs: 25%
* Cats: 17%
* Rabbits, indoor birds, guinea pigs, hamsters: ≈1%
* Tortoises and Turtles: 0.7%
* Lizards: 0.6%

However, the population of pets in the UK declined from 71 million in 2013 (a significant peak) to 51 million in 2018. This decline has seen some reversal as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic; an article published in May 2021 stated that a total of 3.2 million households in the UK had acquired a pet since the start of the pandemic, according to the Pet Food Manufacturers&#x27; Association.

=== History ===
Founded in 1824, the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA) is the oldest and largest animal welfare organisation in the world.
The British Shorthair cat is the most popular pedigreed breed in its native country, as registered by the UK&#x27;s Governing Council of the Cat Fancy (GCCF). The breed&#x27;s broad cheeks and relatively calm temperament make it a frequent media star. The cat&#x27;s profile reads: &quot;When gracelessness is observed, the British Shorthair is duly embarrassed, quickly recovering with a &#x27;Cheshire cat smile&#x27;&quot;. There are almost one million horses and ponies in the UK, with popular native breeds including Clydesdale horse (used as drum horses by the British Household Cavalry), Thoroughbred (used in horse racing), Cleveland Bay (pull carriages in royal processions), Highland pony and Shetland pony.

The UK&#x27;s indigenous dog breeds include the Bulldog, Jack Russell Terrier, Golden Retriever, Yorkshire Terrier, Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, Airedale Terrier, Beagle, Border Collie, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, English Cocker Spaniel, Scottish Terrier, Welsh Corgi, Bullmastiff, Greyhound, English Springer Spaniel and Old English Sheepdog.

The Kennel Club, with its headquarters in London, is the oldest kennel club in the world, and acts as a lobby group on issues involving dogs in the UK. Its main objectives are to promote the general improvement of dogs and responsible dog ownership. Held since 1891, Crufts is an annual dog show in the UK. The event takes place over four days in early March. In 1928, the very first winner of Best in Show at Crufts was Primley Sceptre, a greyhound.

==National costume and dress==

As a multi-national state, the UK has no single national costume. However, different countries within the United Kingdom have national costumes or at least are associated with styles of dress. Scotland has the kilt and Tam o&#x27;shanter, and tartan clothing – its pattern consisting of criss-crossed horizontal and vertical bands in multiple colours – is a notable aspect of Gaelic culture. A traditional Welsh costume with Welsh hat is worn by some women during Eisteddfodau. In England, the topic of a national costume has been in debate, since no officially recognized clothing is anointed &quot;national&quot;. However, the closest to an English national costume can be the smock or smock-frock in the Midlands and Southern England and the maud in Northern England. English Country Clothing is also very popular among rural folk, flat caps and brogue shoes also forming part of the country clothing.
Certain military uniforms such as the Beefeater or the Queen&#x27;s Guard are considered to be symbolic of Englishness. Morris dancers or the costumes for the traditional English May dance are sometimes cited as examples of traditional English costume, but are only worn by participants in those events. Designed in 1849 by the London hat-makers Thomas and William Bowler, the Bowler hat is arguably the most iconic stereotyped view of an Englishman (complete with Bowler and rolled umbrella), and was commonly associated with City of London businessmen. Traced back to the north of England in the 14th century, the flat cap is associated with the working classes in the UK. The flat cap has seen a 21st-century resurgence in popularity, possibly influenced by various British public figures wearing them, including David Beckham, Harry Styles and Guy Ritchie, with clothing sellers Marks &amp; Spencer reporting that flat cap sales significantly increased in the 2010s. In 1856 William Henry Perkin discovered the first synthetic dye (Mauveine – a purple colour), which was suitable as a dye of silk and other textiles, helping to revolutionise the world of fashion.

Burberry is most famous for creating the trench coat: they were worn by British soldiers in the trenches in World War I. Among various British youth subcultures, Dr. Martens boots (often referred to as DMs) have been the choice of footwear: in the 1960s skinheads started to wear them, and they later became popular among scooter riders, punks, and some new wave musicians. Male mods adopted a sophisticated look that included tailor-made suits, thin ties, button-down collar shirts, Chelsea boots and Clarks desert boots.
British sensibilities have played an influential role in world clothing since the 18th century. Particularly during the Victorian era, British fashions defined acceptable dress for men of business. Key figures such as the future Edward VII, Edward VIII, and Beau Brummell, created the modern suit and cemented its dominance. Brummell is credited with introducing and establishing as fashion the modern man&#x27;s suit, worn with a tie. The use of a coloured and patterned tie (a common feature in British school uniforms) indicating the wearer&#x27;s membership in a club, regiment, school, professional association etc. stems from the 1880 oarsmen of Exeter College, Oxford, who tied the bands of their straw hats around their necks. The Wellington boot (first worn by Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington) became a staple for outdoor wear.

The tradition of a white wedding is commonly credited to Queen Victoria&#x27;s choice to wear a white wedding dress at her wedding to Prince Albert in 1840, at a time when white was associated with purity and conspicuous consumption (because it was difficult to keep clean, and thus could not be worn by servants or labourers), and when it was the colour required of girls being presented to the royal court. The 1981 wedding dress of Lady Diana Spencer became one of the most famous dresses in the world, and was considered one of the most closely guarded secrets in fashion history.

===Fashion===

London, as one of the world&#x27;s four fashion capitals, is host to the London Fashion Week – one of the &#x27;Big Four&#x27; fashion weeks. Organised by the British Fashion Council, the event takes place twice each year, in February and September. The current venue for most of the &quot;on-schedule&quot; events is Somerset House in central London, where a large marquee in the central courtyard hosts a series of catwalk shows by top designers and fashion houses, while an exhibition, housed within Somerset House itself, showcases over 150 designers. However, many &quot;off-schedule&quot; events, such as On|Off and Vauxhall Fashion Scout, are organised independently and take place at other venues in central London.

British designers whose collections have been showcased at the fashion week include Vivienne Westwood, Alexander McQueen, John Galliano and Stella McCartney. British models who have featured at the event include Kate Moss, Naomi Campbell, Jade Jagger, David Gandy, Cara Delevingne and Rosie Huntington-Whiteley. For almost two decades, Princess Diana was a fashion icon whose style was emulated by women around the world.

Fashion designer Mary Quant was at the heart of the &quot;Swinging London&quot; scene of the 1960s, and her work culminated in the creation of the miniskirt and hot pants. Quant named the miniskirt after her favourite make of car, the Mini. The Swinging London fashion scene has featured in films, and was spoofed in the &quot;Austin Powers&quot; comedy series. The English fashion designer Charles Frederick Worth is widely considered the father of Haute couture.
==Symbols, flags, and emblems==

The United Kingdom as a whole has a number of national symbols, as do its constituent nations. The Union Flag is the national flag of the United Kingdom. The first flag combined the cross of St George with the saltire of Saint Andrew to represent the Union of the Crowns in 1707. St Patrick&#x27;s saltire was added when the Kingdom of Ireland was unified with Great Britain in 1801, and retained to represent Northern Ireland after partition in 1927. Wales has never been represented on the Union Flag, as in 1707 it was part of the Kingdom of England. Similarly, the Royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom only represents England, Scotland, and Northern Ireland. England occupies the first and fourth quarters of the arms except in Scotland, when its arms take precedence. Britannia is the national personification of the UK, while John Bull is a personification used in satirical contexts, and the national animals are the lion and the bulldog.

The UK does not have a floral emblem, but each nation does. The Tudor rose represents England, a thistle Scotland, the flax flower and shamrock Northern Ireland, and the leek and daffodil Wales. The rose, shamrock and thistle are engrafted on the same stem on the coat of arms of the United Kingdom. Another major floral symbol is the remembrance poppy, which has been worn in Britain since 1921 to commemorate soldiers who have died in war. In the weeks leading up to Remembrance Sunday they are distributed by The Royal British Legion in return for donations to their &quot;Poppy Appeal&quot;, which supports all current and former British military personnel.

==Traditional communication and greeting cards==

A familiar sight throughout the UK, the red telephone box and Royal Mail red post box are considered British cultural icons. Designed by Sir Giles Gilbert in 1924, the red telephone box features a prominent crown representing the British government. The post pillar box was introduced in the 1850s during the reign of Queen Victoria following Sir Rowland Hill&#x27;s postal reforms in the 1830s where the reduction in postal rates with the invention of the postage stamp (Penny Black) made sending post an affordable means of personal communication.
The red telephone box has appeared in British pop culture, such as in Adele&#x27;s video &quot;Hello&quot;, the front cover of One Direction&#x27;s album &quot;Take Me Home&quot;, and the back cover of David Bowie&#x27;s album &quot;The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars&quot;.

The world&#x27;s first postcard was received by Theodore Hook from Fulham, London in 1840. The first pillar boxes had the distinctive Imperial cypher of Victoria Regina. Most pillar boxes produced after 1905 are made of cast iron and are cylindrical, and have served well throughout the reigns of George V, Edward VIII, George VI and Elizabeth II.

The sending and receiving of greeting cards is an established tradition in the UK, with card sending or card display in the home being an important part of British culture.

Sir Henry Cole devised the concept of sending greetings cards at Christmas time. Designed by John Callcott Horsley for Cole in 1843, the Christmas card accounts for almost half of the volume of greeting card sales in the UK, with over 600 million cards sold annually. The robin is a common sight in gardens throughout the UK. It is relatively tame and drawn to human activities, and is frequently voted Britain&#x27;s national bird in polls. The robin began featuring on many Christmas cards in the mid-19th century. The association with Christmas arises from postmen in Victorian Britain who wore red jackets and were nicknamed &quot;Robins&quot;; the robin featured on the Christmas card is an emblem of the postman delivering the card.

Sending Valentine&#x27;s Day cards became hugely popular in Britain in the late 18th century, a practice which has since spread to other nations. The day first became associated with romantic love within the circle of Geoffrey Chaucer in the 14th century, when the tradition of courtly love flourished. In Chaucer&#x27;s &quot;Parlement of Foules&quot; (1382) he wrote; &quot;For this was on seynt Volantynys day. When euery bryd comets there to chese his make&quot;. The modern cliché Valentine&#x27;s Day poem can be found in the 1784 English nursery rhyme &quot;Roses Are Red&quot;; &quot;The rose is red, the violet&#x27;s blue. &#x27;The honey&#x27;s sweet, and so are you. Thou art my love and I am thine. I drew thee to my Valentine.&quot;

In 1797, a British publisher issued &quot;The Young Man&#x27;s Valentine Writer&quot; which contained scores of suggested sentimental verses for the young lover unable to compose his own. In 1835, 60,000 Valentine cards were sent by post in the UK, despite postage being expensive. A reduction in postal rates (with the 1840 invention of the postage stamp, the Penny Black) increased the practice of mailing Valentines, with 400,000 sent in 1841. In the UK just under half the population spend money on gifts. Other popular occasions for sending greeting cards in the UK are birthdays, Mother&#x27;s Day, Easter and Father&#x27;s Day.

==Education==

Each country of the United Kingdom has a separate education system. Power over education matters in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland is devolved but education in England is dealt with by the British government since there is no devolved administration for England.

=== England ===
Most schools came under state control in the Victorian era; a formal state school system was instituted after the Second World War. Initially, schools were categorised as infant schools, primary schools and secondary schools (split into more academic grammar schools and more vocational secondary modern schools). Under the Labour governments of the 1960s and 1970s most secondary modern and grammar schools were combined to become comprehensive schools. England has many independent (fee-paying) schools, some founded hundreds of years ago; independent secondary schools are known as public schools. Eton, Harrow, Shrewsbury and Rugby are four of the best-known. The nature and peculiarities of these Public schools have frequently featured in British literature. Prior to 1999, corporal punishment was allowed in such schools, whilst the use of corporal punishment was outlawed in state schools in 1987. Most primary and secondary schools in both the private and state sectors have compulsory school uniforms. Allowances are almost invariably made, however, to accommodate religious dress, including the Islamic hijab and Sikh bangle (kara).

Although the Minister of Education is responsible to Parliament for education, the day-to-day administration and funding of state schools is the responsibility of local education authorities.

England&#x27;s universities include some of the highest-ranked universities in the world: the University of Cambridge, Imperial College London, the University of Oxford and University College London are all ranked in the global top 10 in the 2010 &quot;QS World University Rankings&quot;. The London School of Economics has been described as the world&#x27;s leading social science institution for both teaching and research. The London Business School is considered one of the world&#x27;s leading business schools and in 2010 its MBA programme was ranked best in the world by the &quot;Financial Times&quot;. Academic degrees in England are usually split into classes: first class (I), upper second class (II:1), lower second class (II:2) and third (III), and unclassified (below third class).

=== Northern Ireland ===

The Northern Ireland Assembly is responsible for education in Northern Ireland. Schools are administered by five Education and Library Boards covering different geographical areas.

=== Scotland ===
Scotland has a long history of universal provision of public education which, traditionally, has emphasised breadth across a range of subjects rather than depth of education in a smaller range of subjects. The majority of schools are non-denominational, but by law separate Roman Catholic schools, with an element of control by the Roman Catholic Church, are provided by the state system. Qualifications at the secondary school and post-secondary (further education) levels are provided by the Scottish Qualifications Authority and delivered through various schools, colleges and other centres. Political responsibility for education at all levels is vested in the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive Education and Enterprise, Transport &amp; Lifelong Learning Departments. State schools are owned and operated by the local authorities which act as &quot;Education Authorities&quot;, and the compulsory phase is divided into primary school and secondary school (often called high school, with the world&#x27;s oldest high school being the Royal High School, Edinburgh in 1505, which colonists spread to the New World owing to the high prestige enjoyed by the Scottish educational system). Schools are supported in delivering the National Guidelines and National Priorities by Learning and Teaching Scotland.

First degree courses at Scottish universities are often a year longer than elsewhere in the UK, though sometimes students can take a more advanced entrance exam and join the courses in the second year. One unique aspect is that the ancient universities of Scotland award a Master of Arts degree as the first degree in humanities. The University of Edinburgh is among the top twenty universities in the world according to the QS World University Rankings 2011. It is also among the Ancient Universities of Great Britain.

=== Wales ===
The National Assembly for Wales has responsibility for education in Wales. A significant number of students in Wales are educated either wholly or largely through the medium of the Welsh language, and lessons in the language are compulsory for all until the age of 16. There are plans to increase the provision of Welsh medium education as part of the policy of promoting a fully bilingual Wales.

=== Outdoor education ===
Scouting is the largest co-educational youth movement in the UK. Scouting began in 1907 when Robert Baden-Powell, Lieutenant General in the British Army, held the first Scout camp at Brownsea Island in Dorset, England. Baden-Powell wrote the principles of Scouting in &quot;Scouting for Boys&quot; in 1908. In July 2009, adventurer Bear Grylls became the youngest Chief Scout ever, aged 35. In 2010, scouting in the UK experienced its biggest growth since 1972, taking total membership to almost 500,000.

==Sociological issues==

===Housing===

The UK (England in particular) has a relatively high population density so housing tends to be more closely packed than in other countries. Thus terraced houses are widespread, dating back to the aftermath of the Great Fire of London.

As the first industrialised country in the world, the UK has long been urbanised. In the 20th century, suburbanisation led to a spread of semi-detached and detached housing. After the Second World War, public housing was dramatically expanded to create a large number of council estates. There are many historic country houses and stately homes in rural areas, though only a minority of these are still used as private living accommodation.

In recent times, more detached housing has started to be built. Also, city living has boomed, with city centre populations rising rapidly. Most of this population growth has been accommodated in new apartment blocks in residential schemes in many towns and cities. Demographic changes (see below) are putting great pressure on the housing market, especially in London and the South East.
===Living arrangements===

Historically most people in the United Kingdom lived either in conjugal extended families or nuclear families. This reflected an economic landscape where the general populace tended to have less spending power, meaning that it was more practical to stick together rather than go their individual ways. This pattern also reflected gender roles. Men were expected to go out to work and women were expected to stay at home and look after the families.
In the 20th century the emancipation of women, the greater freedoms enjoyed by both men and women in the years following the Second World War, greater affluence and easier divorce have changed gender roles and living arrangements significantly. The general trend is a rise in single people living alone, the virtual extinction of the extended family (outside certain ethnic minority communities), and the nuclear family arguably reducing in prominence.

From the 1990s, the break-up of the traditional family unit, when combined with low interest rates and other demographic changes, has created great pressure on the housing market, in particular on accommodation for &quot;key workers&quot; such as nurses, other emergency service workers and teachers, who are priced out of most housing, especially in the South East. Some research indicates that in the 21st century young people are tending to continue to live in the parental home for much longer than their predecessors.

===Happiness===
When Brits were asked to rate their happiness yesterday on a scale of 1 to 10 in 2018, respondent&#x27;s mean answer was 7.54 (ranked &#x27;High&#x27;) in 2018. Northern Irish respondents were ranked the happiest of the United Kingdom (with a mean of 7.74), followed by the English (with 7.54), then the Scots (with 7.52) and finally the Welsh (with 7.51).

However, only 25% of women and girls between the ages of 7 and 21 claim to be very happy, which has fallen from 41% in 2009. They claimed that it was due to the pressure from exams and social media, which exerted undue amounts of stress on them. In that category, the oldest were the least happy: 27% of young women aged 17 to 21 claimed they were not happy, compared to 11% in 2009. This negatively influenced their confidence by 61%, health by 50%, relationships by 49% and studying by 39%. 69% of respondents in that age group claimed school exams were the chief stressor, 59% felt pressure from social media was making them less happy, and compared to 5 years ago, more claimed they had experienced unkind, threatening or negative reactions on social media. The proportion of the population who knew someone with mental health issues rose from 62% in 2015 to 71% in 2018. Many young women and girls feel unsafe walking alone: over half aged from 13 to 21 have experienced harassment or know someone who has, and almost half feel unsafe using public transport.&lt;ref name=&quot;guardian19/9/2018&quot;&gt;UK survey finds sharp decline in happiness of young women and girls &quot;The Guardian&quot;&lt;/ref&gt;

===Feminism===
The proportion of young girls considering themselves feminists has risen from 35% in 2013 to 47% in 2018. 36% of young women and girls aged 11 to 21 had spoken up about an issue that mattered to them, this rose from 28% in 2011 but only 60% felt they had been listened to. Girls have also become more interested in science, maths and technology. Girls are more likely to want to become leaders in their careers, 53% compared to 42% in 2016. Maria Miller said, &quot;#MeToo may have left its mark in Hollywood but for women and girls around the country their ambitions to succeed are still too often met with sexism. It&#x27;s important more women and girls are now speaking out about how this behaviour undermines their confidence and mental health; but this harmful, negative behaviour has to be stopped&quot;.

==Naming conventions==
The common naming convention throughout the United Kingdom is for everyone to have one or more given names (a forename, still often referred to as a &quot;Christian name&quot;) usually (but not always) indicating the child&#x27;s sex, and a surname (&quot;family name&quot;). A four-year study by the University of the West of England, which concluded in 2016, analysed sources dating from the 11th to the 19th centuries to explain the origins of the surnames in the British Isles. The study found that over 90% of the 45,602 surnames in the dictionary are native to the British Isles; the most common in the UK are Smith, Jones, Williams, Brown, Taylor, Johnson, and Lee. Since the 19th century middle names (additional forenames) have become very common and are sometimes taken from the name of a family member.

Most surnames of British origin fall into seven categories:
* Occupations e.g. &quot;Smith&quot;, &quot;Sawyer&quot;, &quot;Fuller&quot;, &quot;Brewer&quot;, &quot;Clark&quot;, &quot;Cooper&quot;, &quot;Cook&quot;, &quot;Carpenter&quot;, &quot;Bailey&quot;, &quot;Parker&quot;, &quot;Forrester&quot;, &quot;Head&quot;, &quot;Palmer&quot;, &quot;Archer&quot;, &quot;Hunt&quot;, &quot;Baker&quot;, &quot;Miller&quot;, &quot;Dyer&quot;, &quot;Walker&quot;, &quot;Woodman&quot;, &quot;Taylor&quot;, &quot;Turner&quot;, &quot;Knight&quot;, &quot;Slater&quot;, &quot;Mason&quot;, &quot;Weaver&quot;, &quot;Carter&quot;, &quot;Wright&quot;
* Personal characteristics e.g. &quot;Short&quot;, &quot;Brown&quot;, &quot;Black&quot;, &quot;Whitehead&quot;, &quot;Young&quot;, &quot;Stout&quot;, &quot;Long&quot;, &quot;White&quot;
* Geographical features e.g. &quot;Pond&quot;, &quot;Bridge&quot;, &quot;Camp&quot;, &quot;Hill&quot;, &quot;Bush&quot;, &quot;Lake&quot;, &quot;Lee&quot;, &quot;Wood&quot;, &quot;Holmes&quot;, &quot;Forest&quot;, &quot;Underwood&quot;, &quot;Hall&quot;, &quot;Brooks&quot;, &quot;Fields&quot;, &quot;Stone&quot;, &quot;Morley&quot;, &quot;Moore&quot;, &quot;Perry&quot;
* Place names e.g. &quot;Murray&quot;, &quot;Everingham&quot;, &quot;Burton&quot;, &quot;Leighton&quot;, &quot;Hamilton&quot;, &quot;Sutton&quot;, &quot;Flint&quot;, &quot;Laughton&quot;
* Estate For those descended from landowners, the name of their holdings, manor or estate
* Patronymics, matronymics or ancestral, often from a person&#x27;s given name. e.g. from male name: &quot;Richardson&quot;, &quot;Jones&quot; (Welsh for John), &quot;Williams&quot;, &quot;Thomas&quot;, &quot;Jackson&quot;, &quot;Wilson&quot;, &quot;Thompson&quot;, &quot;Johnson&quot;, &quot;Harris&quot;, &quot;Evans&quot;, &quot;Simpson&quot;, &quot;Willis&quot;, &quot;Davies&quot;, &quot;Reynolds&quot;, &quot;Adams&quot;, &quot;Dawson&quot;, &quot;Lewis&quot;, &quot;Rogers&quot;, &quot;Murphy&quot;, &quot;Nicholson&quot;, &quot;Robinson&quot;, &quot;Powell&quot;, &quot;Ferguson&quot;, &quot;Davis&quot;, &quot;Edwards&quot;, &quot;Hudson&quot;, &quot;Roberts&quot;, &quot;Harrison&quot;, &quot;Watson&quot;, or female names &quot;Molson&quot; (from Moll for Mary), &quot;Gilson&quot; (from Gill), &quot;Emmott&quot; (from Emma), &quot;Marriott&quot; (from Mary) or from a clan name (for those of Scottish origin, e.g. &quot;MacDonald&quot;, &quot;Forbes&quot;, &quot;Henderson&quot;, &quot;Armstrong&quot;, &quot;Grant&quot;, &quot;Cameron&quot;, &quot;Stewart&quot;, &quot;Douglas&quot;, &quot;Crawford&quot;, &quot;Campbell&quot;, &quot;Houston&quot;, &quot;Hunter&quot;) with &quot;Mac&quot; Irish and Scottish Gaelic for son.
* Patronal from patronage (&quot;Hickman&quot; meaning Hick&#x27;s man, where Hick is a pet form of the name Richard) or strong ties of religion &quot;Kilpatrick&quot; (follower of Patrick) or &quot;Kilbride&quot; (follower of Bridget).

Traditionally, Christian names were those of Biblical figures or recognised saints; however, in the Gothic Revival of the Victorian era, other Anglo Saxon and mythical names enjoyed something of a fashion among the &quot;literati&quot;. Since the 20th century, however, first names have been influenced by a much wider cultural base.

First names from the British Isles include Jennifer, a Cornish form of Guinevere (Welsh: Gwenhwyfar) from Arthurian romance, which gained recognition after George Bernard Shaw used it for the main female character in his play &quot;The Doctor&#x27;s Dilemma&quot; (1906): Jennifer first entered the top 100 most commonly used names for baby girls in England and Wales in 1934. The oldest written record of the name Jessica is in Shakespeare&#x27;s play &quot;The Merchant of Venice&quot;, where it belongs to the daughter of Shylock. Jessica is the seventh most popular name for baby girls in England and Wales in 2015. First appearing in 13th century England, Olivia was popularised by Shakespeare&#x27;s character in the &quot;Twelfth Night&quot; (1602). Vanessa was created by Jonathan Swift in his poem &quot;Cadenus and Vanessa&quot; (1713). While it first appeared in late 16th century England, Pamela was popularised after Samuel Richardson named it as the title for his 1740 novel.

See also:
* Most popular names of England and Wales
* Most popular names of Northern Ireland
* Most popular names of Scotland
* Most common surnames in England
* Most common surnames in Northern Ireland
* Most common surnames in Scotland
* Most common surnames in Wales

==See also==
* British humour
* Department for Culture, Media and Sport (deals with Culture for England)
* Minister for Culture and External Affairs (deals with Culture for Scotland)
* Shrove Tuesday (Pancake Day)
* April Fools&#x27; Day
* Lord Kitchener Wants You
* List of venues in the United Kingdom
* Social history of Postwar Britain (1945–1979)
* Social history of the United Kingdom (1979–present)
* Commonwealth of Nations – Culture

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* Culture
** Department for Culture, Media and Sport
** United Kingdom/Ireland for Visitors 
* Television
** BBC television
** ITV
** Sky television
* Radio
** BBC radio</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="4" end="11" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="19" end="33" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q113162" start="55" end="85" title="History of the United Kingdom" label="combined nations&amp;#x27; history"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="91" end="100" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q892159" start="101" end="115" title="Religion in the United Kingdom" label="religious life"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="154" end="160" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="189" end="196" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="198" end="203" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="205" end="213" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="218" end="234" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="258" end="272" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393277" start="427" end="446" title="Culture of England" label="cultures of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007259" start="448" end="456" title="Culture of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075956" start="458" end="463" title="Culture of Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4246666" start="468" end="484" title="Culture of Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q764912" start="591" end="609" title="British literature" label="British literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="640" end="652" title="Novel" label="modern novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q268673" start="809" end="814" title="Music of the United Kingdom" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q849763" start="816" end="822" title="British cinema" label="cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971295" start="824" end="827" title="Art of the United Kingdom" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189662" start="829" end="841" title="Architecture of the United Kingdom" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546736" start="846" end="856" title="Television in the United Kingdom" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="889" end="906" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="908" end="926" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089788" start="928" end="943" title="Church in Wales" label="Church in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="949" end="961" title="State religion" label="state church"/>
<link wikidata="Q19361673" start="966" end="979" title="mother church" label="mother church"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="987" end="1005" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074689" start="1143" end="1153" title="British philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="1155" end="1162" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="1164" end="1174" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="1179" end="1187" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="1229" end="1238" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q14208553" start="1244" end="1253" title="invention" label="invention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="1260" end="1281" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="1327" end="1341" title="socioeconomics" label="socio-economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1529" end="1557" title="Legacy of the British Empire" label="result of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q540885" start="1571" end="1588" title="Anglicisation" label="British influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1709" end="1732" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q541576" start="1768" end="1779" title="Anglosphere" label="Anglosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q918277" start="1906" end="1921" title="British cuisine" label="British cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="2059" end="2066" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="2068" end="2076" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="2078" end="2084" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="2086" end="2092" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="2097" end="2102" title="Rugby football" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2172" end="2178" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q918240" start="2583" end="2614" title="Territorial evolution of the British Empire" label="expansion of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985804" start="2663" end="2677" title="Culture of France" label="French culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="2687" end="2694" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="2697" end="2717" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="2727" end="2734" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992919" start="2740" end="2755" title="Culture of Italy" label="Italian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2765" end="2771" title="Roman Empire" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="2790" end="2796" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="2801" end="2809" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="3006" end="3018" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="3086" end="3113" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman occupation of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q69163529" start="3477" end="3500" title="Fall of the Berlin Wall" label="Fall of the Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="3604" end="3618" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060646" start="3748" end="3759" title="South Asian ethnic groups" label="South Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="3761" end="3779" title="Continental Europe" label="Continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183734" start="3783" end="3790" title="List of ethnic groups of Africa" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="3795" end="3804" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="3866" end="3888" title="early medieval England" label="early medieval England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3894" end="3910" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="3939" end="3956" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983621" start="4023" end="4041" title="Demographics of the United Kingdom" label="British population"/>
<link wikidata="Q106308" start="4116" end="4167" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" label="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="4170" end="4175" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="4177" end="4192" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="4194" end="4199" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="4201" end="4208" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="4210" end="4215" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q201966" start="4217" end="4229" title="Ulster Scots dialects" label="Ulster Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q33000" start="4235" end="4256" title="British Sign Language" label="British Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981936" start="4407" end="4430" title="Welsh Language Act 1993" label="Welsh Language Act 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540463" start="4439" end="4467" title="Government of Wales Act 1998" label="Government of Wales Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q973006" start="4732" end="4762" title="Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act" label="Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="4778" end="4797" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398539" start="5018" end="5034" title="List of revived languages" label="revived language"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="5078" end="5086" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336843" start="5197" end="5228" title="countries of the United Kingdom" label="countries of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321639" start="5361" end="5377" title="English language in Northern England" label="Northern English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553250" start="5428" end="5444" title="Scottish English" label="Scottish English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363292" start="5446" end="5459" title="Welsh English" label="Welsh English"/>
<link wikidata="Q665624" start="5465" end="5478" title="Hiberno-English" label="Hiberno-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312722" start="5523" end="5538" title="English language in England" label="English English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985" start="5584" end="5606" title="Received Pronunciation" label="Received Pronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14437894" start="5614" end="5630" title="Standard English" label="Standard English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553250" start="5678" end="5703" title="Scottish English" label="Scottish Standard English"/>
<link wikidata="Q919978" start="5757" end="5777" title="Prestige (sociolinguistics)" label="high social prestige"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804441" start="6056" end="6062" title="Scouse" label="Scouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747578" start="6067" end="6076" title="Manchester dialect" label="Mancunian"/>
<link wikidata="Q80137" start="6205" end="6217" title="Emily Brontë" label="Emily Brontë"/>
<link wikidata="Q202975" start="6237" end="6254" title="Wuthering Heights" label="Wuthering Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q507738" start="6416" end="6436" title="Matter of Britain" label="Arthurian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q437112" start="6477" end="6499" title="Old English literature" label="Old English literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="6530" end="6546" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="6551" end="6570" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699264" start="6596" end="6608" title="John Barbour (poet)" label="John Barbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520145" start="6622" end="6630" title="The Brus" label="The Brus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821020" start="6729" end="6741" title="Augustan literature" label="Augustan Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q40946" start="6785" end="6804" title="Daniel Defoe" label="Daniel Defoe&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q483034" start="6811" end="6826" title="Robinson Crusoe" label="Robinson Crusoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q612523" start="6850" end="6863" title="Moll Flanders" label="Moll Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="6944" end="6950" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823920" start="6998" end="7018" title="The Rape of the Lock" label="The Rape of the Lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q164047" start="7029" end="7043" title="Alexander Pope" label="Alexander Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q181488" start="7266" end="7289" title="Gulliver&amp;#x27;s Travels" label="Gulliver&amp;#x27;s Travels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="7307" end="7318" title="Anglo-Irish" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q41166" start="7326" end="7340" title="Jonathan Swift" label="Jonathan Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q238499" start="7377" end="7384" title="Spanish literature" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="7391" end="7402" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353123" start="7455" end="7470" title="A Tale of a Tub" label="A Tale of a Tub"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749810" start="7491" end="7534" title="An Argument Against Abolishing Christianity" label="An Argument Against Abolishing Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q264143" start="7553" end="7570" title="A Modest Proposal" label="A Modest Proposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q321660" start="7692" end="7700" title="John Gay" label="John Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q435816" start="7706" end="7720" title="John Arbuthnot" label="John Arbuthnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q572114" start="7751" end="7775" title="Martinus Scriblerus Club" label="Martinus Scriblerus Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q248096" start="7827" end="7836" title="The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling" label="Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q34190" start="7854" end="7868" title="Henry Fielding" label="Henry Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048624" start="7876" end="7882" title="Pamela, or Virtue Rewarded" label="Pamela"/>
<link wikidata="Q295941" start="7924" end="7941" title="Samuel Richardson" label="Samuel Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q218960" start="7943" end="7958" title="Laurence Sterne" label="Laurence Sterne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164083" start="7961" end="8012" title="The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman" label="The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048624" start="8032" end="8038" title="Pamela; or, Virtue Rewarded" label="Pamela"/>
<link wikidata="Q980534" start="8121" end="8129" title="Clarissa; or, The History of a Young Lady" label="Clarissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="8354" end="8368" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210346" start="8382" end="8418" title="A Dictionary of the English Language" label="A Dictionary of the English Language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8478" end="8496" title="British Dictionary" label="British Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="8531" end="8556" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q23622" start="8874" end="8886" title="dictionary" label="dictionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="8939" end="8955" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q184524" start="9005" end="9017" title="lexicography" label="lexicography"/>
<link wikidata="Q918094" start="9111" end="9118" title="Guinea (British coin)" label="guineas"/>
<link wikidata="Q333148" start="9716" end="9730" title="Richard Steele" label="Richard Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q40831" start="9764" end="9772" title="comedies" label="comedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q190399" start="9777" end="9786" title="pamphlets" label="pamphlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q42192498" start="10022" end="10037" title="The Lying Lover" label="The Lying Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q206384" start="10119" end="10133" title="Joseph Addison" label="Joseph Addison"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10137" end="10155" title="The Tender Husband" label="The Tender Husband"/>
<link wikidata="Q333398" start="10188" end="10201" title="John Vanbrugh" label="John Vanbrugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078212" start="10284" end="10294" title="The Tatler" label="The Tatler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002697" start="10309" end="10319" title="periodical" label="periodical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673366" start="10385" end="10402" title="Isaac Bickerstaff" label="Isaac Bickerstaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790750" start="10582" end="10595" title="The Spectator" label="The Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="10608" end="10620" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="10740" end="10755" title="Romantic Period" label="Romantic Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="10783" end="10789" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="11001" end="11019" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q82409" start="11024" end="11047" title="Samuel Taylor Coleridge" label="Samuel Taylor Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q738958" start="11050" end="11065" title="Lyrical Ballads" label="Lyrical Ballads"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="11209" end="11226" title="Romantic Movement" label="Romantic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q47152" start="11228" end="11240" title="Mary Shelley" label="Mary Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q150827" start="11243" end="11255" title="Frankenstein" label="Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q36322" start="11445" end="11456" title="Jane Austen" label="Jane Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170583" start="11459" end="11478" title="Pride and Prejudice" label="Pride and Prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q25861" start="11578" end="11593" title="Regency England" label="Regency England"/>
<link wikidata="Q764912" start="11641" end="11659" title="British Literature" label="British Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="11661" end="11671" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q210372" start="11674" end="11682" title="Don Juan" label="Don Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="11848" end="11864" title="Sir Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q678251" start="11867" end="11875" title="Waverley (novel)" label="Waverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="11952" end="11970" title="Jacobite Rebellion" label="Jacobite Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12050" end="12102" title="William Blake’s Songs of Innocence and of Experience" label="William Blake’s Songs of Innocence and of Experience"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12251" end="12292" title="Percy Bysshe Shelley’s Prometheus Unbound" label="Percy Bysshe Shelley’s Prometheus Unbound"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="12435" end="12447" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q211939" start="12530" end="12544" title="Auld Lang Syne" label="Auld Lang Syne"/>
<link wikidata="Q101638" start="12597" end="12616" title="Mary Wollstonecraft" label="Mary Wollstonecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q300646" start="12619" end="12655" title="A Vindication of the Rights of Woman" label="A Vindication of the Rights of Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="12868" end="12881" title="Victorian Era" label="Victorian Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="12883" end="12896" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="12899" end="12931" title="Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland" label="Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006877" start="13466" end="13478" title="Georgian Era" label="Georgian Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q619593" start="13483" end="13496" title="Victorian literature" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q36322" start="13602" end="13613" title="Jane Austen" label="Jane Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="13692" end="13707" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q164974" start="13815" end="13827" title="Oliver Twist" label="Oliver Twist"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="13838" end="13853" title="Victorian Era" label="Victorian Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="13943" end="13949" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q219552" start="13985" end="14003" title="Great Expectations" label="Great Expectations"/>
<link wikidata="Q223945" start="14017" end="14030" title="bildungsroman" label="bildungsroman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197170" start="14056" end="14059" title="Pip (Great Expectations)" label="Pip"/>
<link wikidata="Q127332" start="14172" end="14188" title="Charlotte Brontë" label="Charlotte Brontë"/>
<link wikidata="Q182961" start="14191" end="14200" title="Jane Eyre" label="Jane Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="14215" end="14221" title="Gothic fiction" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q117349643" start="14342" end="14359" title="Victorian society" label="Victorian society"/>
<link wikidata="Q835808" start="14371" end="14385" title="Brontë family" label="Brontë sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q131333" start="14390" end="14402" title="George Eliot" label="George Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788657" start="14416" end="14432" title="Northern England" label="Northern England"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="14441" end="14449" title="Midlands" label="Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q228494" start="14706" end="14732" title="Elizabeth Barrett Browning" label="Elizabeth Barrett Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q236596" start="14737" end="14755" title="Christina Rossetti" label="Christina Rossetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q131333" start="14757" end="14769" title="George Eliot" label="George Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q313129" start="14772" end="14783" title="Middlemarch" label="Middlemarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q229226" start="14949" end="14966" title="Elizabeth Gaskell" label="Elizabeth Gaskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853142" start="14969" end="14984" title="North and South (Gaskell novel)" label="North and South"/>
<link wikidata="Q132805" start="15136" end="15148" title="Thomas Hardy" label="Thomas Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15151" end="15176" title="Tess of the d’Urbervilles" label="Tess of the d’Urbervilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="15285" end="15296" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q82464" start="15299" end="15325" title="The Picture of Dorian Gray" label="The Picture of Dorian Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="15477" end="15499" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q217352" start="15502" end="15545" title="The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde" label="The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="15670" end="15688" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q392147" start="15691" end="15724" title="The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes" label="The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="15879" end="15894" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="15929" end="15943" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q764912" start="15959" end="15977" title="British literature" label="British literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="16028" end="16039" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="16044" end="16055" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189509" start="16068" end="16083" title="The Jungle Book" label="The Jungle Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129936" start="16144" end="16169" title="The Man Who Would Be King" label="The Man Who Would Be King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="16186" end="16199" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16419" end="16441" title="The White Man’s Burden" label="The White Man’s Burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="16764" end="16775" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401082" start="16797" end="16806" title="war poets" label="war poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q212719" start="16827" end="16839" title="Wilfred Owen" label="Wilfred Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q363729" start="16841" end="16858" title="Siegfried Sassoon" label="Siegfried Sassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q366086" start="16864" end="16877" title="Rupert Brooke" label="Rupert Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q483372" start="16896" end="16903" title="paradox" label="paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="16970" end="16978" title="trench warfare" label="trenches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672822" start="17166" end="17180" title="Celtic Revival" label="Celtic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q683732" start="17225" end="17241" title="Irish literature" label="Irish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783150" start="17253" end="17273" title="Scottish Renaissance" label="Scottish Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180995" start="17295" end="17314" title="Scottish literature" label="Scottish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="17604" end="17616" title="Booker Prize" label="Booker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278820" start="17669" end="17681" title="Hay Festival" label="Hay Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q168545" start="17785" end="17801" title="2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony" label="opening ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="17809" end="17834" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="London 2012 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q775274" start="17981" end="17993" title="The Big Read" label="The Big Read"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="18097" end="18113" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q36322" start="18115" end="18126" title="Jane Austen" label="Jane Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q190220" start="18128" end="18142" title="Philip Pullman" label="Philip Pullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q42" start="18144" end="18157" title="Douglas Adams" label="Douglas Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="18162" end="18175" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q568642" start="18446" end="18456" title="Bloomsbury Publishing" label="Bloomsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="18458" end="18484" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q680946" start="18486" end="18493" title="Informa" label="Informa"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="18495" end="18518" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916402" start="18520" end="18527" title="Pearson plc" label="Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q998470" start="18533" end="18543" title="RELX Group" label="RELX Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732400" start="18705" end="18724" title="Union of the Crowns" label="Union of the Crowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417690" start="18780" end="18798" title="Restoration comedy" label="Restoration comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q754602" start="18812" end="18823" title="sentimentalism (literature)" label="sentimental"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="18841" end="18848" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748056" start="18877" end="18896" title="The London Merchant" label="The London Merchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q940462" start="19112" end="19122" title="music hall" label="music hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11685204" start="19332" end="19348" title="John Home" label="John Home&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301172" start="19355" end="19362" title="Douglas (play)" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="19386" end="19398" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q678251" start="19466" end="19474" title="Waverley (novel)" label="Waverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="19567" end="19586" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="19591" end="19602" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="19683" end="19703" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220650" start="19755" end="19766" title="comic opera" label="comic opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375404" start="19773" end="19801" title="Shakespeare Memorial Theatre" label="Shakespeare Memorial Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q189288" start="19846" end="19865" title="Stratford upon Avon" label="Stratford upon Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352525" start="19878" end="19899" title="Herbert Beerbohm Tree" label="Herbert Beerbohm Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q523926" start="19911" end="19934" title="Royal Academy of Dramatic Art" label="Academy of Dramatic Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155331" start="19938" end="19964" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Theatre, London" label="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278792" start="20020" end="20038" title="Drawing room play" label="drawing-room plays"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="20064" end="20075" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q477371" start="20111" end="20131" title="kitchen sink realism" label="kitchen sink realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="20175" end="20189" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="20257" end="20272" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051472" start="20286" end="20299" title="The Mousetrap" label="The Mousetrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150998" start="20387" end="20416" title="List of the longest-running West End shows" label="longest-running West End show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352949" start="20463" end="20482" title="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells" label="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q440432" start="20490" end="20503" title="Lilian Baylis" label="Lilian Baylis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342882" start="20587" end="20609" title="English National Opera" label="English National Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="20735" end="20747" title="Royal Ballet" label="Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146254" start="20763" end="20788" title="Royal Shakespeare Company" label="Royal Shakespeare Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q189288" start="20812" end="20831" title="Stratford-upon-Avon" label="Stratford-upon-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="20937" end="20945" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756626" start="20989" end="21014" title="Theatre Royal, Drury Lane" label="Theatre Royal, Drury Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="21022" end="21041" title="City of Westminster" label="City of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q917960" start="21132" end="21147" title="Bristol Old Vic" label="Bristol Old Vic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="21256" end="21275" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932368" start="21426" end="21454" title="National Theatre of Scotland" label="National Theatre of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="21611" end="21633" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q961683" start="21902" end="21937" title="Birmingham Triennial Music Festival" label="Birmingham Triennial Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292443" start="22078" end="22105" title="Royal Philharmonic Society" label="London Philharmonic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144673" start="22115" end="22137" title="Royal Academy of Music" label="Royal Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777663" start="22151" end="22173" title="Royal Irish Academy of Music" label="Irish Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="22330" end="22347" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q209684" start="22432" end="22442" title="John Field (composer)" label="John Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904882" start="22600" end="22622" title="Opera in English" label="English-language opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818979" start="22692" end="22720" title="Royal Liverpool Philharmonic" label="Royal Liverpool Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q262431" start="22747" end="22752" title="The Hallé" label="Hallé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002502" start="22766" end="22784" title="Royal Scottish National Orchestra" label="Scottish Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q706774" start="22801" end="22838" title="City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra" label="City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750539" start="23005" end="23029" title="The Masque at Kenilworth" label="The Masque at Kenilworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971344" start="23138" end="23158" title="British folk revival" label="British folk revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q207947" start="23189" end="23211" title="Ralph Vaughan Williams" label="Ralph Vaughan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378262" start="23224" end="23247" title="English Folk Song Suite" label="English Folk Song Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q674739" start="23259" end="23282" title="Alexander Mackenzie (composer)" label="Sir Alexander Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="23408" end="23424" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q310939" start="23492" end="23506" title="William Walton" label="William Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q795630" start="23621" end="23643" title="BBC Symphony Orchestra" label="BBC Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046309" start="23653" end="23665" title="Philharmonia" label="Philharmonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096609" start="23698" end="23709" title="Opera North" label="Opera North"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077402" start="23838" end="23847" title="Aldeburgh" label="Aldeburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q203348" start="23852" end="23863" title="Glyndebourne Festival Opera" label="Glydebourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046677" start="23875" end="23884" title="The Proms" label="BBC Proms"/>
<link wikidata="Q849965" start="24068" end="24084" title="broadside ballad" label="broadside ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154562" start="24107" end="24123" title="British brass band" label="brass band music"/>
<link wikidata="Q940462" start="24128" end="24138" title="music hall" label="music hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971384" start="24230" end="24234" title="British jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="24239" end="24252" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q606089" start="24273" end="24280" title="skiffle" label="skiffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971443" start="24382" end="24403" title="British rock and roll" label="British rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q546264" start="24496" end="24500" title="Beat music" label="beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q918542" start="24505" end="24518" title="British blues" label="British blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="24568" end="24575" title="The Beatles" label="Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="24580" end="24594" title="The Rolling Stones" label="Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q211418" start="24633" end="24649" title="British Invasion" label="British Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="24684" end="24695" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="24699" end="24709" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q193355" start="24749" end="24759" title="blues rock" label="blues rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q76092" start="24870" end="24879" title="Glam rock" label="Glam rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="24994" end="24998" title="Punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="25000" end="25008" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="25014" end="25023" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q205049" start="25110" end="25121" title="World music" label="World music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039449" start="25136" end="25150" title="Caribbean music in the United Kingdom" label="Jamaican music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443137" start="25216" end="25232" title="Second British Invasion" label="British Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298934" start="25289" end="25297" title="Synth-pop" label="synthpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q221772" start="25384" end="25393" title="Acid jazz" label="Acid Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="25395" end="25405" title="Indie rock" label="Indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q945153" start="25494" end="25515" title="Stock Aitken Waterman" label="Stock Aitken Waterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q216337" start="25581" end="25589" title="boy band" label="boy band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623897" start="25592" end="25602" title="All-female band" label="all-female"/>
<link wikidata="Q28503947" start="25607" end="25619" title="Co-ed groups" label="mixed groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q502886" start="25659" end="25669" title="Madchester" label="Madchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="25689" end="25705" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q189045" start="25710" end="25717" title="Britpop" label="Britpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q23215" start="25824" end="25829" title="Adele" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q20474" start="25884" end="25891" title="dubstep" label="dubstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995980" start="25896" end="25904" title="new rave" label="new rave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771297" start="26113" end="26134" title="folk music of England" label="folk music of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195253" start="26178" end="26190" title="sea shanties" label="sea shanties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079270" start="26192" end="26196" title="jigs" label="jigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547484" start="26198" end="26206" title="hornpipe" label="hornpipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="26212" end="26223" title="dance music" label="dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900271" start="26302" end="26316" title="Morris dancing" label="Morris dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8347" start="26412" end="26419" title="bagpipe" label="bagpipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164192" start="26475" end="26497" title="Great Highland Bagpipe" label="Great Highland Bagpipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568351" start="26524" end="26572" title="List of the Child Ballads" label="&amp;quot;English and Scottish Popular Ballads&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="26578" end="26584" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910735" start="26742" end="26756" title="Border ballads" label="Border ballads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985773" start="26801" end="26834" title="The Ballad of Chevy Chase" label="&amp;quot;Ballad of Chevy Chase&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145652" start="26865" end="26884" title="Fairport Convention" label="Fairport Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="26947" end="26962" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q40807" start="26969" end="26986" title="God Save the King" label="God Save the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q215729" start="27033" end="27049" title="Rule, Britannia!" label="Rule, Britannia!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27176" end="27197" title="And did those feet in ancient time#Popularisation of the hymn" label="&amp;quot;Jerusalem&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q208275" start="27205" end="27223" title="Flower of Scotland" label="Flower of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q160036" start="27231" end="27261" title="Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau" label="&amp;quot;Land of My Fathers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164523" start="27273" end="27282" title="Danny Boy" label="Danny Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="27651" end="27659" title="Cinema of the United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q993246" start="27676" end="27691" title="Cinema of Europe" label="European cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q267176" start="27764" end="27785" title="Roundhay Garden Scene" label="Roundhay Garden Scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735485" start="27818" end="27826" title="Roundhay" label="Roundhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="27828" end="27833" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q421675" start="27853" end="27868" title="Louis Le Prince" label="Louis Le Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q25486309" start="27906" end="27934" title="Incident at Clovelly Cottage" label="Incident at Clovelly Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q941530" start="27982" end="28003" title="Color motion picture film" label="colour motion picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525845" start="28016" end="28037" title="Edward Raymond Turner" label="Edward Raymond Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="28429" end="28445" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="28554" end="28566" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189359" start="28571" end="28586" title="Crown Film Unit" label="Crown Film Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400831" start="28637" end="28659" title="Powell and Pressburger" label="Powell and Pressburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q271830" start="28803" end="28816" title="The Third Man" label="The Third Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q814296" start="28833" end="28848" title="Brief Encounter" label="Brief Encounter"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="28866" end="28888" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="28951" end="28967" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q27178" start="28986" end="28992" title="Hamlet (1948 film)" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="29037" end="29067" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Academy Award for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q948916" start="29165" end="29173" title="Carry On (franchise)" label="Carry On"/>
<link wikidata="Q710850" start="29219" end="29258" title="The Dam Busters (film)" label="&amp;quot;The&amp;quot; &amp;quot;Dam Busters&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433745" start="29285" end="29297" title="Hammer Film Productions" label="Hammer Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q668309" start="29425" end="29441" title="British New Wave" label="British New Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q652256" start="29697" end="29713" title="Epic film" label="historical epics"/>
<link wikidata="Q228186" start="29750" end="29768" title="Lawrence of Arabia (film)" label="Lawrence of Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218999" start="29785" end="29806" title="A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)" label="A Man for All Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297927" start="29814" end="29827" title="Spy film" label="spy thrillers"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="29868" end="29878" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037910" start="29921" end="29936" title="Swinging Sixties" label="swinging London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140649" start="30120" end="30134" title="The Wicker Man" label="The Wicker Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="30145" end="30157" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="30204" end="30216" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241689" start="30250" end="30258" title="Pressure (1976 film)" label="Pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039707" start="30275" end="30295" title="A Private Enterprise" label="A Private Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244280" start="30327" end="30340" title="Black British" label="Black British"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722871" start="30345" end="30358" title="British Asian" label="British Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207921" start="30397" end="30413" title="Chariots of Fire" label="Chariots of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q202211" start="30442" end="30448" title="Gandhi (film)" label="Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="30591" end="30600" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q901213" start="30867" end="30894" title="Four Weddings and a Funeral" label="Four Weddings and a Funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="30905" end="30922" title="Romantic comedy" label="romantic comedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407366" start="30943" end="30969" title="Merchant Ivory Productions" label="Merchant Ivory Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q109135" start="31220" end="31233" title="Trainspotting (film)" label="Trainspotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q223367" start="31440" end="31449" title="The Queen (2006 film)" label="The Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q349391" start="31496" end="31508" title="Helen Mirren" label="Helen Mirren"/>
<link wikidata="Q922857" start="31537" end="31552" title="UK Film Council" label="UK Film Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q160060" start="31566" end="31588" title="The King&amp;#x27;s Speech" label="The King&amp;#x27;s Speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278073" start="31696" end="31708" title="East Is East (1999 film)" label="East is East"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="31957" end="31989" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="British Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="32080" end="32083" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="32085" end="32094" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="32096" end="32100" title="Five (channel)" label="Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="32141" end="32146" title="British Sky Broadcasting" label="BSkyB"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="32295" end="32322" title="public service broadcasting" label="public service broadcasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="32594" end="32606" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917245" start="32629" end="32634" title="Hovis" label="Hovis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12058752" start="32706" end="32728" title="Gold Hill, Shaftesbury" label="Gold Hill, Shaftesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969426" start="32891" end="32925" title="British Airways face advertisement" label="British Airways face advertisement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017103" start="32942" end="32951" title="noitulovE" label="noitulovE"/>
<link wikidata="Q194297" start="32969" end="32977" title="Guinness" label="Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586455" start="32994" end="33001" title="Gorilla (advertisement)" label="Gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6677525" start="33025" end="33032" title="Cadbury" label="Cadbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q546425" start="33113" end="33131" title="In the Air Tonight" label="In the Air Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242180" start="33187" end="33193" title="Galaxy (chocolate)" label="Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42786" start="33248" end="33262" title="Audrey Hepburn" label="Audrey Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895514" start="33359" end="33386" title="John Lewis Christmas advert" label="John Lewis Christmas advert"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="33468" end="33477" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908130" start="33556" end="33572" title="Match of the Day" label="Match of the Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065912" start="33625" end="33650" title="1966 FIFA World Cup Final" label="1966 FIFA World Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918374" start="33659" end="33684" title="Funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales" label="Funeral of Princess Diana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33697" end="33732" title="List of most-watched television broadcasts#Most watched special events" label="most watched television events ever"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="33744" end="33750" title="Satire" label="Satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070889" start="33783" end="33797" title="British comedy" label="British comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426234" start="33825" end="33836" title="satire boom" label="satire boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q525970" start="33901" end="33911" title="Peter Cook" label="Peter Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q310343" start="33913" end="33925" title="Dudley Moore" label="Dudley Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q654730" start="33927" end="33939" title="Alan Bennett" label="Alan Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q380865" start="33941" end="33952" title="David Frost" label="David Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435905" start="33957" end="33972" title="Jonathan Miller" label="Jonathan Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q16401" start="34058" end="34091" title="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus" label="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="34117" end="34129" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837662" start="34287" end="34301" title="Spitting Image" label="Spitting Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="34328" end="34340" title="British Royal Family" label="royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768525" start="34434" end="34457" title="Have I Got News for You" label="Have I Got News for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448875" start="34474" end="34487" title="Mock the Week" label="Mock the Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q132730" start="34587" end="34603" title="Grand Theft Auto" label="Grand Theft Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q624771" start="34700" end="34709" title="slapstick" label="slapstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q200228" start="34733" end="34743" title="Benny Hill" label="Benny Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q484020" start="34835" end="34843" title="Mr. Bean" label="Mr. Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325878" start="34899" end="34914" title="The Two Ronnies" label="The Two Ronnies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748714" start="34931" end="34949" title="Morecambe and Wise" label="Morecambe and Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462368" start="35009" end="35027" title="Jeeves and Wooster" label="Jeeves and Wooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q49017" start="35042" end="35053" title="Hugh Laurie" label="Hugh Laurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q828530" start="35057" end="35071" title="Bertie Wooster" label="Bertie Wooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="35129" end="35140" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q521812" start="35144" end="35150" title="Jeeves" label="Jeeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q13472752" start="35190" end="35195" title="valet" label="valet"/>
<link wikidata="Q439095" start="35221" end="35231" title="Rik Mayall" label="Rik Mayall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160202" start="35246" end="35262" title="Adrian Edmondson" label="Adrian Edmondson"/>
<link wikidata="Q634199" start="35279" end="35285" title="Bottom (TV series)" label="Bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q316709" start="35443" end="35455" title="Steve Coogan" label="Steve Coogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q489671" start="35478" end="35492" title="Alan Partridge" label="Alan Partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q611100" start="35649" end="35662" title="Da Ali G Show" label="Da Ali G Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q29055" start="35677" end="35694" title="Sacha Baron Cohen" label="Sacha Baron Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751029" start="35723" end="35728" title="Ali G" label="Ali G"/>
<link wikidata="Q336206" start="35908" end="35917" title="Nick Park" label="Nick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q691528" start="35930" end="35948" title="Wallace and Gromit" label="Wallace and Gromit"/>
<link wikidata="Q301092" start="35963" end="35981" title="Aardman Animations" label="Aardman Animations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783701" start="36023" end="36038" title="A Grand Day Out" label="A Grand Day Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969617" start="36059" end="36077" title="The Wrong Trousers" label="The Wrong Trousers"/>
<link wikidata="Q400097" start="36101" end="36114" title="A Close Shave" label="A Close Shave"/>
<link wikidata="Q15298003" start="36144" end="36165" title="List of films with a 100% rating on Rotten Tomatoes" label="100% positive ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q501348" start="36219" end="36245" title="A Matter of Loaf and Death" label="A Matter of Loaf and Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q477959" start="36360" end="36375" title="Shaun the Sheep" label="Shaun the Sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q501663" start="36460" end="36480" title="Thomas &amp;amp; Friends" label="Thomas &amp;amp; Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348667" start="36503" end="36521" title="The Railway Series" label="The Railway Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q733698" start="36537" end="36550" title="Wilbert Awdry" label="Wilbert Awdry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143800" start="36677" end="36688" title="Postman Pat" label="Postman Pat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572813" start="36702" end="36713" title="Fireman Sam" label="Fireman Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q41403" start="36727" end="36738" title="Teletubbies" label="Teletubbies"/>
<link wikidata="Q888360" start="36752" end="36767" title="Bob the Builder" label="Bob the Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q938985" start="36784" end="36793" title="Peppa Pig" label="Peppa Pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247639" start="36830" end="36840" title="Blue Peter" label="Blue Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q877729" start="36865" end="36880" title="handicraft" label="arts and crafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795151" start="37007" end="37020" title="The Borrowers (miniseries)" label="The Borrowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q265756" start="37037" end="37048" title="Mary Norton (author)" label="Mary Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q128236" start="37080" end="37110" title="The Adventures of Black Beauty" label="The Adventures of Black Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481583" start="37124" end="37139" title="The Famous Five (1970s TV series)" label="The Famous Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q192069" start="37156" end="37167" title="Enid Blyton" label="Enid Blyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078932" start="37182" end="37218" title="The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe (1988 TV serial)" label="The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="37239" end="37250" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q855673" start="37269" end="37288" title="Pride and Prejudice (1995 TV series)" label="Pride and Prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q162492" start="37305" end="37316" title="Colin Firth" label="Colin Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207092" start="37320" end="37329" title="Mr. Darcy" label="Mr. Darcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q964329" start="37342" end="37353" title="David Jason" label="David Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228040" start="37442" end="37465" title="The Wind in the Willows (1983 film)" label="The Wind in the Willows"/>
<link wikidata="Q314897" start="37510" end="37525" title="Kenneth Grahame" label="Kenneth Grahame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159583" start="37534" end="37546" title="Danger Mouse (1981 TV series)" label="Danger Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q611745" start="37563" end="37576" title="Count Duckula" label="Count Duckula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139507" start="37626" end="37645" title="Where&amp;#x27;s Wally?" label="Where&amp;#x27;s Wally?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532830" start="37687" end="37702" title="Martin Handford" label="Martin Handford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259097" start="37781" end="37810" title="Dennis the Menace and Gnasher" label="Dennis the Menace and Gnasher"/>
<link wikidata="Q288085" start="37830" end="37842" title="Thunderbirds (TV series)" label="Thunderbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398728" start="37859" end="37869" title="Terrahawks" label="Terrahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q596137" start="37879" end="37884" title="Gerry Anderson" label="Gerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673235" start="37889" end="37904" title="Sylvia Anderson" label="Sylvia Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q609765" start="37936" end="37952" title="Supermarionation" label="Supermarionation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196717" start="37979" end="37990" title="The Snowman" label="The Snowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165014" start="38031" end="38049" title="Walking in the Air" label="Walking in the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595862" start="38165" end="38181" title="Children in Need" label="Children in Need"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="38214" end="38226" title="Comic Relief" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306863" start="38250" end="38263" title="Sports Relief" label="Sports Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q767499" start="38339" end="38351" title="James Corden" label="James Corden"/>
<link wikidata="Q130311" start="38429" end="38443" title="George Michael" label="George Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q477371" start="38534" end="38553" title="Kitchen sink realism" label="kitchen sink dramas"/>
<link wikidata="Q945030" start="38572" end="38589" title="Coronation Street" label="Coronation Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q607514" start="38617" end="38627" title="EastEnders" label="EastEnders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972121" start="38691" end="38695" title="Broadcasters&amp;#x27; Audience Research Board" label="BARB"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="38708" end="38718" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="38735" end="38738" title="pub" label="pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371709" start="38806" end="38819" title="Rovers Return" label="Rovers Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q607514" start="38869" end="38878" title="The Queen Victoria" label="Queen Vic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="38894" end="38908" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247575" start="38956" end="38964" title="Woolpack" label="Woolpack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247575" start="38985" end="38994" title="Emmerdale" label="Emmerdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q113700" start="39292" end="39304" title="The Avengers (TV series)" label="The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248019" start="39374" end="39383" title="Emma Peel" label="Emma Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="39562" end="39571" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="39582" end="39593" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="39645" end="39656" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="39667" end="39680" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="39754" end="39765" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857766" start="39813" end="39828" title="current affairs (news format)" label="current affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="39830" end="39835" title="radio drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748941" start="39840" end="39846" title="radio comedy" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q386813" start="39871" end="39882" title="The Archers" label="The Archers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200587" start="39964" end="39983" title="Desert Island Discs" label="Desert Island Discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q508230" start="40069" end="40077" title="castaway" label="castaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500287" start="40215" end="40229" title="Lauren Laverne" label="Lauren Laverne"/>
<link wikidata="Q767054" start="40315" end="40332" title="Royal Christmas Message" label="Christmas message"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572032" start="40465" end="40494" title="alternative Christmas message" label="alternative Christmas message"/>
<link wikidata="Q168718" start="40585" end="40598" title="The Goon Show" label="The Goon Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q177984" start="40615" end="40628" title="Peter Sellers" label="Peter Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q561401" start="40630" end="40644" title="Spike Milligan" label="Spike Milligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q762958" start="40649" end="40662" title="Harry Secombe" label="Harry Secombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q332670" start="41004" end="41017" title="Marty Feldman" label="Marty Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371210" start="41076" end="41091" title="Round the Horne" label="Round the Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331688" start="41143" end="41156" title="Just a Minute" label="Just a Minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="41351" end="41362" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q254022" start="41364" end="41376" title="Eddie Izzard" label="Eddie Izzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634236" start="41381" end="41392" title="Sue Perkins" label="Sue Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521267" start="41480" end="41521" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (radio series)" label="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="41596" end="41622" title="public service broadcasting" label="public service broadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q795533" start="41660" end="41677" title="BBC Asian Network" label="BBC Asian Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q795563" start="41679" end="41694" title="BBC Radio 1Xtra" label="BBC Radio 1Xtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q795600" start="41699" end="41716" title="BBC Radio 6 Music" label="BBC Radio 6 Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590187" start="41780" end="41794" title="Absolute Radio" label="Absolute Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679885" start="41815" end="41824" title="Talksport" label="Talksport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635939" start="41888" end="41932" title="List of radio stations in the United Kingdom" label="List of radio stations in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247845" start="41935" end="41984" title="List of television stations in the United Kingdom" label="List of television stations in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="41999" end="42019" title="Freedom of the press" label="Freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="42104" end="42113" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="42127" end="42142" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="42144" end="42156" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="42158" end="42177" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="42182" end="42197" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q322295" start="42227" end="42238" title="John Walter (publisher)" label="John Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q213048" start="42413" end="42424" title="Times New Roman" label="Times Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926081" start="42446" end="42460" title="Victor Lardent" label="Victor Lardent"/>
<link wikidata="Q384501" start="42481" end="42496" title="Stanley Morison" label="Stanley Morison"/>
<link wikidata="Q335193" start="42539" end="42556" title="Alfred Harmsworth, 1st Viscount Northcliffe" label="Alfred Harmsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q846686" start="42887" end="42899" title="Fleet Street" label="Fleet Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="42913" end="42926" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q94765" start="42948" end="42960" title="James Wilson (businessman)" label="James Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="42990" end="43005" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q153297" start="43048" end="43077" title="The Gentleman&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="The Gentleman&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q151799" start="43093" end="43104" title="Edward Cave" label="Edward Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q41298" start="43127" end="43135" title="magazine" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990628" start="43251" end="43271" title="Thomas Gibson Bowles" label="Thomas Gibson Bowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119493" start="43279" end="43290" title="Vanity Fair (UK magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603428" start="43306" end="43316" title="List of Vanity Fair (British magazine) caricatures" label="caricature"/>
<link wikidata="Q266330" start="43411" end="43423" title="John Newbery" label="John Newbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060236" start="43520" end="43557" title="The History of Little Goody Two-Shoes" label="The History of Little Goody Two-Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263483" start="43613" end="43623" title="Allen Lane" label="Allen Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="43633" end="43646" title="Penguin Books" label="Penguin Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q193934" start="43710" end="43719" title="paperback" label="paperback"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907694" start="43814" end="43826" title="Puffin Books" label="Puffin Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q117345" start="43876" end="43895" title="Barbara Euphan Todd" label="Barbara Euphan Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217303" start="43926" end="43941" title="Worzel Gummidge" label="Worzel Gummidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="44001" end="44025" title="Guinness Book of Records" label="Guinness Book of Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142224" start="44058" end="44069" title="Hugh Beaver" label="Hugh Beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q223930" start="44152" end="44161" title="Game (food)" label="game bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q320560" start="44572" end="44578" title="Norris McWhirter" label="Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167618" start="44583" end="44597" title="Ross McWhirter" label="Ross McWhirter"/>
<link wikidata="Q59896" start="44705" end="44716" title="E. L. James" label="E. L. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q16357152" start="44738" end="44745" title="Fifty Shades trilogy" label="trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q557867" start="44752" end="44772" title="Fifty Shades of Grey" label="Fifty Shades of Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195511" start="44786" end="44805" title="Fifty Shades Darker" label="Fifty Shades Darker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183834" start="44823" end="44841" title="Fifty Shades Freed" label="Fifty Shades Freed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="44969" end="44978" title="Copyright" label="Copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q615405" start="45015" end="45030" title="Statute of Anne" label="Statute of Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103237" start="45485" end="45511" title="English school of painting" label="English school of painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q194402" start="45633" end="45648" title="Joshua Reynolds" label="Joshua Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q381728" start="45662" end="45675" title="George Stubbs" label="George Stubbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q192720" start="45693" end="45712" title="Thomas Gainsborough" label="Thomas Gainsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q171344" start="45746" end="45761" title="William Hogarth" label="William Hogarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916094" start="45918" end="45936" title="political cartoons" label="political cartoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q520806" start="46020" end="46033" title="James Gillray" label="James Gillray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114448" start="46085" end="46095" title="cartoonist" label="cartoonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41513" start="46401" end="46414" title="William Blake" label="William Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q159297" start="46428" end="46442" title="John Constable" label="John Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="46459" end="46474" title="J. M. W. Turner" label="J. M. W. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q195436" start="46602" end="46614" title="Tate Britain" label="Tate Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q284500" start="46640" end="46652" title="Turner Prize" label="Turner Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q184814" start="46753" end="46779" title="Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood" label="Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q483394" start="46908" end="46913" title="genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q159606" start="46997" end="47017" title="John Everett Millais" label="John Everett Millais"/>
<link wikidata="Q186748" start="47019" end="47041" title="Dante Gabriel Rossetti" label="Dante Gabriel Rossetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q216406" start="47059" end="47077" title="Edward Burne-Jones" label="Edward Burne-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q182589" start="47120" end="47134" title="William Morris" label="William Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="47281" end="47290" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q330369" start="47321" end="47345" title="Arts and Crafts movement" label="Arts and Crafts movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q154594" start="47403" end="47415" title="Lucian Freud" label="Lucian Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q154340" start="47417" end="47430" title="Francis Bacon (painter)" label="Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159907" start="47432" end="47445" title="David Hockney" label="David Hockney"/>
<link wikidata="Q234449" start="47447" end="47460" title="Bridget Riley" label="Bridget Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q134147" start="47470" end="47477" title="pop art" label="pop art"/>
<link wikidata="Q159465" start="47482" end="47498" title="Richard Hamilton (artist)" label="Richard Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q504611" start="47503" end="47514" title="Peter Blake (artist)" label="Peter Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q151097" start="47564" end="47575" title="Henry Moore" label="Henry Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q354779" start="47658" end="47675" title="Sir Jacob Epstein" label="Sir Jacob Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q973245" start="47726" end="47739" title="Gerald Holtom" label="Gerald Holtom"/>
<link wikidata="Q178511" start="47782" end="47814" title="Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament" label="Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q510345" start="47877" end="47889" title="peace symbol" label="peace symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="47908" end="47930" title="abstract expressionism" label="abstract expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q134147" start="47932" end="47939" title="pop art" label="pop art"/>
<link wikidata="Q516316" start="48002" end="48023" title="Young British Artists" label="Young British Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q294326" start="48025" end="48037" title="Damien Hirst" label="Damien Hirst"/>
<link wikidata="Q241185" start="48042" end="48053" title="Tracey Emin" label="Tracey Emin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555585" start="48118" end="48136" title="Candle auction" label="auctions by candle"/>
<link wikidata="Q106143" start="48223" end="48235" title="Samuel Pepys" label="Samuel Pepys"/>
<link wikidata="Q185598" start="48243" end="48248" title="diary" label="diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q503176" start="48296" end="48311" title="Christie&amp;#x27;s" label="Christie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482832" start="48387" end="48401" title="James Christie (auctioneer)" label="James Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q15148999" start="48622" end="48651" title="Three Studies of Lucian Freud" label="Three Studies of Lucian Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368268" start="48715" end="48748" title="List of most expensive paintings" label="highest price attained at auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364488" start="48764" end="48782" title="Randolph Caldecott" label="Randolph Caldecott"/>
<link wikidata="Q660917" start="48784" end="48796" title="Walter Crane" label="Walter Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q204936" start="48798" end="48812" title="Kate Greenaway" label="Kate Greenaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q457881" start="48814" end="48826" title="John Tenniel" label="John Tenniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q272566" start="48828" end="48844" title="Aubrey Beardsley" label="Aubrey Beardsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q349013" start="48846" end="48862" title="Roger Hargreaves" label="Roger Hargreaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q314938" start="48864" end="48878" title="Arthur Rackham" label="Arthur Rackham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374807" start="48880" end="48890" title="John Leech (caricaturist)" label="John Leech"/>
<link wikidata="Q360466" start="48892" end="48909" title="George Cruikshank" label="George Cruikshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q214565" start="48914" end="48928" title="Beatrix Potter" label="Beatrix Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120928" start="49032" end="49044" title="Alfred Leete" label="Alfred Leete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647491" start="49105" end="49129" title="Lord Kitchener Wants You" label="Lord Kitchener Wants You"/>
<link wikidata="Q633603" start="49316" end="49338" title="Keep Calm and Carry On" label="Keep Calm and Carry On"/>
<link wikidata="Q627325" start="49566" end="49582" title="graphic designer" label="graphic designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q724003" start="49583" end="49599" title="Storm Thorgerson" label="Storm Thorgerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q846392" start="49633" end="49642" title="Hipgnosis" label="Hipgnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="49747" end="49754" title="Surrealism" label="surreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q150901" start="49838" end="49863" title="The Dark Side of the Moon" label="The Dark Side of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963625" start="49900" end="49911" title="Brian Duffy (photographer)" label="Brian Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q558969" start="49923" end="49935" title="Aladdin Sane" label="Aladdin Sane"/>
<link wikidata="Q133600" start="50099" end="50105" title="Banksy" label="Banksy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="50128" end="50143" title="graffiti artist" label="graffiti artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753535" start="50285" end="50305" title="Royal College of Art" label="Royal College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="50307" end="50328" title="Royal Society of Arts" label="Royal Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548307" start="50330" end="50350" title="New English Art Club" label="New English Art Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399299" start="50352" end="50371" title="Slade School of Art" label="Slade School of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q270920" start="50373" end="50386" title="Royal Academy" label="Royal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q430682" start="50396" end="50408" title="Tate Gallery" label="Tate Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505" start="50516" end="50524" title="Concorde" label="Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q571249" start="50609" end="50622" title="Design Museum" label="Design Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="50720" end="50724" title="Mini" label="Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q230823" start="50726" end="50736" title="mini skirt" label="mini skirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q249303" start="50738" end="50751" title="Jaguar E-Type" label="Jaguar E-Type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014543" start="50753" end="50761" title="Tube map" label="Tube map"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="50770" end="50790" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25191" start="50817" end="50834" title="Christopher Nolan" label="Christopher Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21935651" start="50874" end="50881" title="Dunkirk (2017 film)" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912189" start="50894" end="50907" title="Morien Morgan" label="Morien Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239346" start="50926" end="50946" title="supersonic transport" label="supersonic transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969066" start="51380" end="51396" title="Bristol Type 223" label="Bristol Type 223"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786501" start="51410" end="51427" title="Archibald Russell" label="Archibald Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="51475" end="51486" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="51505" end="51508" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="BPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q138396" start="51551" end="51560" title="Britannia" label="Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q158067" start="51707" end="51724" title="Vivienne Westwood" label="Vivienne Westwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q294326" start="51726" end="51738" title="Damien Hirst" label="Damien Hirst"/>
<link wikidata="Q241185" start="51740" end="51751" title="Tracey Emin" label="Tracey Emin"/>
<link wikidata="Q504611" start="51757" end="51768" title="Peter Blake (artist)" label="Peter Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q47780" start="51770" end="51780" title="Zaha Hadid" label="Zaha Hadid"/>
<link wikidata="Q327293" start="51789" end="51801" title="Anish Kapoor" label="Anish Kapoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630002" start="51861" end="51876" title="List of music festivals in the United Kingdom" label="music festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q309066" start="51923" end="51934" title="Glastonbury Festival" label="Glastonbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007098" start="51983" end="51993" title="V Festival" label="V Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137962" start="51995" end="52022" title="Reading and Leeds Festivals" label="Reading and Leeds Festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q645767" start="52073" end="52077" title="rave" label="rave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631354" start="52145" end="52153" title="teknival" label="teknival"/>
<link wikidata="Q153562" start="52258" end="52269" title="opera house" label="opera house"/>
<link wikidata="Q55018" start="52288" end="52305" title="Royal Opera House" label="Royal Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q55019" start="52309" end="52323" title="Covent Gardens" label="Covent Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046677" start="52325" end="52334" title="The Proms" label="The Proms"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="52348" end="52358" title="orchestral" label="orchestral"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="52396" end="52413" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="52456" end="52472" title="The Royal Ballet" label="The Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q805221" start="52612" end="52627" title="prima ballerina" label="prima ballerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q231776" start="52634" end="52648" title="Margot Fonteyn" label="Margot Fonteyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q711073" start="52667" end="52683" title="Frederick Ashton" label="Frederick Ashton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146185" start="52685" end="52698" title="Irish dancing" label="Irish dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q204221" start="52832" end="52845" title="Book of Kells" label="Book of Kells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250832" start="52908" end="52922" title="Punch and Judy" label="Punch and Judy"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="53407" end="53417" title="Puritanism" label="Puritanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47928" start="53661" end="53667" title="circus" label="circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101654" start="53718" end="53744" title="Chipperfield&amp;#x27;s Circus" label="Chipperfield&amp;#x27;s Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003149" start="53841" end="53854" title="Philip Astley" label="Philip Astley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53888" end="53901" title="circus#Development" label="modern circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810894" start="53955" end="53981" title="Astley&amp;#x27;s Amphitheatre" label="Astley&amp;#x27;s Amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q219616" start="54103" end="54112" title="tightrope" label="tightrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q194326" start="54122" end="54130" title="jugglers" label="jugglers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358" start="54155" end="54160" title="clown" label="clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q738593" start="54295" end="54307" title="Pablo Fanque" label="Pablo Fanque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438078" start="54393" end="54405" title="William Kite" label="William Kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="54422" end="54433" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q610258" start="54449" end="54483" title="Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite!" label="Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="54493" end="54504" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="54523" end="54565" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q375106" start="54573" end="54588" title="Joseph Grimaldi" label="Joseph Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54604" end="54613" title="Clown#Whiteface" label="whiteface"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358" start="54614" end="54619" title="clown" label="clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q368176" start="54679" end="54704" title="Edinburgh Festival Fringe" label="Edinburgh Festival Fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801521" start="54733" end="54746" title="arts festival" label="arts festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="54939" end="54954" title="performing arts" label="performing arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q586220" start="55032" end="55053" title="Notting Hill Carnival" label="Notting Hill Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q215354" start="55112" end="55124" title="Notting Hill" label="Notting Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986879" start="55156" end="55181" title="British African-Caribbean people" label="British African-Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275561" start="55472" end="55479" title="Digbeth" label="Digbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="55481" end="55491" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="55534" end="55543" title="Pantomime" label="Pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="55598" end="55612" title="musical theatre" label="musical comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702121" start="55798" end="55809" title="John Weaver (dancer)" label="John Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756626" start="55851" end="55876" title="Theatre Royal, Drury Lane" label="Theatre Royal, Drury Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q111939940" start="56038" end="56052" title="topical humour" label="topical humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455839" start="56445" end="56467" title="Jack and the Beanstalk" label="Jack and the Beanstalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q107190" start="56481" end="56490" title="Peter Pan" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837790" start="56504" end="56521" title="Babes in the Wood" label="Babes in the Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q128917" start="56535" end="56565" title="Goldilocks and the Three Bears" label="Goldilocks and the Three Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273547" start="56582" end="56610" title="Dick Whittington and His Cat" label="Dick Whittington and His Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115950" start="56932" end="56945" title="Jack and Jill (nursery rhyme)" label="Jack and Jill"/>
<link wikidata="Q170510" start="57003" end="57015" title="Ian McKellen" label="Ian McKellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747484" start="57071" end="57087" title="Manchester Pride" label="Manchester Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967700" start="57149" end="57157" title="Brighton Pride" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q940462" start="57182" end="57192" title="Music hall" label="Music hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q336181" start="57310" end="57323" title="variety shows" label="variety shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966082" start="57464" end="57496" title="I&amp;#x27;m Henery the Eighth, I Am" label="I&amp;#x27;m Henery the Eighth, I Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643110" start="57510" end="57521" title="Hokey cokey" label="Hokey cokey"/>
<link wikidata="Q376147" start="57535" end="57569" title="I Do Like To be Beside the Seaside" label="I Do Like To be Beside the Seaside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746364" start="57586" end="57608" title="The Laughing Policeman (song)" label="The Laughing Policeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="57703" end="57718" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q72869" start="57720" end="57731" title="Stan Laurel" label="Stan Laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q181816" start="57733" end="57746" title="George Formby" label="George Formby"/>
<link wikidata="Q463275" start="57748" end="57761" title="Gracie Fields" label="Gracie Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618270" start="57763" end="57771" title="Dan Leno" label="Dan Leno"/>
<link wikidata="Q433053" start="57773" end="57790" title="Gertrude Lawrence" label="Gertrude Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762922" start="57792" end="57803" title="Marie Lloyd" label="Marie Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q349902" start="57808" end="57822" title="Harry Champion" label="Harry Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q969031" start="57875" end="57885" title="Fred Karno" label="Fred Karno"/>
<link wikidata="Q72792" start="58179" end="58188" title="Hal Roach" label="Hal Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q624771" start="58265" end="58274" title="slapstick" label="slapstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300629" start="58399" end="58424" title="Royal Variety Performance" label="Royal Variety Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q676755" start="58587" end="58603" title="London Palladium" label="London Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="58646" end="58666" title="British Royal Family" label="British Royal Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596000" start="58673" end="58699" title="List of Royal Variety Performances" label="famous acts have performed"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="58843" end="58846" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q556444" start="58876" end="58901" title="Britain&amp;#x27;s Got Talent" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s Got Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189662" start="58933" end="58967" title="architecture of the United Kingdom" label="architecture of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q816437" start="59065" end="59075" title="Skara Brae" label="Skara Brae"/>
<link wikidata="Q39671" start="59080" end="59090" title="Stonehenge" label="Stonehenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q822992" start="59098" end="59115" title="Giant&amp;#x27;s Ring" label="Giant&amp;#x27;s Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q661855" start="59117" end="59124" title="Avebury" label="Avebury"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="59129" end="59134" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q109607" start="59135" end="59140" title="ruins" label="ruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="59239" end="59245" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="59263" end="59271" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="59288" end="59302" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="59340" end="59355" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q639208" start="59409" end="59422" title="Bodiam Castle" label="Bodiam Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q88480" start="59426" end="59430" title="moat" label="moat"/>
<link wikidata="Q941276" start="59446" end="59460" title="Warwick Castle" label="Warwick Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="59499" end="59525" title="Norman conquest" label="Norman conquest of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="59559" end="59574" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q275128" start="59592" end="59609" title="Caernarfon Castle" label="Caernarfon Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368960" start="59623" end="59643" title="Carrickfergus Castle" label="Carrickfergus Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q750752" start="59667" end="59694" title="English Gothic architecture" label="English Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="59775" end="59792" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q464122" start="59819" end="59829" title="Coronation of the British monarch" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="59838" end="59853" title="British monarch" label="British monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992501" start="59902" end="59915" title="royal wedding" label="royal wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918374" start="59946" end="59971" title="funeral of Princess Diana" label="funeral of Princess Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q29265" start="59973" end="59993" title="Canterbury Cathedral" label="Canterbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q390150" start="60062" end="60081" title="Salisbury Cathedral" label="Salisbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q852590" start="60112" end="60117" title="spire" label="spire"/>
<link wikidata="Q476529" start="60133" end="60153" title="Winchester Cathedral" label="Winchester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="60177" end="60181" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q509364" start="60245" end="60263" title="Tudor architecture" label="Tudor architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316201" start="60337" end="60349" title="Tudor period" label="Tudor period"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="60388" end="60403" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q192687" start="60619" end="60633" title="Downing Street" label="Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335492" start="60647" end="60665" title="Sir George Downing, 1st Baronet" label="Sir George Downing"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="60695" end="60712" title="10 Downing Street" label="10 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="60742" end="60756" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="60875" end="60891" title="Christopher Wren" label="Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q164679" start="60991" end="61011" title="Great Fire of London" label="Great Fire of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="61030" end="61054" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="61112" end="61129" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q82337" start="61251" end="61265" title="Portland stone" label="Portland stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="61288" end="61296" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188040" start="61304" end="61312" title="Quarry" label="quarried"/>
<link wikidata="Q575976" start="61320" end="61334" title="Jurassic Coast" label="Jurassic Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q774215" start="61338" end="61346" title="Isle of Portland" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="61446" end="61453" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q208181" start="61509" end="61524" title="Blenheim Palace" label="Blenheim Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="61625" end="61646" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629626" start="61736" end="61748" title="Woburn Abbey" label="Woburn Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443707" start="61753" end="61767" title="Kedleston Hall" label="Kedleston Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="61862" end="61874" title="neoclassicism" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="61879" end="61887" title="Romanticism" label="romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q312635" start="61894" end="61905" title="Robert Adam" label="Robert Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q455155" start="61911" end="61927" title="William Chambers (architect)" label="William Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350728" start="61933" end="61944" title="James Wyatt" label="James Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="61963" end="61975" title="stately home" label="stately home"/>
<link wikidata="Q912595" start="62061" end="62072" title="Elizabethan" label="Elizabethan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635679" start="62073" end="62088" title="Montacute House" label="Montacute House"/>
<link wikidata="Q19813" start="62093" end="62107" title="Hatfield House" label="Hatfield House"/>
<link wikidata="Q83071" start="62187" end="62200" title="Downton Abbey" label="Downton Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="62291" end="62312" title="English country house" label="English country house"/>
<link wikidata="Q19841" start="62418" end="62433" title="Knebworth House" label="Knebworth House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231907" start="62457" end="62487" title="Concerts at Knebworth House" label="open air rock and pop concerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q15869" start="62490" end="62505" title="Freddie Mercury" label="Freddie Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="62541" end="62546" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q443909" start="62589" end="62601" title="Alton Towers" label="Alton Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="62620" end="62630" title="theme park" label="theme park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726158" start="62646" end="62654" title="Longleat" label="Longleat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364766" start="62679" end="62690" title="Longleat Safari Park" label="safari park"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="62747" end="62761" title="Gothic revival architecture" label="Gothic revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485" start="62800" end="62808" title="symmetry" label="symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="62882" end="62902" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Houses of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435890" start="62907" end="62921" title="Fonthill Abbey" label="Fonthill Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q318372" start="63084" end="63097" title="Joseph Paxton" label="Joseph Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q202902" start="63112" end="63130" title="the Crystal Palace" label="the Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918900" start="63165" end="63180" title="Mentmore Towers" label="Mentmore Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272912" start="63217" end="63228" title="English Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q313288" start="63366" end="63378" title="August Pugin" label="August Pugin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63476" end="63488" title="Pier#Pleasure piers" label="seaside pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q776556" start="63505" end="63509" title="Ryde" label="Ryde"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="63511" end="63524" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021711" start="63588" end="63602" title="seaside resort" label="seaside resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633414" start="63926" end="63949" title="List of piers in the United Kingdom" label="seaside piers in the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q83125" start="63951" end="63963" title="Tower Bridge" label="Tower Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q130206" start="63982" end="63995" title="London Bridge" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q330369" start="64073" end="64088" title="Arts and Crafts movement" label="arts and crafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538507" start="64214" end="64226" title="George Devey" label="George Devey"/>
<link wikidata="Q378157" start="64246" end="64259" title="Edwin Lutyens" label="Edwin Lutyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031967" start="64359" end="64366" title="mullion" label="mullion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368562" start="64372" end="64379" title="latticework" label="lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161370" start="64398" end="64403" title="gable" label="gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="64570" end="64579" title="Modernism" label="Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q779736" start="64838" end="64853" title="Hayward Gallery" label="Hayward Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q783210" start="64921" end="64930" title="Bracknell" label="Bracknell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306184" start="65049" end="65062" title="council house" label="council house"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="65177" end="65187" title="sanitation" label="sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q237412" start="65435" end="65459" title="Lord Rogers of Riverside" label="Lord Rogers of Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q104898" start="65464" end="65477" title="Norman Foster, Baron Foster of Thames Bank" label="Norman Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814818" start="65533" end="65554" title="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s Building" label="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q29014" start="65563" end="65578" title="Millennium Dome" label="Millennium Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q191161" start="65611" end="65618" title="30 St Mary Axe" label="Gherkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093950" start="65633" end="65642" title="City Hall, Southwark" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q284500" start="65648" end="65660" title="Turner Prize" label="Turner Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q327293" start="65680" end="65692" title="Anish Kapoor" label="Anish Kapoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q631871" start="65765" end="65784" title="ArcelorMittal Orbit" label="ArcelorMittal Orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q525481" start="65802" end="65814" title="Olympic Park, London" label="Olympic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="65846" end="65858" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47780" start="65904" end="65914" title="Zaha Hadid" label="Zaha Hadid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66012" end="66032" title="Cubism#Architecture" label="multiple perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q81392" start="66044" end="66063" title="Fractal" label="fragmented geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052076" start="66123" end="66136" title="parametricism" label="parametricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012219" start="66153" end="66165" title="neo-futurism" label="neo-futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q308874" start="66251" end="66269" title="London Aquatics Centre" label="the aquatic centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q920638" start="66334" end="66348" title="Stirling Prize" label="Stirling Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q920783" start="66459" end="66475" title="Royal Gold Medal" label="Royal Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067943" start="66485" end="66522" title="Royal Institute of British Architects" label="Royal Institute of British Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q18536" start="66547" end="66566" title="Shard London Bridge" label="Shard London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18602" start="66663" end="66677" title="22 Bishopsgate" label="22 Bishopsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613853" start="66683" end="66694" title="Heron Tower" label="Heron Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348044" start="66716" end="66733" title="Nicholas Grimshaw" label="Nicholas Grimshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q596642" start="66747" end="66759" title="Eden Project" label="Eden Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374808" start="66910" end="66924" title="penny dreadful" label="penny dreadful"/>
<link wikidata="Q669485" start="66958" end="66970" title="Sweeney Todd" label="Sweeney Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q977890" start="66972" end="66983" title="Dick Turpin" label="Dick Turpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987925" start="66994" end="67012" title="Varney the Vampire" label="Varney the Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="67124" end="67131" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q375044" start="67133" end="67140" title="Stockton and Darlington Railway" label="in 1825"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="67378" end="67393" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425557" start="67448" end="67463" title="vampire fiction" label="vampire fiction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67537" end="67544" title="Vampire#In modern culture" label="vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838751" start="67605" end="67636" title="Ally Sloper&amp;#x27;s Half Holiday" label="Ally Sloper&amp;#x27;s Half Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838747" start="67661" end="67672" title="Ally Sloper" label="Ally Sloper"/>
<link wikidata="Q965587" start="67805" end="67814" title="The Beano" label="The Beano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728848" start="67831" end="67840" title="The Dandy" label="The Dandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203542" start="67860" end="67870" title="DC Thomson" label="DC Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="67881" end="67887" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801359" start="68344" end="68349" title="Tiger (Fleetway)" label="Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647616" start="68380" end="68397" title="Roy of the Rovers" label="Roy of the Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647616" start="68468" end="68476" title="Roy Race" label="Roy Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647616" start="68505" end="68522" title="Melchester Rovers" label="Melchester Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="68843" end="68856" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046338" start="68967" end="68972" title="Eagle (comic)" label="Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911637" start="68986" end="68993" title="Valiant (comics)" label="Valiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970757" start="69007" end="69014" title="Warrior (comics)" label="Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q211174" start="69032" end="69039" title="2000 AD (comics)" label="2000 AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152236" start="69132" end="69140" title="Commando (comics)" label="Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968515" start="69154" end="69173" title="War Picture Library" label="War Picture Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772538" start="69191" end="69201" title="The Victor (comics)" label="The Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q234530" start="69221" end="69231" title="Emma Orczy" label="Emma Orczy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249536" start="69241" end="69262" title="the Scarlet Pimpernel" label="the Scarlet Pimpernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q930420" start="69439" end="69454" title="secret identity" label="secret identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q21327968" start="69858" end="69875" title="Anagallis arvensis" label="scarlet pimpernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970161" start="70254" end="70270" title="British Invasion (comics)" label="British Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q31895" start="70391" end="70398" title="anarchy" label="anarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255828" start="70400" end="70411" title="controversy" label="controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="70416" end="70424" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594405" start="70614" end="70634" title="Modern Age of Comics" label="Modern Age of Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q205739" start="70653" end="70663" title="Alan Moore" label="Alan Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q103411" start="70686" end="70700" title="V for Vendetta" label="V for Vendetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q513101" start="70714" end="70723" title="From Hell" label="From Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q128444" start="70737" end="70745" title="Watchmen" label="Watchmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q117288839" start="70759" end="70768" title="Marvelman" label="Marvelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q95029" start="70786" end="70823" title="The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen" label="The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="70940" end="70951" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q827099" start="71004" end="71015" title="The Sandman (Vertigo)" label="The Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211840" start="71039" end="71053" title="Books of Magic" label="Books of Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q540787" start="71061" end="71073" title="Warren Ellis" label="Warren Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q128286" start="71091" end="71108" title="Transmetropolitan" label="Transmetropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q95061" start="71125" end="71134" title="Planetary (comics)" label="Planetary"/>
<link wikidata="Q327222" start="71161" end="71171" title="Alan Grant (writer)" label="Alan Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q943047" start="71173" end="71187" title="Grant Morrison" label="Grant Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q445765" start="71189" end="71201" title="Dave Gibbons" label="Dave Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q730250" start="71203" end="71213" title="Alan Davis" label="Alan Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543" start="71219" end="71230" title="Mark Millar" label="Mark Millar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442" start="71249" end="71255" title="Wanted (comics)" label="Wanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q85766864" start="71272" end="71280" title="Kick-Ass (comic book)" label="Kick-Ass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498909" start="71326" end="71338" title="Steve Dillon" label="Steve Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q660225" start="71340" end="71352" title="Simon Bisley" label="Simon Bisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q721300" start="71354" end="71365" title="Dave McKean" label="Dave McKean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681530" start="71367" end="71377" title="Glen Fabry" label="Glen Fabry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254890" start="71379" end="71391" title="John Ridgway (comics)" label="John Ridgway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476776" start="71396" end="71409" title="Sean Phillips" label="Sean Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035139" start="71439" end="71449" title="Hellblazer" label="Hellblazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663841" start="71511" end="71527" title="John Constantine" label="John Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806796" start="71571" end="71583" title="Jamie Delano" label="Jamie Delano"/>
<link wikidata="Q610567" start="71585" end="71595" title="Mike Carey (writer)" label="Mike Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q289947" start="71600" end="71611" title="Denise Mina" label="Denise Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144339" start="71900" end="71905" title="pixie" label="pixie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707571" start="71908" end="71914" title="giant (mythology)" label="giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q174396" start="71916" end="71921" title="elves" label="elves"/>
<link wikidata="Q172451" start="71923" end="71931" title="bogeymen" label="bogeymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12581" start="71933" end="71938" title="troll" label="troll"/>
<link wikidata="Q308697" start="71941" end="71947" title="goblin" label="goblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="71953" end="71960" title="dwarf (mythology)" label="dwarves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417254" start="72046" end="72060" title="Offa of Angeln" label="Offa of Angeln"/>
<link wikidata="Q33150" start="72065" end="72078" title="Weyland Smith" label="Weyland Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="72143" end="72153" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247096" start="72162" end="72171" title="Merry Men" label="Merry Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q919191" start="72175" end="72183" title="Sherwood Forest" label="Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712262" start="72211" end="72232" title="Sheriff of Nottingham" label="Sheriff of Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="72234" end="72255" title="Richard the Lionheart" label="Richard the Lionheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="72281" end="72294" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q968748" start="72404" end="72415" title="Maid Marian" label="Maid Marian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17642916" start="72424" end="72441" title="Nottingham Castle" label="Nottingham Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="72455" end="72471" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q507738" start="72528" end="72544" title="Arthurian legend" label="Arthurian legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="72574" end="72585" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q187880" start="72587" end="72596" title="Excalibur" label="Excalibur"/>
<link wikidata="Q188044" start="72601" end="72607" title="Merlin" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="72619" end="72625" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382" start="72631" end="72635" title="Wace" label="Wace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644266" start="72651" end="72677" title="Knights of the Round Table" label="Knights of the Round Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q188344" start="72736" end="72756" title="Geoffrey of Monmouth" label="Geoffrey of Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="72837" end="72854" title="Britons (historic)" label="British tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304442" start="72856" end="72865" title="King Cole" label="King Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q507738" start="72972" end="72989" title="Matter of Britain" label="Matter of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q49658" start="73037" end="73054" title="Loch Ness Monster" label="Loch Ness Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q16322" start="73060" end="73067" title="cryptid" label="cryptid"/>
<link wikidata="Q49650" start="73095" end="73104" title="Loch Ness" label="Loch Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q244392" start="73246" end="73256" title="leprechaun" label="leprechaun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052" start="73489" end="73496" title="rainbow" label="rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455839" start="73650" end="73672" title="Jack and the Beanstalk" label="Jack and the Beanstalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157362" start="73689" end="73710" title="Jack the Giant Killer" label="Jack the Giant Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707571" start="73754" end="73760" title="Giant (mythology)" label="giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q16384841" start="73800" end="73809" title="Tom Thumb" label="Tom Thumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q128917" start="73879" end="73909" title="The Story of the Three Bears" label="Goldilocks and the Three Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q106077" start="74089" end="74100" title="Lady Godiva" label="Lady Godiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="74167" end="74175" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37591" start="74203" end="74220" title="Hereward the Wake" label="Hereward the Wake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613706" start="74251" end="74267" title="Herne the Hunter" label="Herne the Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q464955" start="74307" end="74314" title="Windsor, Berkshire" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569306" start="74326" end="74336" title="Windsor Great Park" label="Great Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q468124" start="74342" end="74356" title="Mother Shipton" label="Mother Shipton"/>
<link wikidata="Q977890" start="74413" end="74424" title="Dick Turpin" label="Dick Turpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q525738" start="74494" end="74526" title="A General History of the Pyrates" label="A General History of the Pyrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065092" start="74536" end="74559" title="Charles Johnson (pirate biographer)" label="Captain Charles Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="74692" end="74714" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q185118" start="74722" end="74737" title="Treasure Island" label="Treasure Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q81796" start="74749" end="74761" title="J. M. Barrie" label="J. M. Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344070" start="74827" end="74839" title="West Country" label="West Country"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74880" end="74892" title="West Country English#Social stigma and future of West Country dialect" label="West Country"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74899" end="74912" title="Pirates in popular culture#Appearance and mannerisms" label="pirate accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q974924" start="74958" end="74971" title="Robert Newton" label="Robert Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428628" start="75009" end="75025" title="Long John Silver" label="Long John Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q331079" start="75056" end="75073" title="walking the plank" label="walking the plank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435337" start="75119" end="75128" title="Peter and Wendy" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035128" start="75142" end="75154" title="Captain Hook" label="Captain Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545624" start="75199" end="75222" title="Davy Jones&amp;#x27; Locker" label="Davy Jones&amp;#x27; Locker"/>
<link wikidata="Q40946" start="75322" end="75334" title="Daniel Defoe" label="Daniel Defoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q213518" start="75426" end="75436" title="Blackbeard" label="Blackbeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q312905" start="75441" end="75452" title="Calico Jack" label="Calico Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q182773" start="75465" end="75476" title="Jolly Roger" label="Jolly Roger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412790" start="75555" end="75562" title="Gremlin" label="Gremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="75574" end="75589" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q669485" start="75841" end="75853" title="Sweeney Todd" label="Sweeney Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q846686" start="75879" end="75891" title="Fleet Street" label="Fleet Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593808" start="75910" end="75921" title="Mrs. Lovett" label="Mrs. Lovett"/>
<link wikidata="Q43963" start="75987" end="76002" title="Jack the Ripper" label="Jack the Ripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q844844" start="76047" end="76063" title="Guy Fawkes Night" label="Guy Fawkes Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q844844" start="76109" end="76122" title="Guy Fawkes Night" label="commemoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q13898" start="76141" end="76151" title="Guy Fawkes" label="Guy Fawkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q45810" start="76158" end="76172" title="Gunpowder Plot" label="Gunpowder Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075424" start="76213" end="76248" title="Observance of 5th November Act 1605" label="Observance of 5th November Act 1605"/>
<link wikidata="Q13905" start="76261" end="76276" title="Guy Fawkes mask" label="Guy Fawkes mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="76375" end="76384" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553250" start="76556" end="76564" title="Scottish English" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="76674" end="76680" title="Gaels" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207365" start="76690" end="76697" title="Samhain" label="Samhain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16354816" start="76761" end="76771" title="otherworld" label="otherworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q652035" start="76839" end="76847" title="Dumfries" label="Dumfries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247345" start="76853" end="76863" title="John Mayne" label="John Mayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="77028" end="77040" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643090" start="77063" end="77072" title="Halloween (poem)" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q47195" start="77231" end="77238" title="guising" label="guising"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643122" start="77263" end="77270" title="Halloween costume" label="costume"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916957" start="77471" end="77477" title="turnip" label="turnip"/>
<link wikidata="Q168739" start="77572" end="77585" title="apple bobbing" label="apple bobbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="77598" end="77613" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q251076" start="77641" end="77662" title="Hallowe&amp;#x27;en Party" label="Hallowe&amp;#x27;en Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9505308" start="77769" end="77777" title="bonfires" label="bonfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="77790" end="77798" title="firework" label="firework"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="77867" end="77873" title="Gothic fiction" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="77878" end="77884" title="Horror fiction" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q47152" start="77905" end="77912" title="Mary Shelley" label="Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q150827" start="77926" end="77938" title="Frankenstein" label="Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q36184" start="77949" end="77955" title="Bram Stoker" label="Stoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41542" start="77969" end="77976" title="Dracula" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433745" start="78019" end="78032" title="Hammer Horror" label="Hammer Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="78145" end="78155" title="Witchcraft" label="Witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032349" start="78218" end="78230" title="crystal ball" label="crystal ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q131081" start="78275" end="78281" title="druids" label="druids"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="78304" end="78315" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q188044" start="78344" end="78350" title="Merlin" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q201484" start="78404" end="78412" title="John Dee" label="John Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="78428" end="78439" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="78573" end="78584" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283" start="78608" end="78615" title="Macbeth" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15698345" start="78637" end="78650" title="three witches" label="three witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317634" start="78661" end="78669" title="cauldron" label="cauldron"/>
<link wikidata="Q45529" start="78675" end="78680" title="ghost" label="ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q80823" start="78684" end="78695" title="Anne Boleyn" label="Anne Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17535638" start="78802" end="78816" title="Blickling Hall" label="Blickling Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11899858" start="78889" end="78908" title="Neopagan witchcraft" label="Neopagan witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="78981" end="78997" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q350708" start="79022" end="79036" title="Gerald Gardner" label="Gerald Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q277755" start="79101" end="79111" title="New Forest" label="New Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q11744488" start="79206" end="79222" title="New Forest coven" label="New Forest coven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457005" start="79318" end="79328" title="Witch-cult hypothesis" label="Witch-Cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q59774" start="79507" end="79512" title="Wicca" label="Wicca"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027891" start="79568" end="79587" title="Witchcraft Act 1735" label="Witchcraft Act 1735"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027900" start="79677" end="79693" title="Witchcraft Today" label="Witchcraft Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750823" start="79717" end="79742" title="The Meaning of Witchcraft" label="The Meaning of Witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q745955" start="79781" end="79788" title="Thelema" label="Thelema"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="80037" end="80049" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207438" start="80069" end="80085" title="Led Zeppelin III" label="Led Zeppelin III"/>
<link wikidata="Q133151" start="80118" end="80131" title="Ozzy Osbourne" label="Ozzy Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419359" start="80152" end="80162" title="Mr Crowley" label="Mr Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="80322" end="80338" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q910019" start="80485" end="80524" title="Department for Culture, Media and Sport" label="Department for Culture, Media and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="80538" end="80602" title="National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty" label="National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q128753" start="80644" end="80670" title="List of World Heritage Sites of the United Kingdom" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="80728" end="80747" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q587584" start="80749" end="80789" title="Stonehenge, Avebury and Associated Sites" label="Stonehenge, Avebury and Associated Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="80791" end="80806" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q575976" start="80808" end="80822" title="Jurassic Coast" label="Jurassic Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="80824" end="80835" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q838920" start="80837" end="80845" title="Saltaire" label="Saltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q647958" start="80847" end="80863" title="Ironbridge Gorge" label="Ironbridge Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q259173" start="80869" end="80887" title="Studley Royal Park" label="Studley Royal Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="80933" end="80952" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q21997561" start="81044" end="81073" title="Historic Environment Scotland" label="Historic Environment Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="81105" end="81124" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="81182" end="81197" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q591133" start="81203" end="81206" title="Old Town, Edinburgh" label="Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q590710" start="81211" end="81232" title="New Town, Edinburgh" label="New Town of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q42049" start="81276" end="81291" title="Balmoral Castle" label="Balmoral Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q931796" start="81351" end="81367" title="Wallace Monument" label="Wallace Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q82457" start="81432" end="81447" title="William Wallace" label="William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962910" start="81463" end="81476" title="Wallace Sword" label="Wallace Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156075" start="81482" end="81493" title="Rob Roy Way" label="Rob Roy Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q378053" start="81537" end="81554" title="Rob Roy MacGregor" label="Rob Roy MacGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="81620" end="81636" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q222520" start="81770" end="81791" title="Battle of Bannockburn" label="Battle of Bannockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q837627" start="81840" end="81888" title="Castles and Town Walls of King Edward in Gwynedd" label="Castles and Town Walls of King Edward in Gwynedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025341" start="81932" end="81936" title="Cadw" label="Cadw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="81978" end="81994" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q65932" start="82012" end="82027" title="Anthony Hopkins" label="Anthony Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q867913" start="82068" end="82091" title="Snowdonia National Park" label="Snowdonia National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q275128" start="82144" end="82161" title="Caernarfon Castle" label="Caernarfon Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q756830" start="82163" end="82175" title="Conwy Castle" label="Conwy Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q682601" start="82177" end="82194" title="Caerphilly Castle" label="Caerphilly Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q540964" start="82196" end="82210" title="Harlech Castle" label="Harlech Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q756815" start="82215" end="82231" title="Beaumaris Castle" label="Beaumaris Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102478" start="82237" end="82272" title="Northern Ireland Environment Agency" label="Northern Ireland Environment Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q106187" start="82359" end="82380" title="Giant&amp;#x27;s Causeway" label="Giant&amp;#x27;s Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q934922" start="82449" end="82464" title="Tintagel Castle" label="Tintagel Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="82557" end="82568" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q354009" start="82606" end="82620" title="National parks of the United Kingdom" label="National Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="82636" end="82649" title="Lake District" label="Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q867913" start="82662" end="82671" title="Snowdonia" label="Snowdonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q116661" start="82686" end="82729" title="Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park" label="Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="82775" end="82789" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q48584" start="83067" end="83080" title="Rosetta Stone" label="Rosetta Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q309388" start="83116" end="83146" title="Natural History Museum, London" label="Natural History Museum, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q151556" start="83166" end="83178" title="Richard Owen" label="Richard Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="83206" end="83214" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967502" start="83327" end="83355" title="National Museums of Scotland" label="National Museums of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046319" start="83405" end="83444" title="National Museum Wales" label="Amgueddfa Cymru – National Museum Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938739" start="83479" end="83512" title="National Museums Northern Ireland" label="National Museums Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547979" start="83564" end="83577" title="Ulster Museum" label="Ulster Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q924254" start="83584" end="83599" title="Titanic Belfast" label="Titanic Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985642" start="83636" end="83651" title="Titanic Quarter" label="Titanic Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q186309" start="83920" end="83935" title="Madame Tussauds" label="Madame Tussauds"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="84058" end="84072" title="Princess Diana" label="Princess Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="84095" end="84105" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q10520" start="84115" end="84128" title="David Beckham" label="David Beckham"/>
<link wikidata="Q15869" start="84138" end="84153" title="Freddie Mercury" label="Freddie Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="84168" end="84183" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="84196" end="84213" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q15280" start="84228" end="84241" title="Gordon Ramsay" label="Gordon Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q123351" start="84256" end="84269" title="Michael Caine" label="Michael Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180788" start="84321" end="84337" title="National Gallery, London" label="National Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q129143" start="84341" end="84357" title="Trafalgar Square" label="Trafalgar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q430682" start="84455" end="84459" title="Tate" label="Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q284500" start="84584" end="84596" title="Turner Prize" label="Turner Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051997" start="84602" end="84632" title="National Galleries of Scotland" label="National Galleries of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="84776" end="84791" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q22806" start="84809" end="84825" title="national library" label="national library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438040" start="84865" end="84883" title="research libraries" label="research libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="85052" end="85063" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q727760" start="85098" end="85112" title="Lincoln Castle" label="Lincoln Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q390150" start="85117" end="85136" title="Salisbury Cathedral" label="Salisbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970294" start="85181" end="85210" title="British Library Sound Archive" label="British Library Sound Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834961" start="85258" end="85275" title="BBC Sound Archive" label="BBC Sound Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670994" start="85336" end="85364" title="National Library of Scotland" label="National Library of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="85462" end="85482" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q666063" start="85513" end="85538" title="National Library of Wales" label="National Library of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="85697" end="85708" title="Blue plaque" label="Blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q721747" start="85725" end="85742" title="historical marker" label="historical marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008717" start="85802" end="85815" title="William Ewart (British politician)" label="William Ewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="85857" end="85872" title="Royal Society of Arts" label="Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="85976" end="85986" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055036" start="86024" end="86040" title="Cavendish Square" label="Cavendish Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q133544" start="86089" end="86105" title="John Logie Baird" label="John Logie Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565954" start="86153" end="86165" title="Frith Street" label="Frith Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q11252459" start="86202" end="86219" title="four-minute mile" label="sub 4-minute mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q319351" start="86227" end="86242" title="Roger Bannister" label="Roger Bannister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357835" start="86285" end="86302" title="Iffley Road Track" label="Iffley Road Track"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244613" start="86324" end="86332" title="Llandaff" label="Llandaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161" start="86384" end="86394" title="Roald Dahl" label="Roald Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533561" start="86418" end="86429" title="gobstoppers" label="gobstoppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="86483" end="86504" title="Scientific Revolution" label="Scientific Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="86592" end="86602" title="science" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="86607" end="86620" title="technology" label="technological"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="86638" end="86651" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966910" start="86666" end="86682" title="national academy" label="national academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q955824" start="86801" end="86818" title="learned society" label="learned societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="86840" end="86856" title="Sir Isaac Newton" label="Sir Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q205921" start="86889" end="86910" title="Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica" label="Principia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="86959" end="86966" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="87201" end="87208" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="87230" end="87249" title="classical mechanics" label="classical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="87269" end="87279" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion" label="three laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="87309" end="87326" title="Gottfried Leibniz" label="Gottfried Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q149999" start="87331" end="87352" title="differential calculus" label="differential calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26708" start="87374" end="87390" title="binomial theorem" label="binomial theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q14620" start="87414" end="87420" title="optics" label="optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902868" start="87436" end="87450" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s law of cooling" label="law of cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q159592" start="87543" end="87554" title="John Napier" label="John Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="87566" end="87575" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8750" start="87640" end="87655" title="Michael Faraday" label="Michael Faraday"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="87660" end="87679" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="87705" end="87713" title="magnetic" label="magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="87714" end="87719" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q51501" start="87746" end="87770" title="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations" label="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074013" start="87807" end="87854" title="A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field" label="A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="87905" end="87916" title="radio waves" label="radio waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q8962" start="87926" end="87937" title="James Joule" label="James Joule"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="87948" end="87962" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11382" start="88011" end="88046" title="principle of conservation of energy" label="principle of conservation of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="88060" end="88074" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="88087" end="88111" title="On the Origin of Species" label="On the Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="88150" end="88159" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="88163" end="88180" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q192927" start="88182" end="88194" title="James Hutton" label="James Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909845" start="88255" end="88264" title="deep time" label="deep time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333" start="88352" end="88365" title="Charles Lyell" label="Charles Lyell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348323" start="88383" end="88404" title="Principles of Geology" label="Principles of Geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="88437" end="88448" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q350891" start="88454" end="88467" title="Adam Sedgwick" label="Adam Sedgwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="88511" end="88519" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q122701" start="88528" end="88558" title="William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin" label="William Thomson (Baron Kelvin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="88634" end="88640" title="Kelvin" label="Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81182" start="88650" end="88663" title="absolute zero" label="absolute zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q47480" start="88665" end="88675" title="Paul Dirac" label="Paul Dirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="88703" end="88720" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q155764" start="88731" end="88743" title="Robert Brown (Scottish botanist from Montrose)" label="Robert Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q178036" start="88810" end="88825" title="Brownian motion" label="Brownian motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q370077" start="88828" end="88845" title="John Stewart Bell" label="John Stewart Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q388525" start="88854" end="88873" title="Bell&amp;#x27;s Theorem" label="Bell&amp;#x27;s Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q157250" start="88875" end="88887" title="Harold Kroto" label="Harold Kroto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075376" start="88899" end="88919" title="buckminsterfullerene" label="buckminsterfullerene"/>
<link wikidata="Q155768" start="88997" end="89010" title="Joseph Lister, 1st Baron Lister" label="Joseph Lister"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89012" end="89030" title="Antiseptic#Usage in surgery" label="antiseptic surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q40852" start="89033" end="89046" title="Edward Jenner" label="Edward Jenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q192995" start="89048" end="89059" title="vaccination" label="vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q151556" start="89062" end="89074" title="Richard Owen" label="Richard Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="89076" end="89089" title="palaeontology" label="palaeontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="89107" end="89115" title="Dinosaur" label="Dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q37103" start="89118" end="89138" title="Florence Nightingale" label="Florence Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q121176" start="89140" end="89147" title="nursing" label="nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q319362" start="89150" end="89167" title="Sir George Cayley" label="Sir George Cayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="89169" end="89181" title="aerodynamics" label="aerodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q299565" start="89184" end="89202" title="William Fox Talbot" label="William Fox Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q133682" start="89222" end="89235" title="Howard Carter" label="Howard Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="89237" end="89255" title="Archaeology" label="modern archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154" start="89268" end="89279" title="Tutankhamun" label="Tutankhamun"/>
<link wikidata="Q312389" start="89396" end="89412" title="William Buckland" label="William Buckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q131056" start="89441" end="89453" title="Megalosaurus" label="Megalosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130980" start="89586" end="89595" title="Iguanodon" label="Iguanodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q21068856" start="89629" end="89645" title="Mary Ann Mantell" label="Mary Ann Mantell"/>
<link wikidata="Q348455" start="89656" end="89670" title="Gideon Mantell" label="Gideon Mantell"/>
<link wikidata="Q131770" start="89717" end="89729" title="Hylaeosaurus" label="Hylaeosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q314335" start="89933" end="89946" title="John Harrison" label="John Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307829" start="89960" end="89978" title="marine chronometer" label="marine chronometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="90042" end="90051" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="90191" end="90201" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q189144" start="90203" end="90217" title="Walter Raleigh" label="Walter Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q36517" start="90219" end="90236" title="Sir Francis Drake" label="Sir Francis Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q179167" start="90238" end="90250" title="Henry Hudson" label="Henry Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q205485" start="90252" end="90268" title="George Vancouver" label="George Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655" start="90270" end="90287" title="Sir John Franklin" label="Sir John Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48373" start="90289" end="90306" title="David Livingstone" label="David Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q228024" start="90308" end="90326" title="John Smith (explorer)" label="Captain John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q102527" start="90328" end="90347" title="Robert Falcon Scott" label="Robert Falcon Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q317941" start="90349" end="90363" title="Lawrence Oates" label="Lawrence Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q957543" start="90368" end="90385" title="Ernest Shackleton" label="Ernest Shackleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q45782" start="90391" end="90399" title="aquarium" label="aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q443062" start="90438" end="90456" title="Philip Henry Gosse" label="Philip Henry Gosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q270263" start="90506" end="90516" title="London Zoo" label="London Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q213756" start="90664" end="90678" title="Robert FitzRoy" label="Robert FitzRoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182868" start="90689" end="90708" title="weather forecasting" label="weather forecasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="90768" end="90777" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90838" end="90850" title="Flush toilet#Development of the flush toilet" label="flush toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q665580" start="90859" end="90865" title="Trap (plumbing)" label="S-trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q322034" start="90878" end="90895" title="Alexander Cumming" label="Alexander Cumming"/>
<link wikidata="Q683522" start="91023" end="91040" title="Charles Macintosh" label="Charles Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018769" start="91065" end="91073" title="raincoat" label="raincoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576557" start="91079" end="91089" title="Mackintosh" label="Mackintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q472515" start="91116" end="91132" title="William Sturgeon" label="William Sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q178032" start="91146" end="91159" title="electromagnet" label="electromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501061" start="91190" end="91210" title="electrical telegraph" label="electrical telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409652" start="91234" end="91258" title="William Fothergill Cooke" label="William Fothergill Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q156942" start="91263" end="91281" title="Charles Wheatstone" label="Charles Wheatstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q800751" start="91399" end="91405" title="Euston railway station" label="Euston"/>
<link wikidata="Q149836" start="91410" end="91421" title="Camden Town" label="Camden Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q370241" start="91450" end="91466" title="Rowland Hill (postal reformer)" label="Sir Rowland Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q49845" start="91508" end="91522" title="postal service" label="postal service"/>
<link wikidata="Q107701" start="91562" end="91573" title="Penny Black" label="Penny Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q537906" start="91693" end="91707" title="Sir Henry Cole" label="Sir Henry Cole"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91753" end="91767" title="Christmas card#History" label="Christmas card"/>
<link wikidata="Q20018" start="91785" end="91800" title="George Biddell Airy" label="Sir George Airy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192988" start="91817" end="91845" title="Royal Observatory, Greenwich" label="Royal Observatory, Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401774" start="91878" end="91892" title="prime meridian" label="prime meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="91994" end="92012" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q134661" start="92016" end="92028" title="George Boole" label="George Boole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746455" start="92044" end="92063" title="The Laws of Thought" label="The Laws of Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="92085" end="92100" title="Boolean algebra" label="Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="92142" end="92151" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q956129" start="92196" end="92211" title="information age" label="information age"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="92295" end="92301" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="92305" end="92325" title="Cambridge University" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q181892" start="92357" end="92377" title="Cavendish Laboratory" label="Cavendish Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095537" start="92399" end="92419" title="Clarendon Laboratory" label="Clarendon Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202123" start="92514" end="92523" title="Red Brick university" label="Red Brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q987075" start="92528" end="92544" title="New Universities" label="New Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q642576" start="92566" end="92574" title="Oxbridge" label="Oxbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q262854" start="92590" end="92610" title="Lancaster University" label="Lancaster University"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="92647" end="92670" title="low temperature physics" label="low temperature physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="92784" end="92805" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="92852" end="92864" title="steam engine" label="steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="92895" end="92912" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q9041" start="92978" end="92988" title="James Watt" label="James Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q328728" start="92990" end="93007" title="Robert Stephenson" label="Robert Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q294153" start="93009" end="93026" title="Richard Arkwright" label="Richard Arkwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q936499" start="93028" end="93042" title="Henry Maudslay" label="Henry Maudslay"/>
<link wikidata="Q133614" start="93082" end="93099" title="George Stephenson" label="George Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994303" start="93152" end="93171" title="screw-cutting lathe" label="screw-cutting lathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11022" start="93211" end="93216" title="screw" label="screw"/>
<link wikidata="Q871913" start="93253" end="93274" title="interchangeable parts" label="interchangeable parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="93295" end="93310" title="mass production" label="mass production"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="93411" end="93418" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q375044" start="93451" end="93482" title="Stockton and Darlington Railway" label="Stockton and Darlington Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="93567" end="93585" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q672271" start="93651" end="93671" title="East Coast Main Line" label="East Coast Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175270" start="93712" end="93727" title="LNER Class A3 4472 Flying Scotsman" label="Flying Scotsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q207380" start="93807" end="93830" title="Isambard Kingdom Brunel" label="Isambard Kingdom Brunel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="93911" end="93914" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q165177" start="93954" end="93974" title="100 Greatest Britons" label="100 Greatest Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="93997" end="94018" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q744086" start="94069" end="94085" title="SS Great Britain" label="SS Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395922" start="94176" end="94205" title="transatlantic telegraph cable" label="transatlantic telegraph cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q319331" start="94207" end="94222" title="Josiah Wedgwood" label="Josiah Wedgwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="94258" end="94265" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q437708" start="94310" end="94321" title="John Loudon McAdam" label="John McAdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q301766" start="94337" end="94344" title="macadam" label="macadam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337426" start="94414" end="94434" title="Edgar Purnell Hooley" label="Edgar Purnell Hooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179760" start="94469" end="94475" title="Tarmacadam" label="Tarmac"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="94554" end="94562" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995634" start="94567" end="94587" title="Smeaton&amp;#x27;s Tower" label="Smeaton&amp;#x27;s Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q460922" start="94597" end="94609" title="John Smeaton" label="John Smeaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q546122" start="94634" end="94654" title="Eddystone Lighthouse" label="Eddystone Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602656" start="94732" end="94746" title="hydraulic lime" label="hydraulic lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355182" start="94769" end="94785" title="Robert Stevenson (civil engineer)" label="Robert Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305375" start="94802" end="94822" title="Bell Rock Lighthouse" label="Bell Rock Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q844123" start="94943" end="94958" title="Portland cement" label="Portland cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="94984" end="94990" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q121838" start="95121" end="95134" title="Joseph Aspdin" label="Joseph Aspdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82337" start="95162" end="95176" title="Portland stone" label="Portland stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004630" start="95212" end="95226" title="William Aspdin" label="William Aspdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q848977" start="95306" end="95323" title="Harland and Wolff" label="Harland and Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q215692" start="95377" end="95402" title="HMHS Britannic" label="RMS &amp;quot;Britannic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699428" start="95417" end="95439" title="John Brown and Company" label="John Brown and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q544894" start="95499" end="95508" title="Mary Rose" label="Mary Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="95521" end="95531" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q546198" start="95559" end="95570" title="Golden Hind" label="Golden Hind"/>
<link wikidata="Q36517" start="95582" end="95595" title="Francis Drake" label="Francis Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558706" start="95616" end="95667" title="Francis Drake&amp;#x27;s circumnavigation" label="circumnavigation of the globe between 1577 and 1580"/>
<link wikidata="Q83235" start="95671" end="95682" title="Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount Nelson" label="Lord Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q171416" start="95706" end="95725" title="Battle of Trafalgar" label="Battle of Trafalgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="95754" end="95768" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564366" start="95776" end="95792" title="Second voyage of HMS Beagle" label="five-year voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="95834" end="95844" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178839" start="95864" end="95889" title="First voyage of James Cook" label="first voyage of discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q644521" start="95938" end="95971" title="Challenger expedition" label="&amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot; expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q82257" start="95978" end="95999" title="RRS Discovery" label="&amp;quot;Discovery&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q102527" start="96009" end="96028" title="Robert Falcon Scott" label="Robert Falcon Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q957543" start="96033" end="96050" title="Ernest Shackleton" label="Ernest Shackleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031706" start="96058" end="96078" title="Discovery Expedition" label="Discovery Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113136" start="96202" end="96226" title="women and children first" label="women and children first"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="96317" end="96328" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="96402" end="96423" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q133544" start="96457" end="96473" title="John Logie Baird" label="John Logie Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q849194" start="96538" end="96555" title="colour television" label="colour television"/>
<link wikidata="Q312547" start="96558" end="96571" title="Frank Whittle" label="Frank Whittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="96589" end="96599" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="96629" end="96637" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q140318" start="96651" end="96665" title="Gloster Meteor" label="Gloster Meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="96688" end="96691" title="jet aircraft" label="jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="96692" end="96699" title="Fighter aircraft" label="fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="96708" end="96720" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="96726" end="96738" title="jet aircraft" label="jet aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q46633" start="96789" end="96804" title="Charles Babbage" label="Charles Babbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q37064" start="96841" end="96858" title="Alexander Fleming" label="Alexander Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="96871" end="96881" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="96997" end="97011" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q80" start="97015" end="97034" title="Sir Tim Berners-Lee" label="Sir Tim Berners-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q191521" start="97040" end="97046" title="Viagra" label="Viagra"/>
<link wikidata="Q26163" start="97086" end="97094" title="Sandwich, Kent" label="Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q511916" start="97102" end="97119" title="Sir Alec Jeffreys" label="Sir Alec Jeffreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q476697" start="97130" end="97148" title="DNA fingerprinting" label="DNA fingerprinting"/>
<link wikidata="Q964401" start="97162" end="97171" title="fertility" label="fertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q669426" start="97182" end="97197" title="Patrick Steptoe" label="Patrick Steptoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q104913" start="97202" end="97216" title="Robert Edwards (physiologist)" label="Robert Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="97246" end="97249" title="IVF" label="IVF"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="97321" end="97325" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009239" start="97345" end="97369" title="William Foster &amp;amp; Co." label="William Foster &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="97373" end="97380" title="Lincoln, England" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964992" start="97425" end="97445" title="Walter Gordon Wilson" label="Walter Gordon Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q531695" start="97509" end="97524" title="William Tritton" label="William Tritton"/>
<link wikidata="Q105272093" start="97577" end="97588" title="Mark I tank" label="Mark I tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="97654" end="97681" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="97683" end="97700" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="97733" end="97751" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730475" start="97804" end="97817" title="Allan Beckett" label="Allan Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q426875" start="97897" end="97913" title="Mulberry harbour" label="Mulberry harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="97926" end="97946" title="invasion of Normandy" label="invasion of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="97995" end="98011" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q150857" start="98193" end="98213" title="German battleship Bismarck" label="&amp;quot;Bismarck&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336298" start="98255" end="98275" title="Francis Thomas Bacon" label="Francis Thomas Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q899342" start="98289" end="98307" title="alkaline fuel cell" label="alkaline fuel cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q957055" start="98344" end="98357" title="space capsule" label="space capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="98363" end="98372" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q283666" start="98400" end="98412" title="de Havilland" label="de Havilland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26159" start="98413" end="98418" title="de Havilland Comet" label="Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120025" start="98457" end="98469" title="jet airliner" label="jet airliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q846885" start="98483" end="98519" title="British Overseas Airways Corporation" label="British Overseas Airways Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="98584" end="98599" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q731466" start="98761" end="98764" title="OXO (video game)" label="OXO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417239" start="98839" end="98859" title="Sandy Douglas" label="Alexander S. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="98902" end="98912" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q210339" start="98982" end="99001" title="noughts and crosses" label="noughts and crosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q336950" start="99042" end="99062" title="John Shepherd-Barron" label="John Shepherd-Barron"/>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="99076" end="99088" title="Automated teller machine" label="cash machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4151649" start="99099" end="99115" title="James Goodfellow" label="James Goodfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q674050" start="99125" end="99155" title="Personal identification number" label="Personal identification number"/>
<link wikidata="Q245343" start="99254" end="99267" title="Barclays Bank" label="Barclays Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q544939" start="99271" end="99278" title="Enfield Town" label="Enfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q171433" start="99294" end="99309" title="Dolly (sheep)" label="Dolly the sheep"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="99341" end="99347" title="Cloning#Dolly the sheep" label="cloned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="99492" end="99513" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="99700" end="99719" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="99767" end="99784" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="99972" end="99987" title="entrepreneurial" label="entrepreneurial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975504" start="100317" end="100329" title="Jeremy Black (historian)" label="Jeremy Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q319331" start="100766" end="100781" title="Josiah Wedgwood" label="Josiah Wedgwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105928" start="101034" end="101054" title="soft-paste porcelain" label="soft-paste porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q851782" start="101055" end="101064" title="tableware" label="tableware"/>
<link wikidata="Q619865" start="101066" end="101076" title="bone china" label="bone china"/>
<link wikidata="Q39809" start="101175" end="101184" title="marketing" label="marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q677073" start="101205" end="101216" title="direct marketing" label="direct mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899215" start="101218" end="101238" title="money back guarantee" label="money back guarantee"/>
<link wikidata="Q688702" start="101241" end="101260" title="Door-to-door" label="travelling salesmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369310" start="101298" end="101310" title="self-service" label="self-service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003339" start="101327" end="101347" title="Buy one, get one free" label="buy one get one free"/>
<link wikidata="Q314278" start="101466" end="101484" title="Thomas Chippendale" label="Thomas Chippendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741056" start="101497" end="101510" title="cabinet-maker" label="cabinet-maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832055" start="101562" end="101577" title="Trade literature" label="trade catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791017" start="101601" end="101618" title="Thomas J. Barratt" label="Thomas J. Barratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046564" start="101669" end="101679" title="Pears (soap)" label="Pears soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q297743" start="101729" end="101743" title="Lillie Langtry" label="Lillie Langtry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="101999" end="102002" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="102017" end="102024" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q329924" start="102149" end="102164" title="Abraham Darby I" label="Abraham Darby I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152764" start="102200" end="102211" title="Lloyds Banking Group" label="Lloyds Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410235" start="102224" end="102237" title="Sampson Lloyd" label="Sampson Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q245343" start="102240" end="102253" title="Barclays PLC" label="Barclays Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839667" start="102255" end="102276" title="Backhouse&amp;#x27;s Bank" label="Backhouse&amp;#x27;s Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840575" start="102281" end="102299" title="Gurney&amp;#x27;s Bank" label="Gurney&amp;#x27;s Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q502313" start="102317" end="102334" title="Friends Provident" label="Friends Provident"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731491" start="102354" end="102374" title="Allen &amp;amp; Hanburys" label="Allen &amp;amp; Hanburys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6677525" start="102420" end="102427" title="Cadbury" label="Cadbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107024" start="102429" end="102439" title="J. S. Fry &amp;amp; Sons" label="Fry&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q695070" start="102444" end="102452" title="Rowntree&amp;#x27;s" label="Rowntree"/>
<link wikidata="Q836679" start="102478" end="102499" title="Huntley &amp;amp; Palmers" label="Huntley &amp;amp; Palmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980627" start="102521" end="102535" title="Bryant and May" label="Bryant and May"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095857" start="102561" end="102567" title="C. &amp;amp; J. Clark" label="Clarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q9041" start="102622" end="102632" title="James Watt" label="James Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="102678" end="102682" title="coin" label="coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q469269" start="102687" end="102702" title="Matthew Boulton" label="Matthew Boulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253236" start="102800" end="102817" title="Pryce Pryce-Jones" label="Pryce Pryce-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q425779" start="102835" end="102845" title="mail order" label="mail order"/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="102897" end="102903" title="retail" label="retail"/>
<link wikidata="Q58162" start="102919" end="102926" title="flannel" label="flannel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49845" start="102991" end="102995" title="mail" label="mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="103048" end="103055" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q679888" start="103159" end="103170" title="Rolls-Royce Limited" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q27224" start="103172" end="103179" title="Bentley" label="Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074" start="103181" end="103193" title="Aston Martin" label="Aston Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351854" start="103195" end="103202" title="McLaren Automotive" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q30055" start="103204" end="103210" title="Jaguar Cars" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35907" start="103212" end="103222" title="Land Rover" label="Land Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q36018" start="103224" end="103226" title="MG Cars" label="MG"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="103236" end="103240" title="Mini" label="Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q313074" start="103269" end="103290" title="Charles Stewart Rolls" label="Charles Stewart Rolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q516276" start="103299" end="103320" title="Frederick Henry Royce" label="Frederick Henry Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412885" start="103530" end="103548" title="Rolls-Royce Merlin" label="Rolls-Royce Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q561420" start="103646" end="103659" title="W. O. Bentley" label="W. O. Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q149830" start="103671" end="103682" title="Cricklewood" label="Cricklewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341843" start="103824" end="103838" title="Robert Bamford" label="Robert Bamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="103952" end="103962" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q249303" start="103996" end="104009" title="Jaguar E-Type" label="Jaguar E-Type"/>
<link wikidata="Q181282" start="104043" end="104055" title="Enzo Ferrari" label="Enzo Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="104167" end="104189" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="British Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942078" start="104214" end="104228" title="Royal warrant of appointment (United Kingdom)" label="royal warrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="104240" end="104252" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="104257" end="104271" title="Charles, Prince of Wales" label="Prince Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="104324" end="104340" title="four-wheel-drive" label="four-wheel-drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="104382" end="104401" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q386065" start="104438" end="104463" title="British Motor Corporation" label="British Motor Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q457634" start="104631" end="104649" title="Sir Alec Issigonis" label="Sir Alec Issigonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160232" start="104732" end="104744" title="History of Christianity in Britain" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="104836" end="104844" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="105057" end="105074" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="105099" end="105104" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="105106" end="105114" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="105116" end="105123" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="105125" end="105132" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="105138" end="105146" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q702718" start="105154" end="105166" title="British Jews" label="British Jews"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="105205" end="105245" title="Jewish population#By country" label="fifth largest Jewish community worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q219639" start="105247" end="105262" title="William Tyndale" label="William Tyndale"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="105406" end="105424" title="King James Version" label="King James Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q784710" start="105438" end="105459" title="Book of Common Prayer" label="Book of Common Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="105726" end="105733" title="Puritan" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="105764" end="105773" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="106007" end="106022" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="106106" end="106126" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="106270" end="106285" title="Roundhead" label="Parliamentarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="106316" end="106333" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="106462" end="106472" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q117085" start="106532" end="106537" title="holly" label="holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q943197" start="106550" end="106558" title="Royalism" label="royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="106864" end="106875" title="English Restoration" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="106879" end="106894" title="Charles II of England" label="King Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316201" start="107361" end="107366" title="Tudor period" label="Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="107422" end="107437" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q62879" start="107460" end="107477" title="A Christmas Carol" label="A Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="108041" end="108068" title="Christmas and holiday season#History of the phrase" label="&amp;quot;Merry Christmas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q626756" start="108122" end="108129" title="Ebenezer Scrooge" label="Scrooge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499127" start="108151" end="108156" title="miser" label="miser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637005" start="108163" end="108187" title="Humbug" label="&amp;quot;Bah! Humbug!&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991649" start="108222" end="108230" title="Tiny Tim (A Christmas Carol)" label="Tiny Tim"/>
<link wikidata="Q626510" start="108294" end="108302" title="blessing" label="blessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q558298" start="108306" end="108322" title="Christmas dinner" label="Christmas dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q503354" start="108439" end="108454" title="Christmas Carol" label="Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561829" start="108466" end="108480" title="William Sandys (antiquarian)" label="William Sandys"/>
<link wikidata="Q686012" start="108588" end="108602" title="The First Noel" label="The First Noel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638857" start="108616" end="108633" title="I Saw Three Ships" label="I Saw Three Ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585437" start="108647" end="108674" title="Hark the Herald Angels Sing" label="Hark the Herald Angels Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512638" start="108691" end="108719" title="God Rest Ye Merry, Gentlemen" label="God Rest Ye Merry, Gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="108756" end="108770" title="Christmas card#History" label="Christmas card"/>
<link wikidata="Q537906" start="108787" end="108797" title="Henry Cole (inventor)" label="Henry Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137662" start="108917" end="108932" title="Oxford Movement" label="Oxford Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q541235" start="108951" end="108968" title="Anglo-Catholicism" label="Anglo-Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109056" end="109070" title="Christmas tree#18th to early 20th centuries" label="Christmas tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="109127" end="109141" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q164079" start="109151" end="109169" title="Kingdom of Hanover" label="Kingdom of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q161159" start="109174" end="109207" title="Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="109217" end="109232" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="109254" end="109268" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653073" start="109331" end="109337" title="Christmas lights (holiday decoration)" label="lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q270286" start="109339" end="109348" title="Christmas ornaments" label="ornaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q184303" start="109354" end="109362" title="presents" label="presents"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="109420" end="109433" title="Albert, Prince Consort" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q609443" start="109673" end="109684" title="United Kingdom Census 2001" label="2001 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="109785" end="109791" title="Gallup poll" label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370598" start="109851" end="109869" title="places of worship" label="religious services"/>
<link wikidata="Q204669" start="109993" end="110018" title="public holidays in the UK" label="public holidays in the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q470572" start="110087" end="110104" title="Jesus of Nazareth (miniseries)" label="Jesus of Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q504982" start="110143" end="110156" title="Robert Powell" label="Robert Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q699705" start="110229" end="110244" title="George Williams (YMCA)" label="George Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="110253" end="110257" title="YMCA" label="YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="110451" end="110469" title="The Salvation Army" label="The Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q309882" start="110504" end="110517" title="William Booth" label="William Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q431614" start="110531" end="110540" title="Catherine Booth" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="110715" end="110739" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary government"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="110753" end="110771" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="110830" end="110844" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="110850" end="110882" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="110901" end="110921" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Houses of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="110949" end="110965" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="110983" end="110997" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="111028" end="111040" title="Royal Assent" label="Royal Assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="111163" end="111171" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="111173" end="111189" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="111194" end="111199" title="National Assembly for Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="111345" end="111355" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="111376" end="111399" title="List of political parties in the United Kingdom#Major parties in the House of Commons" label="major political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="111408" end="111420" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="111429" end="111447" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="111522" end="111550" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="most recent general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="111627" end="111644" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="111683" end="111706" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q104721252" start="111853" end="111862" title="Reform UK" label="Reform UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q9669" start="111867" end="111878" title="Green Party of England and Wales" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="111905" end="111916" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q244927" start="111930" end="111964" title="Alliance Party of Northern Ireland" label="Alliance Party of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q175443" start="111970" end="112004" title="Social Democratic and Labour Party" label="Social Democratic and Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="112006" end="112031" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="Democratic Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="112037" end="112046" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380597" start="112114" end="112145" title="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s Questions" label="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s Questions"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="112262" end="112276" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="112333" end="112354" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q479171" start="112418" end="112428" title="Amber Rudd" label="Amber Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="112608" end="112616" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q217228" start="112618" end="112626" title="Sky News" label="Sky News"/>
<link wikidata="Q787206" start="112631" end="112645" title="BBC Parliament" label="BBC Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555537" start="112746" end="112752" title="Twitch (service)" label="Twitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="112756" end="112763" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135084" start="112792" end="112815" title="uncodified constitution" label="uncodified constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="112821" end="112855" title="Constitution of the United Kingdom" label="Constitution of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="112931" end="112938" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q11022655" start="112952" end="112960" title="case law" label="case law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="113080" end="113098" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="113151" end="113169" title="Act of Parliament" label="Acts of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="113419" end="113430" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="113479" end="113492" title="Habeas corpus" label="Habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="113570" end="113589" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="Bill of Rights 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="113614" end="113631" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q584063" start="113648" end="113665" title="Petition of Right" label="Petition of Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q492004" start="113667" end="113689" title="Habeas Corpus Act 1679" label="Habeas Corpus Act 1679"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414408" start="113694" end="113723" title="Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949" label="Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q12407381" start="113762" end="113780" title="Claim of Right Act 1689" label="Claim of Right Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344299" start="113810" end="113827" title="Albert Venn Dicey" label="Albert Venn Dicey"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="114154" end="114164" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983190" start="114282" end="114301" title="Ministry of Justice (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714040" start="114375" end="114384" title="jury duty" label="jury duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q329843" start="114623" end="114635" title="John Hampden" label="John Hampden"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="114707" end="114716" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405064" start="114749" end="114759" title="ship money" label="ship money"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149574" start="114788" end="114800" title="Five Members" label="Five Members"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914849" start="114860" end="114876" title="House of Commons of England" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="114897" end="114914" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="115023" end="115042" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="115070" end="115089" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="Bill of Rights 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550193" start="115220" end="115247" title="State Opening of Parliament" label="State Opening of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="115293" end="115309" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q804241" start="115341" end="115365" title="Black Rod" label="monarch&amp;#x27;s messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q332435" start="115498" end="115509" title="Edward Coke" label="Edward Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222479" start="115741" end="115775" title="Institutes of the Lawes of England" label="Institutes of the Lawes of England"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="115971" end="116010" title="Property#Whether and to what extent the state may interfere with property" label="an Englishman&amp;#x27;s home is his castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="116022" end="116040" title="William Blackstone" label="William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986212" start="116109" end="116144" title="Commentaries on the Laws of England" label="Commentaries on the Laws of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q211519" start="116345" end="116363" title="Emmeline Pankhurst" label="Emmeline Pankhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="116412" end="116425" title="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="right to vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q207672" start="116427" end="116446" title="William Wilberforce" label="William Wilberforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="116470" end="116482" title="abolitionist" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="116525" end="116535" title="Classical liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="116598" end="116614" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="116724" end="116737" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="116817" end="116831" title="Robert Walpole" label="Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q181875" start="116929" end="116940" title="Robert Peel" label="Robert Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="116996" end="117013" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="117053" end="117070" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="117275" end="117294" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945549" start="117325" end="117343" title="Peace for our time" label="Peace for our time"/>
<link wikidata="Q315537" start="117408" end="117422" title="William Cowper" label="William Cowper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032151" start="117771" end="117786" title="Thomas Clarkson" label="Thomas Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q319331" start="117825" end="117840" title="Josiah Wedgwood" label="Josiah Wedgwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q72561873" start="117883" end="117911" title="Am I Not A Man And A Brother" label="Am I Not A Man And A Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q770832" start="118003" end="118023" title="Slave Trade Act 1807" label="Slave Trade Act 1807"/>
<link wikidata="Q495040" start="118178" end="118204" title="Anti-Slavery International" label="Anti-Slavery International"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937607" start="118376" end="118412" title="Murder (Abolition of Death Penalty) Act 1965" label="1965 suspension of the death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587581" start="118463" end="118489" title="private member&amp;#x27;s bill" label="private member&amp;#x27;s bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q283472" start="118493" end="118509" title="Sydney Silverman" label="Sydney Silverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="118566" end="118587" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q271049" start="118604" end="118618" title="Peter Benenson" label="Peter Benenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q768855" start="118664" end="118686" title="British honours system" label="British honours system"/>
<link wikidata="Q21006820" start="118947" end="118964" title="honours committee" label="honours committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="119183" end="119193" title="knighthood" label="knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250916" start="119221" end="119228" title="warrior" label="warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="119238" end="119254" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="119306" end="119314" title="chivalry" label="chivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134237" start="119350" end="119357" title="Court (royal)" label="courtly"/>
<link wikidata="Q831685" start="119434" end="119444" title="Sir Gawain" label="Sir Gawain"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="119446" end="119457" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q381981" start="119478" end="119503" title="Round Table" label="Knight of the Round Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q756715" start="119514" end="119545" title="Sir Gawain and the Green Knight" label="Sir Gawain and the Green Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="119583" end="119602" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q901407" start="119765" end="119773" title="damehood" label="damehood"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="119809" end="119826" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q460431" start="119901" end="119920" title="Nicholas Winton" label="Sir Nicholas Winton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="120021" end="120035" title="Elton John" label="Sir Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="120096" end="120112" title="Ridley Scott" label="Sir Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q194419" start="120173" end="120192" title="Richard Branson" label="Sir Richard Branson"/>
<link wikidata="Q161819" start="120271" end="120289" title="Julie Andrews" label="Dame Julie Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q234754" start="120301" end="120320" title="Shirley Bassey" label="Dame Shirley Bassey"/>
<link wikidata="Q152843" start="120384" end="120401" title="Joan Collins" label="Dame Joan Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="120444" end="120464" title="Agatha Christie" label="Dame Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q662296" start="120543" end="120548" title="shire" label="shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="120745" end="120753" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="120755" end="120764" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23092" start="120766" end="120781" title="Nottinghamshire" label="Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="120783" end="120794" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23105" start="120796" end="120809" title="Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23135" start="120811" end="120825" title="Worcestershire" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="120830" end="120839" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290674" start="120854" end="120867" title="Aberdeenshire (traditional)" label="Aberdeenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247411" start="120869" end="120879" title="Perthshire" label="Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247390" start="120881" end="120896" title="Inverness-shire" label="Inverness-shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229763" start="120901" end="120914" title="Stirlingshire" label="Stirlingshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q217840" start="120930" end="120945" title="Carmarthenshire" label="Carmarthenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q684016" start="120947" end="120957" title="Flintshire (historic)" label="Flintshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q213361" start="120962" end="120975" title="Pembrokeshire" label="Pembrokeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="121070" end="121075" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="121077" end="121081" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="121087" end="121093" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q237945" start="121175" end="121194" title="Heptarchy" label="Anglo-Saxon kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="121206" end="121214" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="121221" end="121228" title="Britons (historical)" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317848" start="121337" end="121361" title="Counties of Northern Ireland" label="six traditional counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q641227" start="121432" end="121458" title="Imperial units" label="imperial system of measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710" start="121883" end="121887" title="Foot (unit)" label="feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q218593" start="121892" end="121898" title="inches" label="inches"/>
<link wikidata="Q25267" start="122082" end="122097" title="Celsius" label="degrees Celsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q42289" start="122133" end="122143" title="Fahrenheit" label="Fahrenheit"/>
<link wikidata="Q253276" start="122216" end="122220" title="mile" label="mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q482798" start="122226" end="122230" title="yard" label="yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q211256" start="122239" end="122253" title="miles per hour" label="miles per hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738925" start="122413" end="122424" title="metrication" label="metrication"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="122720" end="122738" title="drives on the left" label="drives on the left"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328304" start="123041" end="123055" title="zebra crossing" label="zebra crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="123081" end="123083" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="123115" end="123130" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537774" start="123156" end="123185" title="Transport Research Laboratory" label="Transport Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="123339" end="123349" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q986428" start="123355" end="123380" title="Gravelly Hill Interchange" label="Gravelly Hill Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809139" start="123410" end="123428" title="Spaghetti Junction" label="Spaghetti Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916749" start="123476" end="123499" title="Birmingham Mail" label="Birmingham Evening Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602459" start="123535" end="123551" title="Green Cross Code" label="Green Cross Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427200" start="123624" end="123635" title="Mungo Jerry" label="Mungo Jerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660805" start="123654" end="123671" title="In the Summertime" label="In the Summertime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525" start="123729" end="123740" title="roundabouts" label="roundabouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864" start="123834" end="123848" title="Cat&amp;#x27;s eye (road)" label="Cat&amp;#x27;s eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167570" start="123916" end="123926" title="Percy Shaw" label="Percy Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q918277" start="123951" end="123966" title="British cuisine" label="British cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40853306" start="124311" end="124325" title="full breakfast" label="full breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q558298" start="124334" end="124350" title="Christmas dinner" label="Christmas dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053214" start="124361" end="124379" title="Celtic fields" label="Celtic agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="124453" end="124458" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="124460" end="124479" title="Anglo-Saxon England" label="Anglo-Saxon England"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="124580" end="124595" title="Norman conquest" label="Norman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969259" start="124626" end="124658" title="Great Britain in the Middle Ages" label="Great Britain in the Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="124664" end="124678" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192087" start="124706" end="124733" title="Indian cuisine" label="India&amp;#x27;s food tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261477" start="124877" end="124892" title="English cuisine" label="English cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850311" start="124905" end="124917" title="Sunday roast" label="Sunday roast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865573" start="124931" end="124944" title="roasting" label="roasted joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q860465" start="124954" end="124964" title="roast beef" label="roast beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989060" start="125037" end="125066" title="The Roast Beef of Old England" label="The Roast Beef of Old England"/>
<link wikidata="Q123122627" start="125075" end="125079" title="lamb and mutton" label="lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q951669" start="125143" end="125160" title="Yorkshire pudding" label="Yorkshire pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q945934" start="125165" end="125170" title="gravy" label="gravy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40853306" start="125176" end="125198" title="Full breakfast" label="full English breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q11106" start="125211" end="125216" title="bacon" label="bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q804297" start="125249" end="125260" title="baked beans" label="baked beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q83093" start="125268" end="125277" title="mushrooms" label="mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462145" start="125298" end="125311" title="Black pudding" label="Black pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710389" start="125316" end="125326" title="hash brown" label="hash brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="125398" end="125404" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336063" start="125437" end="125446" title="soda farl" label="soda farl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125451" end="125463" title="Potato bread#North of Ireland and Republic of Ireland" label="potato bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q203925" start="125547" end="125561" title="Fish and chips" label="Fish and chips"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="125607" end="125624" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="125670" end="125681" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="125722" end="125735" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="125962" end="125973" title="blue plaque" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q202628" start="125977" end="125983" title="Oldham" label="Oldham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980934" start="126039" end="126057" title="fish and chip shop" label="fish and chip shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q81799" start="126062" end="126071" title="fast food" label="fast food"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367573" start="126092" end="126100" title="meat pie" label="meat pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q861304" start="126123" end="126143" title="steak and kidney pie" label="steak and kidney pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303056" start="126145" end="126164" title="shepherd&amp;#x27;s pie" label="shepherd&amp;#x27;s pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303056" start="126166" end="126177" title="cottage pie" label="cottage pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q126777" start="126179" end="126192" title="Cornish pasty" label="Cornish pasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304394" start="126197" end="126205" title="pork pie" label="pork pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q245009" start="126241" end="126254" title="afternoon tea" label="afternoon tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q176253" start="126382" end="126403" title="Catherine of Braganza" label="Catherine of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q13270" start="126442" end="126449" title="biscuit" label="biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q28803" start="126452" end="126460" title="sandwich" label="sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q869660" start="126464" end="126469" title="scone" label="scone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13276" start="126472" end="126476" title="cake" label="cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q167309" start="126499" end="126514" title="Battenberg cake" label="Battenberg cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q675987" start="126516" end="126526" title="fruit cake" label="fruit cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049852" start="126530" end="126545" title="Victoria sponge" label="Victoria sponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819834" start="126572" end="126589" title="A Nice Cup of Tea" label="A Nice Cup of Tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="126604" end="126617" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q557614" start="126698" end="126712" title="McVitie&amp;#x27;s" label="McVitie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q13270" start="126734" end="126741" title="biscuit" label="biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315375" start="126792" end="126808" title="Dunking (biscuit)" label="&amp;quot;dunk&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247120" start="126837" end="126856" title="chocolate digestive" label="chocolate digestive"/>
<link wikidata="Q275540" start="126859" end="126867" title="rich tea" label="rich tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874601" start="126872" end="126879" title="hobnob biscuit" label="hobnobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q863966" start="126974" end="126981" title="Bourbon biscuit" label="bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246820" start="126984" end="126998" title="custard creams" label="custard creams"/>
<link wikidata="Q506115" start="127000" end="127014" title="Jammie Dodgers" label="Jammie Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879663" start="127016" end="127027" title="ginger nuts" label="ginger nuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q652695" start="127032" end="127042" title="shortbread" label="shortbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984665" start="127089" end="127104" title="gingerbread man" label="gingerbread man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="127126" end="127137" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="127188" end="127197" title="Ice cream#True ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929814" start="127221" end="127252" title="Mrs. Mary Eales&amp;#x27;s Receipts" label="Mrs. Mary Eales&amp;#x27;s Receipts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156634" start="127327" end="127341" title="ice cream cone" label="ice cream cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077379" start="127354" end="127378" title="Charles Elmé Francatelli" label="Charles Elmé Francatelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307979" start="127397" end="127412" title="The Modern Cook" label="The Modern Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q334953" start="127456" end="127490" title="John Montagu, 4th Earl of Sandwich" label="John Montagu, 4th Earl of Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q28803" start="127548" end="127556" title="sandwich" label="sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="127751" end="127767" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q264554" start="127825" end="127841" title="carbonated water" label="carbonated water"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="127911" end="127921" title="soft drink" label="soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q893" start="127935" end="127943" title="lemonade" label="lemonade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274118" start="128002" end="128026" title="R. White&amp;#x27;s Lemonade" label="R. White&amp;#x27;s Lemonade"/>
<link wikidata="Q938806" start="128098" end="128105" title="Irn-Bru" label="Irn-Bru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110171" start="128194" end="128202" title="Lucozade" label="Lucozade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882471" start="128272" end="128288" title="bangers and mash" label="bangers and mash"/>
<link wikidata="Q105588044" start="128293" end="128305" title="sausage roll" label="sausage roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q740764" start="128313" end="128329" title="toad in the hole" label="toad in the hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358444" start="128331" end="128348" title="Lancashire hotpot" label="Lancashire hotpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q217525" start="128395" end="128402" title="Cheddar cheese" label="Cheddar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972540" start="128407" end="128418" title="Wensleydale (cheese)" label="Wensleydale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068034" start="128457" end="128466" title="apple pie" label="apple pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q14552548" start="128468" end="128477" title="mince pie" label="mince pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q584564" start="128480" end="128492" title="spotted dick" label="spotted dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236200" start="128494" end="128505" title="Eccles cake" label="Eccles cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q44541" start="128508" end="128515" title="pancake" label="pancake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049852" start="128518" end="128529" title="sponge cake" label="sponge cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q616601" start="128531" end="128537" title="trifle" label="trifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545971" start="128539" end="128544" title="Gelatin dessert" label="jelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q625825" start="128546" end="128553" title="custard" label="custard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616334" start="128555" end="128576" title="sticky toffee pudding" label="sticky toffee pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853348" start="128578" end="128600" title="Tunnock&amp;#x27;s teacake" label="Tunnock&amp;#x27;s teacake"/>
<link wikidata="Q29330" start="128606" end="128617" title="Jaffa cakes" label="Jaffa cakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5834964" start="128652" end="128661" title="Marmalade" label="Marmalade"/>
<link wikidata="Q632908" start="128754" end="128769" title="Paddington Bear" label="Paddington Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055478" start="128859" end="128869" title="Paddington (film)" label="Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590871" start="128893" end="128905" title="Paddington 2" label="Paddington 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q720398" start="128925" end="128931" title="baking" label="baking"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336542" start="129028" end="129063" title="The Experienced English Housekeeper" label="The Experienced English Housekeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q19787269" start="129084" end="129119" title="Modern Cookery for Private Families" label="Modern Cookery for Private Families"/>
<link wikidata="Q542825" start="129148" end="129159" title="Eliza Acton" label="Eliza Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q287665" start="129282" end="129297" title="Isabella Beeton" label="Isabella Beeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917183" start="129311" end="129339" title="Mrs Beeton&amp;#x27;s Book of Household Management" label="Book of Household Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q17135873" start="129423" end="129427" title="fête" label="fête"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737672" start="129529" end="129555" title="The Great British Bake Off" label="The Great British Bake Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049852" start="129808" end="129823" title="Victoria sponge" label="Victoria sponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="129837" end="129851" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q29476" start="129926" end="129939" title="baking powder" label="baking powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q684195" start="129969" end="129980" title="Alfred Bird" label="Alfred Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601611" start="130045" end="130058" title="hot cross bun" label="hot cross bun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836557" start="130160" end="130172" title="Treacle tart" label="Treacle tart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688129" start="130208" end="130220" title="golden syrup" label="golden syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669372" start="130245" end="130255" title="Abram Lyle" label="Abram Lyle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="130353" end="130377" title="Golden syrup#History" label="Lyle&amp;#x27;s Golden Syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="130461" end="130466" title="brand" label="brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897293" start="130485" end="130501" title="Scottish cuisine" label="Scottish cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784939" start="130511" end="130526" title="Arbroath smokie" label="Arbroath smokie"/>
<link wikidata="Q209500" start="130531" end="130537" title="haggis" label="haggis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058590" start="130539" end="130561" title="Northern Irish cuisine" label="Northern Irish cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40853306" start="130575" end="130585" title="Ulster fry" label="Ulster fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143007" start="130594" end="130600" title="pastie" label="pastie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066586" start="130605" end="130618" title="Welsh cuisine" label="Welsh cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210230" start="130632" end="130645" title="Welsh rarebit" label="Welsh rarebit"/>
<link wikidata="Q842618" start="130659" end="130679" title="Worcestershire sauce" label="Worcestershire sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038482" start="130685" end="130689" title="cawl" label="cawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082116" start="130691" end="130702" title="Brown sauce" label="Brown sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565841" start="130767" end="130775" title="HP Sauce" label="HP Sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="130819" end="130839" title="Houses of Parliament" label="Houses of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839953" start="130886" end="130900" title="bacon sandwich" label="bacon sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q212348" start="130917" end="130931" title="Aberdeen Angus" label="Aberdeen Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208989" start="130952" end="130956" title="Beef cattle" label="beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051869" start="131015" end="131032" title="Cavendish bananas" label="Cavendish bananas"/>
<link wikidata="Q318372" start="131056" end="131069" title="Joseph Paxton" label="Joseph Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068289" start="131092" end="131108" title="Chatsworth House" label="Chatsworth House"/>
<link wikidata="Q541755" start="131142" end="131159" title="William Cavendish, 6th Duke of Devonshire" label="William Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="131195" end="131201" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="131238" end="131241" title="pub" label="pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="131484" end="131488" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q208385" start="131492" end="131495" title="ale" label="ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257249" start="131616" end="131625" title="pub games" label="pub games"/>
<link wikidata="Q131471" start="131634" end="131639" title="darts" label="darts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11015" start="131643" end="131650" title="snooker" label="snooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="131698" end="131720" title="English Premier League" label="English Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q187304" start="131725" end="131748" title="Scottish Premier League" label="Scottish Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="131794" end="131808" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431891" start="131815" end="131823" title="pub quiz" label="pub quiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="131926" end="131936" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065172" start="132035" end="132045" title="ale taster" label="ale taster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065172" start="132320" end="132332" title="English beer" label="English beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27201" start="132342" end="132348" title="bitter (beer)" label="bitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318025" start="132350" end="132354" title="mild ale" label="mild"/>
<link wikidata="Q217825" start="132356" end="132361" title="stout" label="stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725773" start="132366" end="132375" title="brown ale" label="brown ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="132377" end="132383" title="Whisky" label="Whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="132426" end="132437" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q909747" start="132439" end="132452" title="Irish whiskey" label="Irish whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q382947" start="132457" end="132470" title="Scotch whisky" label="Scotch whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q558298" start="132521" end="132527" title="Christmas dinner" label="dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q43794" start="132614" end="132620" title="turkey (bird)" label="turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q852576" start="132651" end="132668" title="Christmas pudding" label="Christmas pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018918" start="132724" end="132742" title="William Strickland (navigator)" label="William Strickland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427809" start="132821" end="132834" title="Thomas Tusser" label="Thomas Tusser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="132881" end="132905" title="Christmas dinner#United Kingdom" label="English Christmas dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855188" start="132971" end="132999" title="turkeys voting for Christmas" label="turkeys voting for Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q860465" start="133048" end="133058" title="roast beef" label="roast beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q170486" start="133062" end="133065" title="ham" label="ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q745361" start="133086" end="133094" title="stuffing" label="stuffing"/>
<link wikidata="Q945934" start="133096" end="133101" title="gravy" label="gravy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="133103" end="133117" title="potatoes" label="roast potatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="133139" end="133148" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776859" start="133184" end="133202" title="Christmas crackers" label="Christmas crackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q868580" start="133303" end="133322" title="Chinese restaurants" label="Chinese restaurants"/>
<link wikidata="Q173265" start="133622" end="133627" title="potato chip" label="crisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014067" start="133680" end="133697" title="William Kitchiner" label="William Kitchiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764913" start="133779" end="133811" title="The Smith&amp;#x27;s Snackfood Company" label="The Smiths Potato Crisps Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977" start="134014" end="134027" title="Archer Martin" label="Archer Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48979" start="134032" end="134045" title="Richard Laurence Millington Synge" label="Richard Synge"/>
<link wikidata="Q907154" start="134115" end="134139" title="partition chromatography" label="partition chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q677065" start="134197" end="134214" title="gas chromatograph" label="gas chromatograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397955" start="134352" end="134357" title="Tayto (Republic of Ireland)" label="Tayto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579979" start="134414" end="134427" title="Golden Wonder" label="Golden Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851274" start="134617" end="134622" title="Tudor Crisps" label="Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296097" start="134736" end="134743" title="Walkers (snack foods)" label="Walkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="134826" end="134833" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q310439" start="134846" end="134856" title="George Fox" label="George Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6677525" start="135040" end="135047" title="Cadbury" label="Cadbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107024" start="135063" end="135073" title="J. S. Fry &amp;amp; Sons" label="Fry&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q695070" start="135089" end="135104" title="Rowntree&amp;#x27;s" label="Rowntree&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704011" start="135109" end="135121" title="Terry&amp;#x27;s" label="Terry&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361086" start="135161" end="135174" title="chocolate bar" label="chocolate bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506544" start="135216" end="135242" title="Fry&amp;#x27;s Chocolate Cream" label="Fry&amp;#x27;s Chocolate Cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016270" start="135271" end="135289" title="Cadbury Dairy Milk" label="Cadbury Dairy Milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242180" start="135291" end="135297" title="Galaxy (chocolate)" label="Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q367251" start="135302" end="135309" title="Kit Kat" label="Kit Kat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932621" start="135354" end="135371" title="Cadbury Creme Egg" label="Cadbury Creme Egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347845" start="135556" end="135571" title="Easter egg hunt" label="Easter egg hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009326" start="135650" end="135662" title="Butterscotch" label="Butterscotch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176886" start="135746" end="135758" title="Jelly Babies" label="Jelly Babies"/>
<link wikidata="Q388973" start="135813" end="135824" title="After Eight" label="After Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354260" start="135861" end="135874" title="Rock (confectionary)" label="stick of rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="136021" end="136029" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027679" start="136031" end="136039" title="Portrush" label="Portrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q170377" start="136044" end="136053" title="Blackpool" label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646303" start="136063" end="136071" title="99 Flake" label="99 Flake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156634" start="136146" end="136150" title="ice cream cone" label="cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352160" start="136158" end="136171" title="Flake (chocolate bar)" label="Cadbury Flake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336843" start="136337" end="136368" title="countries of the United Kingdom" label="countries of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691492" start="136474" end="136481" title="Team GB" label="Team GB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="136538" end="136551" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="136643" end="136660" title="Victorian Britain" label="Victorian Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q182609" start="136685" end="136698" title="Jacques Rogge" label="Jacques Rogge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="137066" end="137094" title="Sport in the United Kingdom#Popularity" label="most popular sport in the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378626" start="137161" end="137197" title="English public school football games" label="English public school football games"/>
<link wikidata="Q506630" start="137203" end="137208" title="Laws of the Game (association football)" label="rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425484" start="137250" end="137270" title="Ebenezer Cobb Morley" label="Ebenezer Cobb Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="137387" end="137391" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q18491" start="137398" end="137412" title="Sheffield F.C." label="Sheffield F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1040745" start="137474" end="137486" title="home nations" label="home nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="137575" end="137589" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="137594" end="137600" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q14377162" start="137610" end="137630" title="Scottish Premiership" label="Scottish Premiership"/>
<link wikidata="Q308822" start="137635" end="137647" title="Scottish Cup" label="Scottish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="137773" end="137781" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="137786" end="137793" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q134202" start="137879" end="137898" title="1966 FIFA World Cup" label="1966 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065912" start="137979" end="137984" title="1966 FIFA World Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="138032" end="138066" title="List of most-watched television broadcasts#Most watched special events" label="most watched television event ever"/>
<link wikidata="Q191492" start="138197" end="138208" title="Bobby Moore" label="Bobby Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q213879" start="138213" end="138225" title="Gordon Banks" label="Gordon Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q164521" start="138250" end="138261" title="George Best" label="George Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q311711" start="138266" end="138278" title="Pat Jennings" label="Pat Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q187198" start="138295" end="138309" title="Kenny Dalglish" label="Kenny Dalglish"/>
<link wikidata="Q454251" start="138314" end="138329" title="Jimmy Johnstone" label="Jimmy Johnstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q219354" start="138347" end="138355" title="Ian Rush" label="Ian Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q10524" start="138360" end="138370" title="Ryan Giggs" label="Ryan Giggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="138399" end="138415" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q216140" start="138417" end="138433" title="Stanley Matthews" label="Stanley Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="138481" end="138495" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="138539" end="138569" title="Football League First Division" label="Football League First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="138651" end="138668" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="138670" end="138679" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="138681" end="138688" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="138690" end="138697" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="138699" end="138716" title="Tottenham Hotspur" label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="138721" end="138736" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="138754" end="138760" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597" start="138765" end="138772" title="Rangers F.C." label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="138801" end="138815" title="Leicester City F.C." label="Leicester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="139027" end="139048" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="139128" end="139145" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="139167" end="139178" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453101" start="139184" end="139212" title="UEFA Champions League Anthem" label="UEFA Champions League Anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q375813" start="139225" end="139237" title="Tony Britten" label="Tony Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q656769" start="139271" end="139287" title="Zadok the Priest" label="Zadok the Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606761" start="139323" end="139333" title="Henry Francis Lyte" label="Henry Lyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476190" start="139362" end="139375" title="Abide with Me" label="Abide with Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484477" start="139417" end="139429" title="FA Cup Final" label="FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484483" start="139449" end="139453" title="1927 FA Cup Final" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092816" start="139517" end="139537" title="Street football (association football)" label="street/park football"/>
<link wikidata="Q232191" start="139554" end="139561" title="Sweater" label="jumpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18530" start="139604" end="139613" title="goalposts" label="goalposts"/>
<link wikidata="Q47447" start="139654" end="139664" title="Ed Sheeran" label="Ed Sheeran"/>
<link wikidata="" start="139682" end="139728" title="Jumpers for Goalposts: Live at Wembley Stadium" label="Jumpers for Goalposts: Live at Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="139834" end="139843" title="Dribbling#Association football" label="dribbling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="139902" end="139918" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260441" start="139987" end="140009" title="The Knight&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Knight&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q191663" start="140026" end="140042" title="Canterbury Tales" label="Canterbury Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489759" start="140263" end="140278" title="football chants" label="football chants"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968363" start="140387" end="140419" title="You&amp;#x27;re Not Singing Any More" label="You&amp;#x27;re Not Singing Any More"/>
<link wikidata="Q728692" start="140684" end="140712" title="You&amp;#x27;ll Never Walk Alone" label="You&amp;#x27;ll Never Walk Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q733400" start="140748" end="140772" title="Gerry and the Pacemakers" label="Gerry and the Pacemakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266908" start="140784" end="140794" title="Local Hero (album)" label="Local Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q50040" start="140804" end="140816" title="Dire Straits" label="Dire Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="140830" end="140846" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q185343" start="140851" end="140864" title="Mark Knopfler" label="Mark Knopfler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605240" start="140957" end="140966" title="Steak pie" label="meat pies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466411" start="141110" end="141128" title="football programme" label="football programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q381704" start="141402" end="141413" title="floodlights" label="floodlights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="141761" end="141765" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="141799" end="141803" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q207736" start="141812" end="141822" title="St Andrews" label="St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110222" start="141858" end="141870" title="Golf in Scotland" label="home of golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q167245" start="141902" end="141912" title="Old Course at St Andrews" label="Old Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165914" start="141925" end="141930" title="links (golf)" label="links"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678264" start="142163" end="142180" title="Musselburgh Links" label="Musselburgh Links"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="142333" end="142358" title="Rules of golf#Origin" label="&amp;quot;rules of golf&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520393" start="142390" end="142395" title="Leith Links" label="Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q848797" start="142481" end="142502" title="The Open Championship" label="The Open Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q945877" start="142647" end="142659" title="Harry Vardon" label="Harry Vardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600100" start="142684" end="142701" title="Great Triumvirate (golf)" label="Great Triumvirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q964427" start="142843" end="142858" title="Graeme McDowell" label="Graeme McDowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q531845" start="142860" end="142873" title="Darren Clarke" label="Darren Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q380613" start="142901" end="142913" title="Rory McIlroy" label="Rory McIlroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q854376" start="142950" end="142959" title="Ryder Cup" label="Ryder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q327781" start="142996" end="143008" title="Samuel Ryder" label="Samuel Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q531520" start="143061" end="143071" title="Nick Faldo" label="Nick Faldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="143146" end="143157" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143281" start="143217" end="143229" title="Rugby School" label="Rugby School"/>
<link wikidata="Q319318" start="143274" end="143292" title="William Webb Ellis" label="William Webb Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555312" start="143375" end="143400" title="1871 England versus Scotland rugby union match" label="first rugby international"/>
<link wikidata="Q378628" start="143445" end="143452" title="England national rugby union team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q945016" start="143457" end="143465" title="Scotland national rugby union team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q599903" start="143480" end="143487" title="Ireland national rugby union team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q822877" start="143492" end="143497" title="Wales national rugby union team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q16642" start="143568" end="143593" title="Six Nations Championship" label="Home Nations Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q733600" start="143674" end="143697" title="British and Irish Lions" label="British and Irish Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381089" start="143834" end="143848" title="Gareth Edwards (rugby union)" label="Gareth Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q725555" start="143850" end="143867" title="J. P. R. Williams" label="J. P. R. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381032" start="143872" end="143884" title="Phil Bennett" label="Phil Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777022" start="144054" end="144082" title="The greatest try ever scored" label="The greatest try ever scored"/>
<link wikidata="Q318920" start="144098" end="144113" title="Jonny Wilkinson" label="Jonny Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14955134" start="144133" end="144142" title="drop kick" label="drop goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601780" start="144195" end="144221" title="2003 Rugby World Cup Final" label="2003 Rugby World Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q5960" start="144268" end="144279" title="English Premiership (rugby union)" label="Premiership"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002" start="144299" end="144312" title="Pro14" label="Celtic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884291" start="144352" end="144356" title="2010–11 Celtic League" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080005" start="144400" end="144425" title="Oggy Oggy Oggy" label="Oggy Oggy Oggy, Oi Oi Oi!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730293" start="144531" end="144565" title="Maggie Out" label="Maggie Maggie Maggie, Out Out Out!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="144609" end="144626" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="144650" end="144662" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q201812" start="144678" end="144690" title="Huddersfield" label="Huddersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934075" start="144692" end="144716" title="West Riding of Yorkshire" label="West Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142995" start="144774" end="144786" title="Super League" label="Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059994" start="144960" end="144973" title="Challenge Cup" label="Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="145053" end="145059" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q725054" start="145243" end="145267" title="Walter Clopton Wingfield" label="Walter Clopton Wingfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="145359" end="145382" title="Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="145560" end="145582" title="Strawberry#Uses" label="Strawberries and cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q312639" start="145804" end="145814" title="Fred Perry" label="Fred Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q233234" start="145924" end="145937" title="Virginia Wade" label="Virginia Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550874" start="146025" end="146039" title="Silver Jubilee" label="Silver Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q10125" start="146197" end="146208" title="Andy Murray" label="Andy Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q64849968" start="146273" end="146286" title="Emma Raducanu" label="Emma Raducanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650007" start="146365" end="146394" title="Marquess of Queensberry rules" label="&amp;#x27;Queensberry rules&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="146425" end="146431" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q335896" start="146449" end="146490" title="John Douglas, 9th Marquess of Queensberry" label="John Douglas, 9th Marquess of Queensberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q472506" start="146588" end="146603" title="Bob Fitzsimmons" label="Bob Fitzsimmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q530220" start="146724" end="146735" title="Frank Bruno" label="Frank Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q718631" start="146807" end="146819" title="Chris Eubank" label="Chris Eubank"/>
<link wikidata="Q718305" start="146821" end="146831" title="Nigel Benn" label="Nigel Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346903" start="146833" end="146846" title="Steve Collins" label="Steve Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674689" start="146851" end="146865" title="Michael Watson" label="Michael Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355898" start="147110" end="147141" title="Naseem Hamed" label="&amp;quot;Prince&amp;quot; Naseem Hamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q22098067" start="147147" end="147178" title="Nigel Benn vs. Gerald McClellan" label="Nigel Benn vs. Gerald McClellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q295328" start="147253" end="147265" title="Lennox Lewis" label="Lennox Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q471383" start="147267" end="147279" title="Joe Calzaghe" label="Joe Calzaghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q116516" start="147284" end="147296" title="Ricky Hatton" label="Ricky Hatton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="147335" end="147342" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371229" start="147384" end="147393" title="round arm" label="round arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113546" start="147460" end="147475" title="overarm bowling" label="overarm bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321565" start="147497" end="147504" title="England cricket team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="147533" end="147543" title="Test cricket" label="Test match"/>
<link wikidata="Q616068" start="147608" end="147619" title="W. G. Grace" label="W. G. Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q25043" start="147747" end="147778" title="Monty Python and the Holy Grail" label="Monty Python and the Holy Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q725151" start="147972" end="147981" title="The Ashes" label="The Ashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137275" start="148121" end="148140" title="County Championship" label="County Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q192202" start="148215" end="148232" title="Cricket World Cup" label="Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q476709" start="148291" end="148295" title="2019 Cricket World Cup" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q210826" start="148369" end="148381" title="Thoroughbred" label="Thoroughbred"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="148425" end="148437" title="horse racing" label="horse racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q333496" start="148578" end="148618" title="Edward Smith-Stanley, 12th Earl of Derby" label="Edward Smith-Stanley, 12th Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q55629" start="148620" end="148629" title="Epsom Derby" label="The Derby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="148694" end="148706" title="Triple Crown of Thoroughbred Racing#English Triple Crowns" label="Triple Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813889" start="148724" end="148736" title="2000 Guineas Stakes" label="2000 Guineas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495279" start="148757" end="148765" title="St Leger Stakes" label="St Leger"/>
<link wikidata="Q723556" start="148782" end="148787" title="Derby (horse race)" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973454" start="148922" end="148935" title="National Hunt" label="National Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542651" start="148951" end="148965" title="Grand National" label="Grand National"/>
<link wikidata="Q174017" start="148987" end="149005" title="Aintree Racecourse" label="Aintree Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624525" start="149118" end="149125" title="Red Rum" label="Red Rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q880092" start="149265" end="149277" title="Black Beauty" label="Black Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q258741" start="149284" end="149295" title="Anna Sewell" label="Anna Sewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q28961347" start="149346" end="149366" title="J.W. Foster and Sons" label="J.W. Foster and Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090200" start="149385" end="149399" title="running spikes" label="running spikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q380887" start="149529" end="149544" title="Harold Abrahams" label="Harold Abrahams"/>
<link wikidata="Q207921" start="149580" end="149596" title="Chariots of Fire" label="Chariots of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q466183" start="149690" end="149696" title="Reebok" label="Reebok"/>
<link wikidata="Q173075" start="149734" end="149757" title="1950 British Grand Prix" label="1950 British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="149772" end="149783" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q172728" start="149885" end="149898" title="Stirling Moss" label="Stirling Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137" start="149900" end="149909" title="Jim Clark" label="Jim Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128" start="149931" end="149942" title="Graham Hill" label="Graham Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533221" start="149972" end="149984" title="Triple Crown of Motorsport" label="Triple Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153" start="149987" end="149999" title="John Surtees" label="John Surtees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188" start="150046" end="150060" title="Jackie Stewart" label="Jackie Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q140393" start="150087" end="150097" title="James Hunt" label="James Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q10501" start="150099" end="150112" title="Nigel Mansell" label="Nigel Mansell"/>
<link wikidata="Q10510" start="150172" end="150185" title="Jenson Button" label="Jenson Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q9673" start="150190" end="150204" title="Lewis Hamilton" label="Lewis Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019" start="150232" end="150250" title="British Grand Prix" label="British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171402" start="150262" end="150273" title="Silverstone Circuit" label="Silverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="150383" end="150390" title="McLaren" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q171337" start="150395" end="150403" title="Williams Grand Prix Engineering" label="Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002993" start="150459" end="150475" title="List of Formula One constructors" label="current F1 teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954812" start="150505" end="150513" title="Mercedes-Benz in Formula One" label="Mercedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q173663" start="150535" end="150550" title="Red Bull Racing" label="Red Bull Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q98930155" start="150552" end="150558" title="Alpine F1 Team" label="Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25412511" start="150563" end="150575" title="Aston Martin F1 Team" label="Aston Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q578794" start="150661" end="150676" title="London Marathon" label="London Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q887604" start="150682" end="150695" title="The Boat Race" label="The Boat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="150703" end="150715" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="150742" end="150747" title="Rowing (sport)" label="rower"/>
<link wikidata="Q52679" start="150768" end="150782" title="Steve Redgrave" label="Steve Redgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q348938" start="150902" end="150914" title="Sir Frank Bowden, 1st Baronet" label="Frank Bowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001072" start="150927" end="150950" title="Raleigh Bicycle Company" label="Raleigh Bicycle Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987990" start="151037" end="151052" title="Raleigh Chopper" label="Raleigh Chopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q337271" start="151108" end="151119" title="Tom Simpson" label="Tom Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q193876" start="151183" end="151198" title="Bradley Wiggins" label="Bradley Wiggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="151224" end="151238" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q319591" start="151247" end="151259" title="Chris Froome" label="Chris Froome"/>
<link wikidata="Q356327" start="151354" end="151368" title="Geraint Thomas" label="Geraint Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q207713" start="151400" end="151414" title="Mark Cavendish" label="Mark Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="151479" end="151492" title="Tour de France records and statistics#Stage wins per rider" label="all-time list"/>
<link wikidata="Q926191" start="151497" end="151506" title="Ice Dance" label="Ice Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9657" start="151596" end="151616" title="1984 Winter Olympics" label="1984 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q257750" start="151618" end="151631" title="Jayne Torvill" label="Jayne Torvill"/>
<link wikidata="Q707975" start="151636" end="151652" title="Christopher Dean" label="Christopher Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q550548" start="151884" end="151919" title="Eddie the Eagle" label="Eddie &amp;quot;The Eagle&amp;quot; Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239385" start="151971" end="151984" title="Taron Egerton" label="Taron Egerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571557" start="152041" end="152056" title="Eddie the Eagle (film)" label="Eddie the Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="152175" end="152181" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="152183" end="152195" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="152197" end="152208" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="152210" end="152217" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="152219" end="152231" title="field hockey" label="field hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11015" start="152233" end="152240" title="snooker" label="snooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q131471" start="152242" end="152247" title="darts" label="darts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341285" start="152249" end="152258" title="billiards" label="billiards"/>
<link wikidata="Q133201" start="152260" end="152266" title="Squash (sport)" label="squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q136851" start="152268" end="152275" title="curling" label="curling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075286" start="152394" end="152402" title="rounders" label="rounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q295201" start="152485" end="152499" title="Stephen Hendry" label="Stephen Hendry"/>
<link wikidata="Q550313" start="152542" end="152553" title="Phil Taylor (darts player)" label="Phil Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q529328" start="152606" end="152618" title="Alex Higgins" label="Alex Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q675591" start="152674" end="152686" title="Eric Bristow" label="Eric Bristow"/>
<link wikidata="Q946022" start="152786" end="152794" title="Reg Park" label="Reg Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="152829" end="152840" title="Universe Championships#Winners" label="Mr Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q204632" start="152865" end="152880" title="Gaelic football" label="Gaelic football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474330" start="152961" end="153001" title="All-Ireland Senior Football Championship" label="All-Ireland Senior Football Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132701" start="153025" end="153046" title="William Penny Brookes" label="William Penny Brookes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="153101" end="153114" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="153134" end="153137" title="International Olympic Committee" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q171166" start="153148" end="153170" title="Juan Antonio Samaranch" label="Juan Antonio Samaranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998646" start="153499" end="153518" title="Netball Superleague" label="Netball Superleague"/>
<link wikidata="Q950844" start="153539" end="153545" title="FA WSL" label="FA WSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q9675" start="153586" end="153597" title="Kelly Smith" label="Kelly Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359623" start="153640" end="153677" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Six Nations Championship" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Six Nations Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058797" start="153698" end="153731" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Cricket Super League" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Cricket Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q429399" start="153766" end="153780" title="Highland games" label="Highland games"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="153859" end="153863" title="Celt" label="Celt"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="153911" end="153929" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267946" start="154018" end="154052" title="BBC Sports Personality of the Year Award" label="BBC Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494048" start="154194" end="154237" title="BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year" label="BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="154446" end="154450" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="154496" end="154508" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q363717" start="154558" end="154568" title="Jonah Lomu" label="Jonah Lomu"/>
<link wikidata="Q529207" start="154621" end="154628" title="Ronaldo (Brazilian footballer)" label="Ronaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="154683" end="154696" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="154816" end="154827" title="health care" label="health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="154854" end="154877" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="155084" end="155090" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583737" start="155177" end="155193" title="Beveridge Report" label="Beveridge Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q325403" start="155475" end="155488" title="Aneurin Bevan" label="Aneurin Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="155726" end="155770" title="2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony#Second to the right, and straight on till morning (21:35–21:47)" label="2012 London Summer Olympics opening ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q134867" start="155783" end="155794" title="Danny Boyle" label="Danny Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q326079" start="155916" end="155934" title="Cancer Research UK" label="Cancer Research UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840694" start="155936" end="155964" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s Research UK" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s Research UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909428" start="155969" end="155993" title="Together for Short Lives" label="Together for Short Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q37103" start="156045" end="156065" title="Florence Nightingale" label="Florence Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q121176" start="156096" end="156103" title="nursing" label="nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13378080" start="156134" end="156148" title="nursing school" label="nursing school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143779" start="156152" end="156176" title="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital" label="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q841076" start="156199" end="156240" title="Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery" label="first secular nursing school in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="156254" end="156280" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352893" start="156306" end="156322" title="Notes on Nursing" label="Notes on Nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341419" start="156448" end="156466" title="Nightingale Pledge" label="Nightingale Pledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144569" start="156538" end="156562" title="International Nurses Day" label="International Nurses Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="157144" end="157161" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q584819" start="157401" end="157455" title="Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals" label="Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q29273" start="157536" end="157553" title="British Shorthair" label="British Shorthair"/>
<link wikidata="Q42543" start="157648" end="157682" title="Governing Council of the Cat Fancy" label="Governing Council of the Cat Fancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q844058" start="158054" end="158070" title="Clydesdale horse" label="Clydesdale horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631440" start="158107" end="158124" title="Household Cavalry" label="Household Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q210826" start="158127" end="158139" title="Thoroughbred" label="Thoroughbred"/>
<link wikidata="Q284617" start="158164" end="158177" title="Cleveland Bay" label="Cleveland Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617933" start="158217" end="158230" title="Highland pony" label="Highland pony"/>
<link wikidata="Q214720" start="158235" end="158248" title="Shetland pony" label="Shetland pony"/>
<link wikidata="Q38383" start="158299" end="158306" title="Bulldog" label="Bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q38287" start="158308" end="158328" title="Jack Russell Terrier" label="Jack Russell Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q38686" start="158330" end="158346" title="Golden Retriever" label="Golden Retriever"/>
<link wikidata="Q39330" start="158348" end="158365" title="Yorkshire Terrier" label="Yorkshire Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q38072" start="158367" end="158396" title="Cavalier King Charles Spaniel" label="Cavalier King Charles Spaniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37617" start="158398" end="158414" title="Airedale Terrier" label="Airedale Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q21102" start="158416" end="158422" title="Beagle" label="Beagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q37710" start="158424" end="158437" title="Border Collie" label="Border Collie"/>
<link wikidata="Q39285" start="158439" end="158465" title="Staffordshire Bull Terrier" label="Staffordshire Bull Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q38533" start="158467" end="158489" title="English Cocker Spaniel" label="English Cocker Spaniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39035" start="158491" end="158507" title="Scottish Terrier" label="Scottish Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q858459" start="158509" end="158520" title="Welsh Corgi" label="Welsh Corgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38080" start="158522" end="158533" title="Bullmastiff" label="Bullmastiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q38571" start="158535" end="158544" title="Greyhound" label="Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q29022" start="158546" end="158570" title="English Springer Spaniel" label="English Springer Spaniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37704" start="158575" end="158595" title="Old English Sheepdog" label="Old English Sheepdog"/>
<link wikidata="Q39431" start="158598" end="158613" title="The Kennel Club" label="The Kennel Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q126540" start="158865" end="158871" title="Crufts" label="Crufts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986432" start="158992" end="159004" title="List of Best in Show winners of Crufts" label="Best in Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641089" start="159087" end="159107" title="multi-national state" label="multi-national state"/>
<link wikidata="Q151948" start="159292" end="159296" title="kilt" label="kilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038222" start="159301" end="159319" title="Tam o&amp;#x27;shanter (hat)" label="Tam o&amp;#x27;shanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q216797" start="159325" end="159331" title="tartan" label="tartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="159458" end="159472" title="Gaelic culture" label="Gaelic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832313" start="159476" end="159501" title="traditional Welsh costume" label="traditional Welsh costume"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982025" start="159507" end="159516" title="Welsh hat" label="Welsh hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q670265" start="159546" end="159556" title="Eisteddfod" label="Eisteddfod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743902" start="159770" end="159781" title="smock-frock" label="smock-frock"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352002" start="159827" end="159831" title="Maud (plaid)" label="maud"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871566" start="159853" end="159877" title="English Country Clothing" label="English Country Clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15603247" start="159917" end="159925" title="flat cap" label="flat cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845639" start="159931" end="159942" title="brogue shoe" label="brogue shoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434" start="160004" end="160011" title="uniform" label="uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q597266" start="160025" end="160034" title="Yeomen Warders" label="Beefeater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179989" start="160042" end="160060" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Guard" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900271" start="160107" end="160119" title="Morris dance" label="Morris dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q76574" start="160166" end="160175" title="May dance" label="May dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q650570" start="160364" end="160374" title="Bowler hat" label="Bowler hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q15603247" start="160603" end="160611" title="flat cap" label="flat cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q10520" start="160803" end="160816" title="David Beckham" label="David Beckham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626966" start="160818" end="160830" title="Harry Styles" label="Harry Styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q192990" start="160835" end="160846" title="Guy Ritchie" label="Guy Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q714491" start="160870" end="160889" title="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer" label="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165749" start="160966" end="160986" title="William Henry Perkin" label="William Henry Perkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q66732478" start="161008" end="161021" title="synthetic dye" label="synthetic dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q421898" start="161023" end="161031" title="Mauveine" label="Mauveine"/>
<link wikidata="Q390107" start="161156" end="161164" title="Burberry" label="Burberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q654290" start="161197" end="161208" title="trench coat" label="trench coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126126" start="161318" end="161329" title="Dr. Martens" label="Dr. Martens"/>
<link wikidata="Q485417" start="161410" end="161418" title="skinhead" label="skinhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q193234" start="161478" end="161485" title="Scooter (motorcycle)" label="scooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q153946" start="161494" end="161499" title="punk subculture" label="punks"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="161510" end="161518" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q503685" start="161535" end="161539" title="Mod (subculture)" label="mods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069098" start="161640" end="161652" title="Chelsea boot" label="Chelsea boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095857" start="161658" end="161664" title="C. &amp;amp; J. Clark" label="Clarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="161799" end="161812" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="161908" end="161918" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="161920" end="161931" title="Edward VIII" label="Edward VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q561019" start="161937" end="161950" title="Beau Brummell" label="Beau Brummell"/>
<link wikidata="Q614806" start="161971" end="161975" title="Suit (clothing)" label="suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q44416" start="162110" end="162113" title="Necktie" label="tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432640" start="162176" end="162199" title="School uniforms in the United Kingdom" label="British school uniforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="162320" end="162327" title="Sport rowing" label="oarsmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420108" start="162331" end="162353" title="Exeter College Boat Club" label="Exeter College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q260142" start="162418" end="162433" title="Wellington boot" label="Wellington boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="162449" end="162489" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995719" start="162545" end="162558" title="white wedding" label="white wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="162583" end="162597" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="162660" end="162673" title="Albert, Prince Consort" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360134" start="162735" end="162758" title="conspicuous consumption" label="conspicuous consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q302371" start="162944" end="162979" title="wedding dress of Lady Diana Spencer" label="wedding dress of Lady Diana Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446735" start="163200" end="163219" title="London Fashion Week" label="London Fashion Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969966" start="163286" end="163309" title="British Fashion Council" label="British Fashion Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344889" start="163445" end="163459" title="Somerset House" label="Somerset House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354215" start="163463" end="163477" title="central London" label="central London"/>
<link wikidata="Q158067" start="163936" end="163953" title="Vivienne Westwood" label="Vivienne Westwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q207939" start="163955" end="163972" title="Alexander McQueen" label="Alexander McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q313607" start="163974" end="163987" title="John Galliano" label="John Galliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q232812" start="163992" end="164008" title="Stella McCartney" label="Stella McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q212531" start="164064" end="164073" title="Kate Moss" label="Kate Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q199369" start="164075" end="164089" title="Naomi Campbell" label="Naomi Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q531585" start="164091" end="164102" title="Jade Jagger" label="Jade Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703185" start="164104" end="164115" title="David Gandy" label="David Gandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395624" start="164117" end="164132" title="Cara Delevingne" label="Cara Delevingne"/>
<link wikidata="Q212006" start="164137" end="164162" title="Rosie Huntington-Whiteley" label="Rosie Huntington-Whiteley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="164188" end="164202" title="Princess Diana" label="Princess Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q234147" start="164292" end="164302" title="Mary Quant" label="Mary Quant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037910" start="164333" end="164348" title="Swinging London" label="Swinging London"/>
<link wikidata="Q230823" start="164422" end="164431" title="miniskirt" label="miniskirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14957233" start="164436" end="164445" title="hot pants" label="hot pants"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="164510" end="164514" title="Mini" label="Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500001" start="164602" end="164615" title="Austin Powers (film series)" label="Austin Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q454330" start="164666" end="164689" title="Charles Frederick Worth" label="Charles Frederick Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q216053" start="164725" end="164738" title="Haute couture" label="Haute couture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173323" start="164872" end="164882" title="Union Flag" label="Union Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q83278" start="164890" end="164925" title="Flag of the United Kingdom" label="national flag of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q614328" start="164955" end="164973" title="Saint George&amp;#x27;s Cross" label="cross of St George"/>
<link wikidata="Q102392" start="164983" end="165006" title="Flag of Scotland" label="saltire of Saint Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732400" start="165024" end="165043" title="Union of the Crowns" label="Union of the Crowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585890" start="165053" end="165078" title="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Saltire" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s saltire"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="165307" end="165325" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q165762" start="165342" end="165382" title="Royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom" label="Royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q138396" start="165550" end="165559" title="Britannia" label="Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q742971" start="165609" end="165618" title="John Bull" label="John Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q504918" start="165788" end="165798" title="Tudor rose" label="Tudor rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q21177" start="165821" end="165828" title="Cirsium vulgare" label="thistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154216" start="165843" end="165854" title="Ipomopsis longiflora" label="flax flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247368" start="165859" end="165867" title="shamrock" label="shamrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807269" start="165894" end="165898" title="leek" label="leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q29465" start="165903" end="165911" title="Narcissus (plant)" label="daffodil"/>
<link wikidata="Q165762" start="165988" end="166022" title="coat of arms of the United Kingdom" label="coat of arms of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009548" start="166059" end="166076" title="remembrance poppy" label="remembrance poppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770490" start="166193" end="166211" title="Remembrance Sunday" label="Remembrance Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621811" start="166236" end="166260" title="The Royal British Legion" label="The Royal British Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q712868" start="166477" end="166494" title="red telephone box" label="red telephone box"/>
<link wikidata="Q58663" start="166514" end="166522" title="pillar box" label="post box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524274" start="166574" end="166591" title="Giles Gilbert Scott" label="Sir Giles Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q170984" start="166644" end="166649" title="Crown (headgear)" label="crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="166755" end="166769" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q370241" start="166780" end="166796" title="Rowland Hill (postal reformer)" label="Sir Rowland Hill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="166842" end="166867" title="Penny Post#United Kingdom" label="reduction in postal rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q107701" start="166909" end="166920" title="Penny Black" label="Penny Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q23215" start="167057" end="167062" title="Adele" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q21172725" start="167082" end="167087" title="Hello (Adele song)" label="Hello"/>
<link wikidata="Q146027" start="167114" end="167127" title="One Direction" label="One Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q391503" start="167147" end="167159" title="Take Me Home (One Direction album)" label="Take Me Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="167189" end="167200" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q682846" start="167220" end="167281" title="The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars" label="The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q192425" start="167313" end="167321" title="postcard" label="postcard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117649" start="167338" end="167351" title="Theodore Hook" label="Theodore Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367868" start="167357" end="167363" title="Fulham" label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="167587" end="167595" title="George V of the United Kingdom" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="167597" end="167608" title="Edward VIII" label="Edward VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="167610" end="167619" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="167624" end="167636" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q915196" start="167668" end="167681" title="greeting card" label="greeting card"/>
<link wikidata="Q537906" start="167813" end="167827" title="Sir Henry Cole" label="Sir Henry Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699529" start="167906" end="167927" title="John Callcott Horsley" label="John Callcott Horsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q622508" start="167950" end="167964" title="Christmas card" label="Christmas card"/>
<link wikidata="Q25334" start="168085" end="168090" title="European robin" label="robin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="168561" end="168581" title="Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day#Modern times" label="Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189047" start="168736" end="168749" title="Romance (love)" label="romantic love"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="168771" end="168787" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q851650" start="168831" end="168843" title="courtly love" label="courtly love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488701" start="168880" end="168899" title="Parlement of Foules" label="Parlement of Foules"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368661" start="169118" end="169131" title="Roses Are Red" label="Roses Are Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661" start="169435" end="169441" title="Verse (poetry)" label="verses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="170092" end="170100" title="devolution" label="devolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267668" start="170184" end="170207" title="Devolved English parliament" label="devolved administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="170283" end="170296" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="170352" end="170368" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q131293161" start="170409" end="170422" title="infant school" label="infant school"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="170489" end="170503" title="grammar school" label="grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443856" start="170525" end="170548" title="secondary modern school" label="secondary modern school"/>
<link wikidata="Q682697" start="170670" end="170690" title="comprehensive school" label="comprehensive school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972829" start="170823" end="170837" title="public school (England)" label="public schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="170839" end="170843" title="Eton College" label="Eton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247373" start="170845" end="170851" title="Harrow School" label="Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280221" start="170853" end="170863" title="Shrewsbury School" label="Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143281" start="170868" end="170873" title="Rugby School" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060630" start="171018" end="171037" title="School corporal punishment" label="corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612033" start="171233" end="171248" title="School uniforms in England" label="school uniforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490224" start="171313" end="171328" title="religious dress" label="religious dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q172317" start="171352" end="171357" title="hijab" label="hijab"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="171362" end="171366" title="Sikh" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664350" start="171546" end="171573" title="local education authority" label="local education authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756957" start="171576" end="171603" title="List of universities in England" label="England&amp;#x27;s universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="171670" end="171693" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q189022" start="171695" end="171718" title="Imperial College London" label="Imperial College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="171724" end="171744" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="171749" end="171774" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="171829" end="171857" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="171869" end="171895" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481050" start="172006" end="172028" title="London Business School" label="London Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="172164" end="172179" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="172187" end="172202" title="Academic degree" label="Academic degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="172403" end="172428" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341102" start="172448" end="172477" title="education in Northern Ireland" label="education in Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="172652" end="172668" title="public education" label="public education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882536" start="172832" end="172850" title="non-denominational" label="non-denominational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="172973" end="172985" title="state school" label="state system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="173030" end="173044" title="post-secondary education" label="post-secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q765192" start="173046" end="173063" title="further education" label="further education"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919096" start="173092" end="173125" title="Scottish Qualifications Authority" label="Scottish Qualifications Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="173263" end="173282" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="173291" end="173381" title="Scottish Executive" label="Scottish Executive Education and Enterprise, Transport &amp;amp; Lifelong Learning Departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q969045" start="173427" end="173444" title="local government of Scotland" label="local authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="173584" end="173595" title="high school" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171033" start="173648" end="173665" title="Royal High School (Edinburgh)" label="Royal High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="173716" end="173725" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510151" start="173885" end="173915" title="Learning and Teaching Scotland" label="Learning and Teaching Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q491955" start="173942" end="173963" title="List of universities in Scotland" label="Scottish universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998530" start="174150" end="174182" title="ancient universities of Scotland" label="ancient universities of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785149" start="174191" end="174205" title="Master of Arts (Scotland)" label="Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="174226" end="174232" title="academic degree" label="degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="174236" end="174246" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="174252" end="174275" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="174343" end="174371" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667285" start="174399" end="174419" title="Ancient Universities" label="Ancient Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="174457" end="174484" title="National Assembly for Wales" label="National Assembly for Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341180" start="174508" end="174526" title="education in Wales" label="education in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406299" start="174767" end="174789" title="Welsh medium education" label="Welsh medium education"/>
<link wikidata="Q872181" start="174877" end="174885" title="Scouting" label="Scouting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12665" start="174970" end="174989" title="Robert Baden-Powell" label="Robert Baden-Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935340" start="175040" end="175056" title="Brownsea Island Scout camp" label="first Scout camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q751086" start="175060" end="175075" title="Brownsea Island" label="Brownsea Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q840584" start="175151" end="175168" title="Scouting for Boys" label="Scouting for Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q485365" start="175209" end="175220" title="Bear Grylls" label="Bear Grylls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963442" start="175241" end="175252" title="Chief Scout (The Scout Association)" label="Chief Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983621" start="175476" end="175494" title="Demographics of the United Kingdom" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q875016" start="175568" end="175576" title="terrace (architecture)" label="terraced"/>
<link wikidata="Q164679" start="175636" end="175656" title="Great Fire of London" label="Great Fire of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419624" start="175797" end="175810" title="semi-detached" label="semi-detached"/>
<link wikidata="Q21585398" start="175930" end="175945" title="council estates" label="council estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="175971" end="175984" title="country house" label="country house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="175990" end="176002" title="stately home" label="stately home"/>
<link wikidata="Q48015" start="176477" end="176487" title="South East England" label="South East"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="176579" end="176587" title="Marriage" label="conjugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q721790" start="176588" end="176605" title="extended family" label="extended families"/>
<link wikidata="Q720069" start="176609" end="176625" title="nuclear family" label="nuclear families"/>
<link wikidata="Q273005" start="176645" end="176653" title="Economic system" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672163" start="176846" end="176857" title="gender role" label="gender role"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="176989" end="177010" title="feminism" label="emancipation of women"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="177090" end="177106" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q200535" start="177116" end="177125" title="affluent" label="affluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q721790" start="177299" end="177314" title="extended family" label="extended family"/>
<link wikidata="Q720069" start="177370" end="177384" title="nuclear family" label="nuclear family"/>
<link wikidata="Q179179" start="177503" end="177516" title="interest rate" label="interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398203" start="177640" end="177651" title="key workers" label="key workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q814610" start="177680" end="177697" title="emergency service" label="emergency service"/>
<link wikidata="Q48015" start="177774" end="177784" title="South East England" label="South East"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086349" start="179134" end="179154" title="Mental health in the United Kingdom" label="mental health issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="179500" end="179512" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q334261" start="179988" end="180000" title="Maria Miller" label="Maria Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="180478" end="180488" title="given name" label="given name"/>
<link wikidata="Q101352" start="180624" end="180631" title="surname" label="surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002520" start="180684" end="180717" title="University of the West of England" label="University of the West of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="180850" end="180863" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158446" start="180999" end="181004" title="Smith (surname)" label="Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q59853" start="181006" end="181011" title="Jones (surname)" label="Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688722" start="181013" end="181021" title="Williams (surname)" label="Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q13421990" start="181023" end="181028" title="Brown (surname)" label="Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q15080511" start="181030" end="181036" title="Taylor (surname)" label="Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158485" start="181038" end="181045" title="Johnson (surname)" label="Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12794688" start="181051" end="181054" title="Lee (English name)" label="Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q245025" start="181079" end="181090" title="middle name" label="middle name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158446" start="181283" end="181288" title="Smith (surname)" label="Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158382" start="181322" end="181328" title="Fuller (surname)" label="Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119151" start="181362" end="181367" title="Clark" label="Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794217" start="181381" end="181387" title="Cooper (surname)" label="Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671214" start="181401" end="181405" title="Cook (surname)" label="Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q14650387" start="181419" end="181428" title="Carpenter (surname)" label="Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658113" start="181442" end="181448" title="Bailey (surname)" label="Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628041" start="181462" end="181468" title="Parker (surname)" label="Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q568872" start="181523" end="181529" title="Palmer (surname)" label="Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q254906" start="181563" end="181567" title="Hunt (surname)" label="Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605060" start="181600" end="181606" title="Miller (name)" label="Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158605" start="181638" end="181644" title="Walker (surname)" label="Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15080511" start="181679" end="181685" title="Taylor (surname)" label="Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12804512" start="181699" end="181705" title="Turner (surname)" label="Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777139" start="181719" end="181725" title="Knight (surname)" label="Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q296150" start="181739" end="181745" title="Slater (disambiguation)" label="Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q12664711" start="181759" end="181764" title="Mason (surname)" label="Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q223912" start="181798" end="181804" title="Carter (disambiguation)" label="Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594455" start="181818" end="181824" title="Wright" label="Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q13421990" start="181888" end="181893" title="Brown (surname)" label="Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q12678727" start="181949" end="181954" title="Young (surname)" label="Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215200" start="182005" end="182010" title="White (surname)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026943" start="182090" end="182094" title="Camp (surname)" label="Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q973239" start="182108" end="182112" title="Hill (surname)" label="Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484464" start="182126" end="182130" title="Bush (surname)" label="Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q12794688" start="182162" end="182165" title="Lee (English name)" label="Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158452" start="182179" end="182183" title="Wood (surname)" label="Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762298" start="182197" end="182203" title="Holmes (surname)" label="Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13583115" start="182237" end="182246" title="Underwood (surname)" label="Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551523" start="182260" end="182264" title="Hall (surname)" label="Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354011" start="182278" end="182284" title="Brooks (surname)" label="Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12803555" start="182318" end="182323" title="Stone (surname)" label="Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q10588869" start="182357" end="182362" title="Moore (surname)" label="Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793334" start="182376" end="182381" title="Perry (surname)" label="Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308329" start="182413" end="182419" title="Murray (surname)" label="Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417266" start="182433" end="182443" title="Everingham" label="Everingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q115300417" start="182457" end="182463" title="Burton (name)" label="Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q21450552" start="182499" end="182507" title="Hamilton (surname and title)" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479191" start="182772" end="182782" title="Richardson (surname)" label="Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q59853" start="182796" end="182801" title="Jones (surname)" label="Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688722" start="182832" end="182840" title="Williams (surname)" label="Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413324" start="182854" end="182860" title="Thomas (surname)" label="Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732758" start="182874" end="182881" title="Jackson (name)" label="Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645480" start="182895" end="182901" title="Wilson (surname)" label="Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2803433" start="182915" end="182923" title="Thompson (surname)" label="Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158485" start="182937" end="182944" title="Johnson (surname)" label="Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859343" start="182958" end="182964" title="Harris (surname)" label="Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260663" start="182978" end="182983" title="Evans (surname)" label="Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2800825" start="182997" end="183004" title="Simpson (surname)" label="Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149756" start="183018" end="183024" title="Willis (surname)" label="Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177810" start="183038" end="183044" title="Davies" label="Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q14648920" start="183058" end="183066" title="Reynolds (surname)" label="Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q351735" start="183080" end="183085" title="Adams (surname)" label="Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674114" start="183099" end="183105" title="Dawson (surname)" label="Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q426463" start="183119" end="183124" title="Lewis (surname)" label="Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16471355" start="183138" end="183144" title="Rogers (surname)" label="Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953798" start="183158" end="183164" title="Murphy" label="Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16878076" start="183178" end="183187" title="Nicholson (surname)" label="Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798428" start="183201" end="183209" title="Robinson (name)" label="Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158612" start="183223" end="183229" title="Powell (surname)" label="Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2694490" start="183243" end="183251" title="Ferguson (name)" label="Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12652678" start="183265" end="183270" title="Davis (surname)" label="Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691159" start="183284" end="183291" title="Edwards (surname)" label="Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720681" start="183305" end="183311" title="Hudson (surname)" label="Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646493" start="183325" end="183332" title="Roberts (surname)" label="Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q123479537" start="183346" end="183354" title="Harrison (name)" label="Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184721" start="183368" end="183374" title="Watson (surname)" label="Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778569" start="183598" end="183607" title="Macdonald (name)" label="MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094942" start="183621" end="183627" title="Clan Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716369" start="183641" end="183650" title="Henderson (surname)" label="Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13627772" start="183664" end="183673" title="Armstrong (surname)" label="Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q17864440" start="183687" end="183692" title="Grant (surname)" label="Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665316" start="183706" end="183713" title="Cameron (surname)" label="Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801971" start="183727" end="183734" title="Stewart (name)" label="Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677358" start="183748" end="183755" title="Douglas (surname)" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q738859" start="183769" end="183777" title="Crawford (name)" label="Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665383" start="183791" end="183799" title="Campbell (surname)" label="Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336196" start="183813" end="183820" title="Houston (surname)" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q12020943" start="183834" end="183840" title="Hunter (name)" label="Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="183869" end="183874" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="183879" end="183894" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165479" start="184085" end="184092" title="Saint Patrick" label="Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q80979" start="184131" end="184138" title="Brigid of Kildare" label="Bridget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="184187" end="184195" title="Bible" label="Biblical"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="184218" end="184224" title="saints" label="saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="184242" end="184256" title="Gothic Revival" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="184264" end="184277" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="184285" end="184296" title="Old English language" label="Anglo Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677161" start="184520" end="184528" title="Jennifer (given name)" label="Jennifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="184532" end="184539" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q272054" start="184548" end="184557" title="Guinevere" label="Guinevere"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="184583" end="184592" title="Arthurian" label="Arthurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="184633" end="184652" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3793807" start="184709" end="184734" title="The Doctor&amp;#x27;s Dilemma (play)" label="The Doctor&amp;#x27;s Dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q630846" start="184892" end="184899" title="Jessica (given name)" label="Jessica"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="184906" end="184917" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q206400" start="184936" end="184958" title="The Merchant of Venice" label="The Merchant of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q632264" start="185138" end="185144" title="Olivia (given name)" label="Olivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221211" start="185206" end="185219" title="Twelfth Night" label="Twelfth Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q951694" start="185234" end="185241" title="Vanessa (name)" label="Vanessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41166" start="185257" end="185271" title="Jonathan Swift" label="Jonathan Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738946" start="185290" end="185309" title="Cadenus and Vanessa" label="Cadenus and Vanessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q262119" start="185378" end="185384" title="Pamela (name)" label="Pamela"/>
<link wikidata="Q295941" start="185407" end="185424" title="Samuel Richardson" label="Samuel Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048624" start="185441" end="185465" title="Pamela; or, Virtue Rewarded" label="title for his 1740 novel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="185480" end="185519" title="Most popular given names#Europe" label="Most popular names of England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="185522" end="185560" title="Most popular given names#Europe#" label="Most popular names of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="185563" end="185593" title="Most popular given names#Europe#" label="Most popular names of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="185596" end="185627" title="List of most common surnames in Europe#England" label="Most common surnames in England"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="185630" end="185670" title="List of most common surnames in Europe#Northern Ireland" label="Most common surnames in Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="185673" end="185705" title="List of most common surnames in Europe#Scotland" label="Most common surnames in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="185708" end="185737" title="List of most common surnames in Europe#Wales" label="Most common surnames in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q918570" start="185754" end="185768" title="British humour" label="British humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q910019" start="185771" end="185810" title="Department for Culture, Media and Sport" label="Department for Culture, Media and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q124619348" start="185846" end="185887" title="Minister for Culture and External Affairs" label="Minister for Culture and External Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845365" start="185924" end="185938" title="Shrove Tuesday" label="Shrove Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845365" start="185940" end="185951" title="Pancake Day" label="Pancake Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q80949" start="185955" end="185976" title="April Fools&amp;#x27; Day" label="April Fools&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647491" start="185979" end="186003" title="Lord Kitchener Wants You" label="Lord Kitchener Wants You"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644593" start="186006" end="186042" title="List of venues in the United Kingdom" label="List of venues in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15290981" start="186045" end="186090" title="Social history of Postwar Britain (1945–1979)" label="Social history of Postwar Britain (1945–1979)"/>
<link wikidata="Q99349393" start="186093" end="186144" title="Social history of the United Kingdom (1979–present)" label="Social history of the United Kingdom (1979–present)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="186147" end="186180" title="Commonwealth of Nations#Culture" label="Commonwealth of Nations – Culture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="275014" wikidata="Q181123" url="?curid=275014" title="Sanchi">
<text>Sanchi Stupa is a Buddhist complex, famous for its Great Stupa, on a hilltop at Sanchi Town in Raisen District of the State of Madhya Pradesh, India. It is located, about 23 kilometers from Raisen town, district headquarter and north-east of Bhopal, capital of Madhya Pradesh.

The Great Stupa at Sanchi is one of the oldest stone structures in India, and an important monument to the historical architecture of India. It was originally commissioned by the Mauryan emperor Ashoka in the 3rd century BCE. Its nucleus was a simple hemispherical brick structure built over the relics of the Buddha. It was crowned by the chatra, a parasol-like structure symbolising high rank, which was intended to honour and shelter the relics. The original construction work of this stupa was overseen by Ashoka, whose wife Devi was the daughter of a merchant of nearby Vidisha. Sanchi was also her birthplace as well as the venue of her and Ashoka&#x27;s wedding. In the 1st century BCE, four elaborately carved toranas (ornamental gateways) and a balustrade encircling the entire structure were added. The stupa at Sanchi built during the Mauryan period was made of bricks. The composite flourished until the 11th century.

Sanchi is the center of a region with a number of stupas, all within a few miles of Sanchi, including Satdhara (9 km to the W of Sanchi, 40 stupas, the Relics of Sariputra and Mahamoggallana, now enshrined in the new Vihara, were unearthed there), Bhojpur (also called Morel Khurd, a fortified hilltop with 60 stupas) and Andher (respectively 11 km and 17 km SE of Sanchi), as well as Sonari (10 km SW of Sanchi). Further south, about 100 km away, is Saru Maru. Bharhut is 300 km to the northeast.

Sanchi Stupa is depicted on the reverse side of the Indian currency note of 200 to signify its importance to Indian cultural heritage.

== Transport ==
The nearest airport is Bhopal which is 55 km away from it. Trains are available from Bhopal and Habibganj railway station to Sanchi railway station. Buses are available from Bhopal and Vidisha.

==Overview==
The monuments at Sanchi today comprise a series of Buddhist monuments starting from the Mauryan Empire period (3rd century BCE), continuing with the Gupta Empire period (5th century CE), and ending around the 12th century CE. It is probably the best preserved group of Buddhist monuments in India. The oldest, and also the largest monument, the Great Stupa also called Stupa No. 1, initially built under the Mauryans, and adorned with one of the Pillars of Ashoka. During the following centuries, especially under the Shungas and the Satavahanas, the Great Stupa was enlarged and decorated with gates and railings, and smaller stupas were also built in the vicinity, especially Stupa No.2, and Stupa No.3.

Simultaneously, various temple structures were also built, down to the Gupta Empire period and later. Altogether, Sanchi encompasses most of the evolutions of ancient Indian architecture and ancient Buddhist architecture in India, from the early stages of Buddhism and its first artistic expression, to the decline of the religion in the subcontinent.

== Mauryan Period (3rd century BCE)==
The &quot;Great Stupa&quot; at Sanchi is the oldest structure and was originally commissioned by the emperor Ashoka the Great of the Maurya Empire in the 3rd century BCE. Its nucleus was a hemispherical brick structure built over the sacred relics of the Buddha, with a raised terrace encompassing its base, and a railing and stone umbrella on the summit, the chatra, a parasol-like structure symbolizing high rank. The original Stupa only had about half the diameter of today&#x27;s stupa, which is the result of enlargement by the Sungas. It was covered in brick, in contrast to the stones that now cover it.

According to one version of the Mahavamsa, the Buddhist chronicle of Sri Lanka, Ashoka was closely connected to the region of Sanchi. When he was heir-apparent and was journeying as Viceroy to Ujjain, he is said to have halted at Vidisha (10 kilometers from Sanchi), and there married the daughter of a local banker. She was called Devi and later gave Ashoka two sons, Ujjeniya and Mahendra, and a daughter Sanghamitta. After Ashoka&#x27;s accession, Mahendra headed a Buddhist mission, sent probably under the auspices of the Emperor, to Sri Lanka, and that before setting out to the island he visited his mother at Chetiyagiri near Vidisa, thought to be Sanchi. He was lodged there in a sumptuous vihara or monastery, which she herself is said to have had erected.

=== Ashoka pillar ===
A pillar of finely polished sandstone, one of the Pillars of Ashoka, was also erected on the side of the main Torana gateway. The bottom part of the pillar still stands. The upper parts of the pillar are at the nearby Sanchi Archaeological Museum. The capital consists in four lions, which probably supported a Wheel of Law, as also suggested by later illustrations among the Sanchi reliefs. The pillar has an Ashokan inscription (Schism Edict) and an inscription in the ornamental Sankha Lipi from the Gupta period. The Ashokan inscription is engraved in early Brahmi characters. It is unfortunately much damaged, but the commands it contains appear to be the same as those recorded in the Sarnath and Kausambi edicts, which together form the three known instances of Ashoka&#x27;s &quot;Schism Edict&quot;. It relates to the penalties for schism in the Buddhist sangha:

The pillar, when intact, was about 42 feet in height and consisted of round and slightly tapering monolithic shaft, with bell-shaped capital surmounted by an abacus and a crowning ornament of four lions, set back to back, the whole finely finished and polished to a remarkable luster from top to bottom. The abacus is adorned with four flame palmette designs separated one from the other by pairs of geese, symbolical perhaps of the flock of the Buddha&#x27;s disciples. The lions from the summit, though now quite disfigured, still testify to the skills of the sculptors.

The sandstone out of which the pillar is carved came from the quarries of Chunar several hundred miles away, implying that the builders were able to transport a block of stone over forty feet in length and weighing almost as many tons over such a distance. They probably used water transport, using rafts during the rainy season up until the Ganges, Jumna and Betwa rivers.

===Temple 40===

Another structure which has been dated, at least partially, to the 3rd century BCE, is the so-called Temple 40, one of the first instances of free-standing temples in India. Temple 40 has remains of three different periods, the earliest period dating to the Maurya age, which probably makes it contemporary to the creation of the Great Stupa. An inscription even suggests it might have been established by Bindusara, the father of Ashoka. The original 3rd century BCE temple was built on a high rectangular stone platform, 26.52×14×3.35 metres, with two flights of stairs to the east and the west. It was an apsidal hall, probably made of timber. It was burnt down sometime in the 2nd century BCE. 

Later, the platform was enlarged to 41.76×27.74 metres and re-used to erect a pillared hall with fifty columns (5×10) of which stumps remain. Some of these pillars have inscriptions of the 2nd century BCE. In the 7th or 8th century a small shrine was established in one corner of the platform, re-using some of the pillars and putting them in their present position.

== Shunga period (2nd century BCE)==
On the basis of Ashokavadana, it is presumed that the stupa may have been vandalized at one point sometime in the 2nd century BCE, an event some have related to the rise of the Shunga emperor Pushyamitra Shunga who overtook the Mauryan Empire as an army general. It has been suggested that Pushyamitra may have destroyed the original stupa, and his son Agnimitra rebuilt it. The original brick stupa was covered with stone during the Shunga period.

Given the rather decentralized and fragmentary nature of the Shunga state, with many cities actually issuing their own coinage, as well as the relative dislike of the Shungas for Buddhism, some authors argue that the constructions of that period in Sanchi cannot really be called &quot;Shunga&quot;. They were not the result of royal sponsorship, in contrast with what happened during the Mauryas, and the dedications at Sanchi were private or collective, rather than the result of royal patronage.

The style of the Shunga period decorations at Sanchi bear a close similarity to those of Bharhut, as well as the peripheral balustrades at the Mahabodhi Temple in Bodh Gaya.
=== Great Stupa (No 1) ===

During the later rule of the Shunga, the stupa was expanded with stone slabs to almost twice its original size. The dome was flattened near the top and crowned by three superimposed parasols within a square railing. With its many tiers it was a symbol of the dharma, the Wheel of the Law. The dome was set on a high circular drum meant for circumambulation, which could be accessed via a double staircase. A second stone pathway at ground level was enclosed by a stone balustrade. The railings around Stupa 1 do not have artistic reliefs. These are only slabs, with some dedicatory inscriptions. These elements are dated to circa 150 BCE, or 175–125 BCE. Although the railings are made up of stone, they are copied from a wooden prototype, and as John Marshall has observed the joints between the coping stones have been cut at a slant, as wood is naturally cut, and not vertically as stone should be cut. Besides the short records of the donors written on the railings in Brahmi script, there are two later inscriptions on the railings added during the time of the Gupta Period. Some reliefs are visible on the stairway balustrade, but they are probably slightly later than those at Stupa No2, and are dated to 125–100 BCE. Some authors consider that these reliefs, rather crude and without obvious Buddhist connotations, are the oldest reliefs of all Sanchi, slightly older even than the reliefs of Sanchi Stupa No.2.

=== Stupa No. 2: the first Buddhist reliefs ===

The stupas which seem to have been commissioned during the rule of the Shungas are the Second and then the Third stupas (but not the highly decorated gateways, which are from the following Satavahana period, as known from inscriptions), following the ground balustrade and stone casing of the Great Stupa (Stupa No 1). The reliefs are dated to circa 115 BCE for the medallions, and 80 BCE for the pillar carvings, slightly before the reliefs of Bharhut for the earliest, with some reworks down to the 1st century CE.
Stupa No. 2 was established later than the Great Stupa, but it is probably displaying the earliest architectural ornaments. For the first time, clearly Buddhist themes are represented, particularly the four events in the life of the Buddha that are: the Nativity, the Enlightenment, the First Sermon and the Decease.

The decorations of Stupa No. 2 have been called &quot;the oldest extensive stupa decoration in existence&quot;, and this Stupa is considered as the birthplace of Jataka illustrations. The reliefs at Stupa No.2 bear mason marks in Kharoshthi, as opposed to the local Brahmi script. This seems to imply that foreign workers from the north-west (from the region of Gandhara, where Kharoshthi was the current script) were responsible for the motifs and figures that can be found on the railings of the stupa. Foreigners from Gandhara are otherwise known to have visited the region around the same time: in 115 BCE, the embassy of Heliodorus from Indo-Greek king Antialkidas to the court of the Sungas king Bhagabhadra in nearby Vidisha is recorded, in which Heliodorus established the Heliodorus pillar in a dedication to Vāsudeva. This would indicate that relations had improved at that time, and that people traveled between the two realms.

=== Stupa No. 3 ===

Stupa No. 3 was built during the time of the Shungas, who also built the railing around it as well as the staircase. The Relics of Sariputra and Mahamoggallana, the disciples of the Buddha are said to have been placed in Stupa No. 3, and relics boxes were excavated tending to confirm this.

The reliefs on the railings are said to be slightly later than those of Stupa No. 2.

The single torana gateway oriented to the south is not Shunga, and was built later under the Satavahanas, probably circa 50 BCE.

=== Sunga Pillar ===

Pillar 25 at Sanchi is also attributed to the Sungas, in the 2nd–1st century BCE, and is considered as similar in design to the Heliodorus pillar, locally called &quot;Kham Baba&quot; pillar, dedicated by Heliodorus, the ambassador to the Indo-Greek king Antialkidas, in nearby Vidisha . That it belongs to about the period of the Sunga, is clear alike from its design and from the character of the surface dressing.

The height of the pillar, including the capital, is 15 ft, its diameter at the base 1 ft. 4 in. Up to a height of 4 ft. 6 in. the shaft is octagonal; above that, sixteen-sided. In the octagonal portion all the facets are flat, but in the upper section the alternate facets are fluted, the eight other sides being produced by a concave chamfering of the arrises of the octagon. This method of finishing off the arris at the point of transition between the two sections are features characteristic of the second and first centuries BCE. The west side of the shaft is split off, but the tenon at the top, to which the capital was mortised, is still preserved. The capital is of the usual bell-shaped Persepolitan type, with lotus leaves falling over the shoulder of the bell. Above this is a circular cable necking, then a second circular necking relieved by a bead and lozenge pattern, and, finally, a deep square abacus adorned with a railing in relief. The crowning feature, probably a lion, has disappeared.

== Satavahana period (1st century BCE – 1st century CE)==

The Satavahana Empire under Satakarni II conquered eastern Malwa from the Shungas. This gave the Satavahanas access to the Buddhist site of Sanchi, in which they are credited with the building of the decorated gateways around the original Mauryan Empire and Sunga stupas. From the 1st century BCE, the highly decorated gateways were built. The balustrade and the gateways were also colored. Later gateways/toranas are generally dated to the 1st century CE.

The &quot;Siri-Satakani inscription&quot; in the Brahmi script records the gift of one of the top architraves of the Southern Gateway by the artisans of the Satavahana king Satakarni II:
There are some uncertainties about the date and the identity of the Satakarni in question, as a king Satakarni is mentioned in the Hathigumpha inscription which is sometimes dated to the 2nd century BCE. Also, several Satavahana kings used the name &quot;Satakarni&quot;, which complicates the matter. Usual dates given for the gateways range from 50 BCE to the 1st century CE, and the builder of the earliest gateways is generally considered to be Satakarni II, who ruled in 50-25 BCE. Another early Satavahana monument is known, Cave No.19 of king Kanha (100-70 BCE) at the Nasik Caves, which is much less developed artistically than the Sanchi toranas.

=== Material and carving technique ===

Although made of stone, the torana gateways were carved and constructed in the manner of wood and the gateways were covered with narrative sculptures. It has also been suggested that the stone reliefs were made by ivory carvers from nearby Vidisha, and an inscription on the Southern Gateway of the Great Stupa (&quot;The Worship of the Bodhisattva&#x27;s hair&quot;) was dedicated by the Guild of Ivory Carvers of Vidisha.
The inscription reads: &quot;Vedisakehi damtakārehi rupakammam katam&quot; meaning &quot;The ivory-workers from Vidisha have done the carving&quot;.

The reliefs show scenes from the life of the Buddha integrated with everyday events that would be familiar to the onlookers and so make it easier for them to understand the Buddhist creed as relevant to their lives. At Sanchi and most other stupas the local population donated money for the embellishment of the stupa to attain spiritual merit. There was no direct royal patronage. Devotees, both men and women, who donated money towards a sculpture would often choose their favourite scene from the life of the Buddha and then have their names inscribed on it. This accounts for the random repetition of particular episodes on the stupa.

On these stone carvings the Buddha was never depicted as a human figure, due to aniconism in Buddhism. Instead the artists chose to represent him by certain attributes, such as the horse on which he left his father&#x27;s home, his footprints, or a canopy under the bodhi tree at the point of his enlightenment. The human body was thought to be too confining for the Buddha.

=== Architecture: evolution of the load-bearing pillar capital ===

Similarities have been found in the designs of the capitals of various areas of northern India from the time of Ashoka to the time of the Satavahanas at Sanchi: particularly between the Pataliputra capital at the Mauryan Empire capital of Pataliputra (3rd century BCE), the pillar capitals at the Sunga Empire Buddhist complex of Bharhut (2nd century BCE), and the pillar capitals of the Satavahanas at Sanchi (1st centuries BCE/CE).

The earliest known example in India, the Pataliputra capital (3rd century BCE) is decorated with rows of repeating rosettes, ovolos and bead and reel mouldings, wave-like scrolls and side volutes with central rosettes, around a prominent central flame palmette, which is the main motif. These are quite similar to Classical Greek designs, and the capital has been described as quasi-Ionic. Greek influence, as well as Persian Achaemenid influence have been suggested.

The Sarnath capital is a pillar capital discovered in the archaeological excavations at the ancient Buddhist site of Sarnath. The pillar displays Ionic volutes and palmettes. It has been variously dated from the 3rd century BCE during the Mauryan Empire period, to the 1st century BCE, during the Sunga Empire period. One of the faces shows a galopping horse carrying a rider, while the other face shows an elephant and its mahaut.

The pillar capital in Bharhut, dated to the 2nd century BCE during the Sunga Empire period, also incorporates many of these characteristics, with a central anta capital with many rosettes, beads-and-reels, as well as a central palmette design. Importantly, recumbent animals (lions, symbols of Buddhism) were added, in the style of the Pillars of Ashoka.

The Sanchi pillar capital is keeping the general design, seen at Bharhut a century earlier, of recumbent lions grouped around a central square-section post, with the central design of a flame palmette, which started with the Pataliputra capital. However the design of the central post is now simpler, with the flame palmette taking all the available room. Elephants were later used to adorn the pillar capitals (still with the central palmette design), and lastly, Yakshas (here the palmette design disappears).

=== Main themes of the reliefs ===
==== Jatakas ====

Various Jatakas are illustrated. These are Buddhist moral tales relating edifying events of the former lives of the Buddha as he was still a Bodhisattva. Among the Jatakas being depicted are the Syama Jataka, the Vessantara Jataka and the Mahakapi Jataka.

==== Miracles ====
Numerous miracles made by the Buddha are recorded. Among them:
* The miracle of the Buddha walking on water.
* The miracle of fire and wood

==== Temptation of the Buddha ====
Numerous scene refer to the temptation of the Buddha, when he was confronted with the seductive daughters of Mara and with his army of demons. Having resisted the temptations of Mara, the Buddha finds enlightenment.
Other similar scenes on the same subject:
* Temptation of the Buddha with Mara&#x27;s army fleeing.
* Enlightenment of the Buddha with Mara&#x27;s army fleeing.
==== War over the Buddha&#x27;s Relics ====

The southern gate of Stupa No1, thought to be oldest and main entrance to the stupa, has several depictions of the story of the Buddha&#x27;s relics, starting with the War over the Relics.

After the death of the Buddha, the Mallakas of Kushinagar wanted to keep his ashes, but the other kingdoms also wanting their part went to war and besieged the city of Kushinagar. Finally, an agreement was reached, and the Buddha&#x27;s cremation relics were divided among 8 royal families and his disciples. This famous view shows warfare techniques at the time of the Satavahanas, as well as a view of the city of Kushinagar of the Mallakas, which has been relied on for the understanding of ancient Indian cities.

Other narrative panels related to the War over the Buddha&#x27;s Relics at Sanchi are:
* &quot;&quot;The King of the Mallakas bringing the relics of the Buddha to Kushinagara&quot;, right after the death of the Buddha, before the War itself. In this relief, the king is seen seated on an elephant, holding the relics on his head.
* &quot;The siege of Kushinagara by the seven kings&quot;&quot;, another relief on the same subject.

==== Removal of the relics by Ashoka ====
According to Buddhist legend, a few centuries later, the relics would be removed from the eight guardian kingdoms by King Ashoka, and enshrined into 84,000 stupas. Ashoka obtained the ashes from seven of the guardian kingdoms, but failed to take the ashes from the Nagas at Ramagrama who were too powerful, and were able to keep them. This scene is depicted in one of the transversal portions of the southern gateway of Stupa No1 at Sanchi. Ashoka is shown on the right in his chariot and his army, the stupa with the relics is in the center, and the Naga kings with their serpent hoods at the extreme left under the trees.
==== Building of the Bodh Gaya temple by Ashoka ====
Ashoka went to Bodh Gaya to visit the Bodhi Tree under which the Buddha had his enlightenment, as described his Major Rock Edict No.8. However Ashoka was profoundly grieved when he discovered that the sacred pipal tree was not properly being taken care of and dying out due to the neglect of Queen Tiṣyarakṣitā.

As a consequence, Ashoka endeavoured to take care of the Bodhi Tree, and built a temple around it. This temple became the center of Bodh Gaya. A sculpture at Sanchi, southern gateway of Stupa No1, shows Ashoka in grief being supported by his two Queens. Then the relief above shows the Bodhi Tree prospering inside its new temple. Numerous other sculptures at Sanchi show scenes of devotion towards the Bodhi Tree, and the Bodhi Tree inside its temple at Bodh Gaya.

Other versions of the relief depicting the temple for the Bodhi Tree are visible at Sanchi, such as the Temple for the Bodhi Tree (Eastern Gateway).

==== Foreign devotees ====

Some of the friezes of Sanchi also show devotees in Greek attire, wearing kilted tunics and some of them a Greek &quot;piloi&quot; hat. They are also sometimes described as Sakas, although the historical period seems too early for their presence in Central India, and the two pointed hats seem too short to be Scythian. The official notice at Sanchi describes &quot;Foreigners worshiping Stupa&quot;. The men are depicted with short curly hair, often held together with a headband of the type commonly seen on Greek coins. The clothing too is Greek, complete with tunics, capes and sandals, typical of the Greek travelling costume. The musical instruments are also quite characteristic, such as the &quot;thoroughly Greek&quot; double flute called aulos. Also visible are carnyx-like horns.

The actual participation of Yavanas/Yonas (Greek donors) to the construction of Sanchi is known from three inscriptions made by self-declared Yavana donors:
* The clearest of these reads &quot;Setapathiyasa Yonasa danam&quot; (&quot;Gift of the Yona of Setapatha&quot;), Setapatha being an uncertain city, possibly a location near Nasik, a place where other dedications by Yavanas are known, in cave No.17 of the Nasik Caves complex, and on the pillars of the Karla Caves not far away.
* A second similar inscription on a pillar reads: &quot;[Sv]etapathasa (Yona?)sa danam&quot;, with probably the same meaning, (&quot;Gift of the Yona of Setapatha&quot;).
* The third inscription, on two adjacent pavement slabs reads &quot;Cuda yo[vana]kasa bo silayo&quot; (&quot;Two slabs of Cuda, the Yonaka&quot;).

Around 113 BCE, Heliodorus, an ambassador of the Indo-Greek ruler Antialcidas, is known to have dedicated a pillar, the Heliodorus pillar, around 5 miles from Sanchi, in the village of Vidisha.

Another rather similar foreigner is also depicted in Bharhut, the Bharhut Yavana (), also wearing a tunic and a royal headband in the manner of a Greek king, and displaying a Buddhist triratna on his sword. Another one can be seen in the region of Odisha, in the Udayagiri and Khandagiri Caves.

==== Aniconism ====
In all these scenes, the Buddha is never represented, being absent altogether even from scenes of his life where he is playing a central role: in the &quot;Miracle of the Buddha walking on the river Nairanjana&quot; he is just represented by his path on the water; in the &quot;Procession of king Suddhodana from Kapilavastu&quot;, he walks in the air at the end of the procession, but his presence is only suggested by people turning their heads upward toward the symbol of his path.
In one of the reliefs of the &quot;Miracle at Kapilavastu&quot;, King Suddhodana is seen praying as his son the Buddha rises in the air. The Buddha praised is praised by celestial beings, but only his path is visible in the form of a slab hanging in middle air, called a &quot;chankrama&quot; or &quot;promenade&quot;.

Otherwise, the presence of the Buddha is symbolized by an empty throne, as in the scene of &quot;Bimbisara with his royal cortege issuing from the city of Rajagriha to visit the Buddha&quot;. Similar scenes would later appear in the Greco-Buddhist art of Gandhara, but this time with representations of the Buddha. John Marshall detailed every panel in his seminal work &quot;A Guide to Sanchi&quot;.

This aniconism is relation to the image of the Buddha could be in conformity with an ancient Buddhist prohibition against showing the Buddha himself in human form, known from the &quot;Sarvastivada vinaya&quot; (rules of the early Buddhist school of the Sarvastivada): &quot;&quot;&quot;Since it is not permitted to make an image of the Buddha&#x27;s body, I pray that the Buddha will grant that I can make an image of the attendant Bodhisattva. Is that acceptable?&quot; The Buddha answered: &quot;You may make an image of the Bodhisattava&quot;&quot;&quot;.

=== The Gateways or Toranas ===
The gateways depict various scenes of the life of the Buddha, as well as events after his death, in particular the War of the Relics and the efforts of emperor Ashoka to spread the Buddhist faith.

==== Stupa 1 Southern Gateway ====
The Southern Gateway of Stupa No1 is thought to be oldest and main entrance to the stupa. The narrative friezes of this gateway put great emphasis on the relics of the Buddha, and on the role of Ashoka in spreading the Buddhist faith. This gateway is one of the two which were reconstructed by Major Cole in 1882–83. The whole of the right jamb and half of the left are new and blank, as well as the west end of the lowest architrave, the east end of the middle architrave, and the six vertical uprights between the architraves.
&lt;noinclude&gt;

==== Stupa 1 Northern Gateway ====
The Northern Gateway is the best preserved of all the gateways, and was the second to be erected. The numerous panels relate various events of the life of the Buddha. Only one atypical panel (Right pillar, Inner face/ Top panel) shows &quot;Foreigners making a dedication at the Southern Gateway of Stupa No 1&quot;.

&lt;noinclude&gt;

==== Stupa 1 Eastern Gateway ====
The Eastern Gateway describes historical events during the life of the Buddha, as well as several miracles performed by the Buddha. It was the third gateway to be erected.

&lt;noinclude&gt;

==== Stupa 1 Western Gateway ====
The Western Gateway of Stupa 1 is the last of the four gateway of the Great Stupa to have been built.

&lt;noinclude&gt;

==== Stupa 3 Southern Gateway ====
The gateway of Stupa No 3, is the last of all the Satavahana gateways that were built at Sanchi. It is located to the immediate south of Stupa No 3, is smaller than the four gateways encircling the Great Stupa. It is also slightly older, and generally dated to the 1st century CE.

&lt;noinclude&gt;

== Later periods ==

Further stupas and other religious Buddhist structures were added over the centuries until the 12th century CE.

===Western Satraps===
The rule of the Satavahanas in the area Sanchi during the 1st centuries BCE/CE is well attested by the finds of Satavahana copper coins in Vidisha, Ujjain and Eran in the name of Satakarni, as well as the Satakarni inscription on the Southern Gateway of Stupa No.1.

Soon after, however, the region fell to the Scythian Western Satraps, possibly under Nahapana (120 CE), and then certainly under Rudradaman I (130-150 CE), as shown by his inscriptions in Junagadh. The Satavahanas probably regained the region for some time, but were again replaced by the Western Satraps in the mid-3rd century CE, during the rule of Rudrasena II (255-278 CE). The Western Satraps remained well into the 4th century as shown by the nearby Kanakerha inscription mentioning the construction of a well by the Saka chief and &quot;righteous conqueror&quot; Sridharavarman, who ruled . Therefore, it seems that the Kushan Empire did not extend to the Sanchi area, and the few Kushan works of art found in Sanchi appear to have come from Mathura. In particular, a few Mathura statues in the name of the Kushan ruler Vasishka (247-267 CE) were found in Sanchi.

===Guptas===
The next rulers of the area were the Guptas. Inscriptions of a victorious Chandragupta II in the year 412-423 CE can be found on the railing near the Eastern Gateway of the Great Stupa. 

Temple 17 is an early stand-alone temple (following the great cave temples of Indian rock-cut architecture), as it dates to the early Gupta period (probably first quarter of 5th century CE). It may have been built for Buddhist use (which is not certain), but the type of which it represents a very early version was to become very significant in Hindu temple architecture. It consists of a flat roofed square sanctum with a portico and four pillars. The interior and three sides of the exterior are plain and undecorated but the front and the pillars are elegantly carved, giving the temple an almost &#x27;classical&#x27; appearance, not unlike the 2nd century rock-cut cave temples of the Nasik Caves. The four columns are more traditional, the octagonal shafts rising from square bases to bell capitals, surmounted by large abacus blocks carved with back-to-back lions.

Next to Temple 17 stands Temple 18, the framework of a mostly 7th-century apsidal chaitya-hall temple, again perhaps Buddhist or Hindu, that was rebuilt over an earlier hall. This was probably covered by a wood and thatch roof.

Near the Northwern Gateway also used to stand a Vajrapani pillar. Another pillar of Padmapani used to stand, and the statue is now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London.

=== Lion pillar No 26 ===

Pillar No26 stands a little to the north of the Sunga pillar No25. It belongs to the early Gupta age. Apart from its design, it is distinguished
from the other pillars on the site by the unusual quality and colour of its stone, which is harder than that ordinarily quarried in the Udayagiri hill, and of a pale
buff hue splashed and streaked with amethyst. At Sanchi this particular variety of stone was used only in monuments of the Gupta period. This pillar was approximately 22 ft. 6 in. in height and was composed of two pieces only, one comprising the circular shaft and square base, the other the bell-capital, necking, lions and crowning chakra. On the northwest side of the lowest section, which is still in situ, is a short mutilated inscription in Gupta characters recording the gift of the pillar by a &quot;viharasvamin&quot; (master of a monastery), the son of Gotaisimhabala.
As was usual with pillars of the Gupta age, the square base projected above the ground level, the projection in this case being 1 ft. 2 in., and was enclosed by a small square platform. The lion capital of this pillar is a feeble imitation of the one which surmounted the pillar of Asoka, with the addition of a wheel at the summit and with certain other variations of detail. For example, the cable necking above the bell-capital, is composed of a series of strands bound together with a riband. Also, the reliefs on the circular abacus, consist of birds and lotuses of unequal sizes disposed in irregular fashion, not with the symmetrical precision of earlier Indian art. Finally, these lions, like those on the pillars of the Southern Gateway, are provided with five claws on each foot, and their modelling exhibits little regard for truth and little artistry.

There has been much confusion about the dating of this pillars, since it was often presented from the beginning as a pillar of Ashoka. Marshall himself describes the pillar as early Gupta Empire in convincing terms, either from the points of view of material, technique or artistry. The Government of India Photo Division describes it in this image as &quot;An Asoka pillar and its broken lion capital near the south gateway of the Great Stupa.&quot; . The British Library Online also describes it as 3rd century BCE Mauryan, although probably pasting the original text from the 19th century . Sachim Kumar Tiwary in &quot;Monolithic Pillars of The Gupta Period&quot;, affirms a Gupta date. The Sanchi Archaeological Museum gives it a date of 600 CE, which would even put it beyond the Gupta period proper, at the time of the Later Gupta dynasty.

=== Pillar 35 ===
The massive pillar near the North Gateway, numbered 35 in the plan, was erected during the Gupta period. Every feature, whether structural, stylistic or technical, is typical of
Gupta workmanship. Most of the shaft has been destroyed, but the stump still remains in situ, and the foundations are intact. The form, too, of the platform around its base is sufficiently clear, and the capital and statue which it is said to have supported, are both relatively well-preserved. What remains of the shaft is 9 ft. in length, 3 ft. 10 in. of which, measured from the top, are circular and smooth, and the remainder, constituting the base, square and rough-dressed. In the Gupta age, it was the common practice to keep the
bases of such monolithic columns square, whereas those of the Maurya age were invariably circular. The columns of the Maurya period are distinguished by its exquisite dressing and highly polished surface; but in this case the dressing of the stone is characterized by no such lustrous finish.

The Persepolitan capital and square abacus ornamented with a balustrade in relief are cut entire from a single block of stone. So, too, is the statue
which was found lying alongside the capital and which is believed to have belonged to the same pillar. This statue represents a man clad in a dhoti and adorned with bracelets, earrings, bejewelled necklace and headdress. The hair falls in curls over the shoulders and back, and beneath it at the back fall the ends of two ribbons. It is thought that the statue represents Vajrapani. The attribution to Vajrapani is indicated by the stub of a vajra thunderbold in the right hand and a halo of 24 rays. The dedication of the Vajrapani pillar is also mentioned in a 5th-century inscription.

An interesting feature of the image is the halo which is pierced with twelve small holes evenly disposed around its edge. Manifestly the halo, is too small in proportion to the size of the statue, and these holes were no doubt intended for the attachment of the outer rays, which were probably fashioned out of copper gilt, the rest of the statue itself being possibly painted or gilded. This statue stood on the summit of the pillar, and is a work of the Gupta period. The statue is currently in the Sanchi Archaeological Museum and is attributed to the 5th century CE.
Following the destruction of the Guptas by the Alchon Huns, and with the decline of Buddhism in India, Buddhist artistic creation at Sanchi slowed down.
Temple 45 was the last Buddhist temple built during the mid to late 9th century. Another point to be noted is that at that time the monuments were enclosed within a wall.

With the decline of Buddhism in India, the monuments of Sanchi went out of use and fell into a state of disrepair. In 1818, General Taylor of the Bengal Cavalry recorded a visit to Sanchi. At that time the monuments were left in a relatively good condition. Although the jungle had overgrown the complex, several of the Gateways were still standing, and Sanchi, being situated on a hill, had escaped the onslaught of the Muslim conquerors who had destroyed the nearby city of Vidisha (Bhilsa) only 5 miles away.

== Sanchi and the Greco-Buddhist art of Gandhara ==
Although the initial craftsmen for stone reliefs in Sanchi seem to have come from Gandhara, with the first reliefs being carved at Sanchi Stupa No.2 circa 115 BCE, the art of Sanchi thereafter developed considerably in the 1st century BCE/CE and is thought to predate the blooming of the Greco-Buddhist art of Gandhara, which went on to flourish until around the 4th century CE. The art of Sanchi is thus considered as the ancestor of the didactic forms of Buddhist art that would follow, such as the art of Gandhara. It is also, with Bharhut, the oldest.

As didactic Buddhist reliefs were adopted by Gandhara, the content evolved somewhat together with the emergence of Mahayana Buddhism, a more theistic understanding of Buddhism. First, although many of the artistic themes remained the same (such as Maya&#x27;s dream, The Great Departure, Mara&#x27;s attacks...), many of the stories of the previous lives of the Buddha were replaced by the even more numerous stories about the Bodhisattvas of the Mahayana pantheon. Second, another important difference is the treatment of the image of the Buddha: whereas the art of Sanchi, however detailed and sophisticated, is aniconic, the art of Gandhara added illustrations of the Buddha as a man wearing Greek-style clothing to play a central role in its didactic reliefs.

The presence of Greeks at or near Sanchi at the time is known (Indo-Greek ambassador Heliodorus at Vidisha , the Greek-like foreigners illustrated at Sanchi worshiping the Great Stupa, or the Greek &quot;Yavana&quot; devotees who had dedicatory inscriptions made at Sanchi), but more precise details about exchanges or possible routes of transmission are elusive.

== Western Discovery ==

General Henry Taylor (1784–1876) who was a British officer in the Third Maratha War of 1817–1819, was the first known Western historian to document in 1818 (in English) the existence of Sanchi Stupa. The site was in a total state of abandon. The Great Stupa was clumsily breached by Sir Herbert Maddock in 1822, although he was not able to reach the center, and he then abandoned. Alexander Cunningham and Frederick Charles Maisey made the first formal survey and excavations at Sanchi and the surrounding stupas of the region in 1851. Amateur archaeologists and treasure hunters ravaged the site until 1881, when proper restoration work was initiated. Between 1912 and 1919 the structures were restored to their present condition under the supervision of Sir John Marshall.

19th Century Europeans were very much interested in the Stupa which was originally built by Ashoka. French sought the permission to take away the eastern gateway to France. English, who had established themselves in India, majorly as a political force, were interested too in carrying it to England for a museum. They were satisfied with plaster-cast copies which were carefully prepared and the original remained at the site, part of Bhopal state. The rule of Bhopal, Shahjehan Begum and her successor Sultan Jehan Begum, provided money for the preservation of the ancient site. John Marshall, Director-General of the Archaeological Survey of India from 1902 to 1928, acknowledged her contribution by dedicating his important volumes on Sanchi to Sultan Jehan. She had funded the museum that was built there. As one of the earliest and most important Buddhist architectural and cultural pieces, it has drastically transformed the understanding of early India with respect to Buddhism. It is now a marvellous example of the carefully preserved archaeological site by the Archeological Survey of India. The place of Sanchi Stupa in Indian history and culture can be gauged from the fact that Reserve Bank of India introduced new 200 Indian Rupees notes with Sanchi Stupa in 2017.

Since Sanchi remained mostly intact, few artefacts of Sanchi can be found in Western Museums: for example, the Gupta statue of Padmapani is at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, and one of the Yashinis can be seen at the British Museum.

Today, around fifty monuments remain on the hill of Sanchi, including three main stupas and several temples. The monuments have been listed among other famous monuments in the UNESCO World Heritage Sites since 1989.

The reliefs of Sanchi, especially those depicting Indian cities, have been important in trying to imagine what ancient Indian cities look like. Many modern simulations are based on the urban illustrations of Sanchi.

== Chetiyagiri Vihara and the Sacred Relics ==

The bone relics (asthi avashesh) of Buddhist Masters along with the reliquaries, obtained by Maisey and Cunningham were divided and taken by them to England as personal trophies. Maisey&#x27;s family sold the objects to Victoria and Albert Museum where they stayed for a long time. The Buddhists in England, Sri Lanka and India, led by the Mahabodhi Society demanded that they be returned. Some of the relics of Sariputta and Moggallana were sent back to Sri Lanka, where they were publicly displayed in 1947. It was such a grand event where the entire population of Sri Lanka came to visit them. However, they were later returned to India. But a new temple Chetiyagiri Vihara was constructed to house the relics, in 1952. In a nationalistic sense, this marked the formal reestablishment of the Buddhist tradition in India. Some of the relics were obtained by Burma.

== Inscriptions ==
Sanchi, especially Stupa 1, has a large number of Brahmi inscriptions. Although most of them are small and mention donations, they are of great historical significance. James Prinsep in 1837, noted that most of them ended with the same two Brahmi characters. Princep took them as &quot;danam&quot; (donation), which permitted the decipherment of the Brahmi script.

An analysis of the donation records shows that while a large fraction of the donors were local (with no town specified), a number of them were from Ujjain, Vidisha, Kurara, Nadinagar, Mahisati, Kurghara, Bhogavadhan and Kamdagigam. Three inscriptions are known from Yavana (Indo-Greek) donors at Sanchi, the clearest of which reads &quot;Setapathiyasa Yonasa danam&quot; (&quot;Gift of the Yona of Setapatha&quot;), Setapatha being an uncertain city.

== See also ==

* Bharhut
* Relics of Sariputra and Mahamoggallana
* Begram ivories
* Deekshabhoomi

== References ==
== Literature ==
* Dehejia, Vidya. (1992). Collective and Popular Bases of Early Buddhist Patronage: Sacred Monuments, 100 BC-AD 250. In B. Stoler Miller (ed.) &quot;The Powers of Art&quot;. Oxford University Press: Oxford. .
* Dehejia, Vidya. (1997). &quot;Indian Art&quot;. Phaidon: London. 
*Harle, J.C., &quot;The Art and Architecture of the Indian Subcontinent&quot;, 2nd edn. 1994, Yale University Press Pelican History of Art, 
*Marshall, Sir John, &quot;A Guide to Sanchi&quot;, 1918, Indian Government, Calcutta
*Michell, George (1988), &quot;The Hindu Temple: An Introduction to its Meaning and Forms&quot;, 1977, University of Chicago Press, 
*Michell, George (1990), &quot;The Penguin Guide to the Monuments of India, Volume 1: Buddhist, Jain, Hindu&quot;, 1990, Penguin Books, 
* Mitra, Debala. (1971). &quot;Buddhist Monuments&quot;. Sahitya Samsad: Calcutta. 
*Rowland, Benjamin, &quot;The Art and Architecture of India: Buddhist, Hindu, Jain&quot;, 1967 (3rd edn.), Pelican History of Art, Penguin, 
*Life in Sanchi sculpture by A. L Srivastava( Book )

== External links ==
* 
* Source Documents and Texts in South Asian Studies 
* Sanchi.org
* (Madhya Pradesh)&quot;, Jacques-Edouard Berger Foundation, World Art Treasures 
* Monuments at Sanchi (UNESCO World Heritage)
* Google Street View tour of Sanchi</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q181123" start="0" end="12" title="Sanchi" label="Sanchi Stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001041" start="18" end="34" title="Buddhist art" label="Buddhist complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q16899727" start="80" end="91" title="Sanchi Town" label="Sanchi Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815223" start="95" end="110" title="Raisen District" label="Raisen District"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="118" end="123" title="States and territories of India" label="State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="127" end="141" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350113" start="190" end="201" title="Raisen" label="Raisen town"/>
<link wikidata="Q80989" start="242" end="248" title="Bhopal" label="Bhopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="261" end="275" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="288" end="293" title="Stupa" label="Stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q61050" start="396" end="417" title="architecture of India" label="architecture of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="457" end="464" title="Maurya Empire" label="Mauryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="473" end="479" title="Ashoka the Great" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="588" end="594" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945507" start="618" end="624" title="Chatra (umbrella)" label="chatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637471" start="853" end="860" title="Vidisha" label="Vidisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q731341" start="996" end="1002" title="torana" label="torana"/>
<link wikidata="Q55887323" start="1311" end="1319" title="Satdhara" label="Satdhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895875" start="1361" end="1399" title="Relics of Sariputra and Mahamoggallana" label="Relics of Sariputra and Mahamoggallana"/>
<link wikidata="Q55887339" start="1457" end="1464" title="Bhojpur Stupas" label="Bhojpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q55887342" start="1531" end="1537" title="Andher Stupas" label="Andher"/>
<link wikidata="Q55785440" start="1594" end="1600" title="Sonari Stupa" label="Sonari"/>
<link wikidata="Q55886272" start="1660" end="1669" title="Saru Maru" label="Saru Maru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310870" start="1671" end="1678" title="Bharhut" label="Bharhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q37880457" start="1760" end="1787" title="Indian 200-rupee note" label="Indian currency note of 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q80989" start="1883" end="1889" title="Bhopal" label="Bhopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80989" start="1945" end="1951" title="Bhopal" label="Bhopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902006" start="1956" end="1981" title="Habibganj railway station" label="Habibganj railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q80989" start="2034" end="2040" title="Bhopal" label="Bhopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637471" start="2045" end="2052" title="Vidisha" label="Vidisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="2156" end="2170" title="Maurya Empire" label="Mauryan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="2217" end="2229" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153371" start="2514" end="2531" title="Pillars of Ashoka" label="Pillars of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q651377" start="2586" end="2593" title="Shunga Empire" label="Shungas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257" start="2602" end="2613" title="Satavahana Empire" label="Satavahanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40889054" start="2746" end="2756" title="Sanchi Stupa No.2" label="Stupa No.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="2846" end="2858" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q85741544" start="2934" end="2961" title="ancient Indian architecture" label="ancient Indian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047562" start="2974" end="2995" title="Buddhist architecture" label="Buddhist architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630269" start="3082" end="3125" title="Decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent" label="decline of the religion in the subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="3275" end="3281" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="3299" end="3312" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156436" start="3400" end="3427" title="Śarīra" label="sacred relics of the Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945507" start="3526" end="3532" title="Chatra (umbrella)" label="chatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q651377" start="3699" end="3705" title="Sungas" label="Sungas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782817" start="3810" end="3819" title="Mahavamsa" label="Mahavamsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="3847" end="3856" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q200119" start="3971" end="3977" title="Ujjain" label="Ujjain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637471" start="4008" end="4015" title="Vidisha" label="Vidisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q16227428" start="4110" end="4114" title="Devi (wife of Ashoka)" label="Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q587284" start="4160" end="4168" title="Mahinda (Buddhist monk)" label="Mahendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462385" start="4185" end="4196" title="Sanghamitta" label="Sanghamitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153371" start="4618" end="4635" title="Pillars of Ashoka" label="Pillars of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q731341" start="4678" end="4684" title="Torana" label="Torana"/>
<link wikidata="Q30625457" start="4786" end="4814" title="Sanchi Archaeological Museum" label="Sanchi Archaeological Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q665056" start="4879" end="4891" title="Wheel of Law" label="Wheel of Law"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4911" end="4958" title=":File:Carving of Ashokan pillar at Sanchi.jpg" label="by later illustrations among the Sanchi reliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569798" start="4999" end="5011" title="List of Edicts of Ashoka" label="Schism Edict"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418709" start="5050" end="5061" title="Sankha Lipi" label="Sankha Lipi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185083" start="5130" end="5136" title="Brahmi" label="Brahmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q324394" start="5259" end="5266" title="Sarnath" label="Sarnath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194868" start="5271" end="5279" title="Kausambi" label="Kausambi"/>
<link wikidata="Q208454" start="5599" end="5605" title="abacus (architecture)" label="abacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136114" start="5777" end="5791" title="flame palmette" label="flame palmette"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="5841" end="5846" title="geese" label="geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="6019" end="6028" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192683" start="6089" end="6095" title="Chunar" label="Chunar"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6508" end="6517" title=":Commons:category:Sanchi Temple 40" label="Temple 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q315526" start="6813" end="6822" title="Bindusara" label="Bindusara"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="7015" end="7022" title="apsidal" label="apsidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q682212" start="7528" end="7540" title="Ashokavadana" label="Ashokavadana"/>
<link wikidata="Q119973" start="7704" end="7722" title="Pushyamitra Shunga" label="Pushyamitra Shunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q24395" start="7865" end="7874" title="Agnimitra" label="Agnimitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q651377" start="8023" end="8035" title="Shunga Empire" label="Shunga state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310870" start="8551" end="8558" title="Bharhut" label="Bharhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4513" start="8605" end="8621" title="Mahabodhi Temple" label="Mahabodhi Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q176767" start="8625" end="8634" title="Bodh Gaya" label="Bodh Gaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="8923" end="8929" title="dharma" label="dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734140" start="9004" end="9020" title="circumambulation" label="circumambulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40889054" start="10065" end="10082" title="Sanchi Stupa No.2" label="Sanchi Stupa No.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="10247" end="10252" title="stupa" label="stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257" start="10323" end="10333" title="Satavahana" label="Satavahana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310870" start="10579" end="10586" title="Bharhut" label="Bharhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q40889054" start="10651" end="10662" title="Sanchi Stupa No.2" label="Stupa No. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q668439" start="11131" end="11137" title="Jataka" label="Jataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161266" start="11199" end="11209" title="Kharoshthi" label="Kharoshthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185083" start="11235" end="11241" title="Brahmi" label="Brahmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="11331" end="11339" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161266" start="11347" end="11357" title="Kharoshthi" label="Kharoshthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854330" start="11595" end="11605" title="Heliodurus" label="Heliodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q215643" start="11611" end="11621" title="Indo-Greek" label="Indo-Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q574812" start="11627" end="11638" title="Antialkidas" label="Antialkidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q651377" start="11659" end="11665" title="Sungas" label="Sungas"/>
<link wikidata="Q854679" start="11671" end="11682" title="Bhagabhadra" label="Bhagabhadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637471" start="11693" end="11700" title="Vidisha" label="Vidisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854330" start="11750" end="11767" title="Heliodorus pillar" label="Heliodorus pillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025522" start="11787" end="11795" title="Vāsudeva" label="Vāsudeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895875" start="12051" end="12089" title="Relics of Sariputra and Mahamoggallana" label="Relics of Sariputra and Mahamoggallana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257" start="12401" end="12412" title="Satavahanas" label="Satavahanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854330" start="12588" end="12605" title="Heliodorus pillar" label="Heliodorus pillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854330" start="12665" end="12675" title="Heliodurus" label="Heliodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q215643" start="12699" end="12709" title="Indo-Greek" label="Indo-Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q574812" start="12715" end="12726" title="Antialkidas" label="Antialkidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637471" start="12738" end="12745" title="Vidisha" label="Vidisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q166080" start="13017" end="13026" title="octagonal" label="octagonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16833885" start="13231" end="13236" title="arris" label="arris"/>
<link wikidata="Q166080" start="13246" end="13253" title="octagon" label="octagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q129072" start="13575" end="13587" title="Persepolitan" label="Persepolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16528" start="13599" end="13604" title="lotus flower" label="lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053956" start="13736" end="13740" title="bead" label="bead"/>
<link wikidata="Q12806" start="13790" end="13796" title="abacus" label="abacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095365" start="13812" end="13819" title="Guard rail" label="railing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257" start="13951" end="13968" title="Satavahana Empire" label="Satavahana Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q73119341" start="13975" end="13987" title="Satakarni II" label="Satakarni II"/>
<link wikidata="Q550691" start="14006" end="14011" title="Malwa" label="Malwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q651377" start="14021" end="14028" title="Shunga Empire" label="Shungas"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="14186" end="14200" title="Mauryan Empire" label="Mauryan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q651377" start="14205" end="14210" title="Sunga" label="Sunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="14211" end="14216" title="stupa" label="stupa"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14415" end="14440" title=":File:Siri-Satakani inscription Sanchi Stupa 1 Southern Gateway Rear of top architrave.jpg" label="Siri-Satakani inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q185083" start="14454" end="14467" title="Brahmi script" label="Brahmi script"/>
<link wikidata="Q183448" start="14503" end="14513" title="architrave" label="architrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q73119341" start="14578" end="14590" title="Satakarni II" label="Satakarni II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425865" start="14660" end="14669" title="Satakarni" label="Satakarni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151502" start="14723" end="14746" title="Hathigumpha inscription" label="Hathigumpha inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q73119341" start="15041" end="15053" title="Satakarni II" label="Satakarni II"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15123" end="15133" title=":File:Nasik cave 19.jpg" label="Cave No.19"/>
<link wikidata="Q25184586" start="15142" end="15147" title="Kanha (Satavahana dynasty)" label="Kanha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130537" start="15168" end="15179" title="Nasik Caves" label="Nasik Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q731341" start="15317" end="15323" title="torana" label="torana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637471" start="15529" end="15536" title="Vidisha" label="Vidisha"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15607" end="15649" title=":File:Worship of the Bodhisattva&amp;#x27;s hair Sanchi Stupa 1 Southern Gateway.jpg" label="The Worship of the Bodhisattva&amp;#x27;s hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637471" start="15704" end="15711" title="Vidisha" label="Vidisha"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15742" end="15781" title=":File:Vidisha ivory carvers inscription in Sanchi.jpg" label="Vedisakehi damtakārehi rupakammam katam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764519" start="16583" end="16604" title="aniconism in Buddhism" label="aniconism in Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q321437" start="16769" end="16779" title="bodhi tree" label="bodhi tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q193893" start="16998" end="17006" title="capital (architecture)" label="capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="17059" end="17065" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257" start="17085" end="17096" title="Satavahanas" label="Satavahanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154546" start="17133" end="17152" title="Pataliputra capital" label="Pataliputra capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="17160" end="17174" title="Mauryan Empire" label="Mauryan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q389755" start="17186" end="17197" title="Pataliputra" label="Pataliputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q651377" start="17244" end="17256" title="Sunga Empire" label="Sunga Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310870" start="17277" end="17284" title="Bharhut" label="Bharhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154546" start="17423" end="17442" title="Pataliputra capital" label="Pataliputra capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277215" start="17497" end="17505" title="rosette (design)" label="rosettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13634059" start="17507" end="17512" title="ovolo" label="ovolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664278" start="17518" end="17531" title="bead and reel" label="bead and reel"/>
<link wikidata="Q898879" start="17543" end="17552" title="Meander (art)" label="wave-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q732328" start="17553" end="17560" title="Scroll (art)" label="scrolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q218626" start="17570" end="17576" title="volute" label="volute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261331" start="17591" end="17599" title="Rosette (decoration)" label="rosettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136114" start="17628" end="17642" title="flame palmette" label="flame palmette"/>
<link wikidata="Q843745" start="17696" end="17711" title="Classical Greece" label="Classical Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="17765" end="17770" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="17800" end="17807" title="Persian Empire" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673399" start="17808" end="17828" title="Achaemenid architecture" label="Achaemenid influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q85799745" start="17855" end="17870" title="Sarnath capital" label="Sarnath capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="17951" end="17959" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q324394" start="17968" end="17975" title="Sarnath" label="Sarnath"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="17997" end="18002" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q677655" start="18015" end="18023" title="palmette" label="palmette"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="18090" end="18104" title="Mauryan Empire" label="Mauryan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q651377" start="18148" end="18160" title="Sunga Empire" label="Sunga Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q589897" start="18275" end="18281" title="Mahout" label="mahaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q651377" start="18355" end="18367" title="Sunga Empire" label="Sunga Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136107" start="18440" end="18452" title="anta capital" label="anta capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277215" start="18463" end="18471" title="rosette (design)" label="rosettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664278" start="18473" end="18488" title="bead and reel" label="beads-and-reels"/>
<link wikidata="Q677655" start="18511" end="18519" title="palmette" label="palmette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153371" start="18620" end="18637" title="Pillars of Ashoka" label="Pillars of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136114" start="18826" end="18840" title="flame palmette" label="flame palmette"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011093" start="19105" end="19112" title="Yakshas" label="Yakshas"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="19348" end="19359" title="Bodhisattva" label="Bodhisattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q13022934" start="19402" end="19414" title="Syama Jataka" label="Syama Jataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929932" start="19420" end="19430" title="Vessantara" label="Vessantara"/>
<link wikidata="Q48724739" start="19446" end="19461" title="Mahakapi Jataka" label="Mahakapi Jataka"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19548" end="19590" title=":File:Miracle of the Buddha walking on a River - East Face - South Pillar - East Gateway - Stupa 1 - Sanchi.jpg" label="The miracle of the Buddha walking on water"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19594" end="19622" title=":File:Miracle of fire and wood Sanchi Stupa 1 Eastern Gateway.jpg" label="The miracle of fire and wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352021" start="19768" end="19772" title="Mara (demon)" label="Mara"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19919" end="19943" title=":File:Temptation of the Buddha with Mara&amp;#x27;s army fleeing.jpg" label="Temptation of the Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19977" end="20004" title=":File:Temptation and enlightenment of the Buddha.jpg" label="Enlightenment of the Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376303" start="20306" end="20313" title="Malla (tribe)" label="Mallaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q825673" start="20318" end="20328" title="Kushinagar" label="Kushinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q825673" start="20687" end="20697" title="Kushinagar" label="Kushinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376303" start="20705" end="20712" title="Malla (tribe)" label="Mallaka"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20890" end="20963" title=":File:King of the Mallas bringing the relics of the Buddha to Kushinagara.jpg" label="The King of the Mallakas bringing the relics of the Buddha to Kushinagara"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21127" end="21170" title=":File:Siege of Kushinagara by the seven kings.jpg" label="The siege of Kushinagara by the seven kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="21380" end="21391" title="King Ashoka" label="King Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q271990" start="21528" end="21533" title="Nāga" label="Nagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288751" start="21537" end="21546" title="Ramagrama" label="Ramagrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q176767" start="21955" end="21964" title="Bodh Gaya" label="Bodh Gaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q321437" start="21978" end="21988" title="Bodhi Tree" label="Bodhi Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805795" start="22052" end="22073" title="Major Rock Edict" label="Major Rock Edict No.8"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071706" start="22148" end="22158" title="pipal tree" label="pipal tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q176767" start="22385" end="22394" title="Bodh Gaya" label="Bodh Gaya"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22824" end="22868" title=":File:Pipal tree temple of Bodh Gaya depicted in Sanchi Stupa 1 Eastern Gateway.jpg" label="Temple for the Bodhi Tree (Eastern Gateway)."/>
<link wikidata="Q1778772" start="23017" end="23022" title="Pileus (hat)" label="piloi"/>
<link wikidata="Q673001" start="23071" end="23076" title="Sakas" label="Sakas"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23264" end="23291" title=":File:Scene Index - North Gateway - Stupa 1 - Sanchi Hill 2013-02-21 4272.JPG" label="Foreigners worshiping Stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q934849" start="23370" end="23378" title="headband" label="headband"/>
<link wikidata="Q440311" start="23408" end="23419" title="Ancient Greek coinage" label="Greek coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q201714" start="23462" end="23467" title="tunic" label="tunic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23504" end="23528" title=":File:Greek travelling costume.jpg" label="Greek travelling costume"/>
<link wikidata="Q324299" start="23646" end="23651" title="aulos" label="aulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q277670" start="23670" end="23676" title="carnyx" label="carnyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134287" start="23682" end="23687" title="Cornu (horn)" label="horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642049" start="23718" end="23725" title="Yavanas" label="Yavanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q342894" start="23726" end="23731" title="Yonas" label="Yonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642049" start="23935" end="23939" title="Yona" label="Yona"/>
<link wikidata="Q200235" start="24021" end="24026" title="Nasik" label="Nasik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130537" start="24103" end="24114" title="Nasik Caves" label="Nasik Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372431" start="24150" end="24161" title="Karla Caves" label="Karla Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642049" start="24321" end="24325" title="Yona" label="Yona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854330" start="24511" end="24521" title="Heliodurus" label="Heliodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q215643" start="24544" end="24554" title="Indo-Greek" label="Indo-Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q574812" start="24561" end="24572" title="Antialcidas" label="Antialcidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854330" start="24615" end="24632" title="Heliodorus pillar" label="Heliodorus pillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637471" start="24680" end="24687" title="Vidisha" label="Vidisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310870" start="24743" end="24750" title="Bharhut" label="Bharhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888951" start="24756" end="24770" title="Bharhut Yavana" label="Bharhut Yavana"/>
<link wikidata="Q228220" start="24874" end="24882" title="triratna" label="triratna"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24897" end="24908" title=":File:Udayagiri Yavana warrior.jpg" label="Another one"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="24938" end="24944" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536413" start="24953" end="24983" title="Udayagiri and Khandagiri Caves" label="Udayagiri and Khandagiri Caves"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25162" end="25215" title=":File:Miracle of the Buddha walking on a River - East Face - South Pillar - East Gateway - Stupa 1 - Sanchi.jpg" label="Miracle of the Buddha walking on the river Nairanjana"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25284" end="25330" title=":File:Procession of king Suddhodana from Kapilavastu in full Sanchi Stupa 1 Eastern Gateway.jpg" label="Procession of king Suddhodana from Kapilavastu"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25526" end="25548" title=":File:Miracle at Kapilavastu Suddhodana praying as his son the Buddha rises in the air with only path visible Sanchi Stupa 1 Northern Gateway.jpg" label="Miracle at Kapilavastu"/>
<link wikidata="Q226488" start="25561" end="25571" title="Suddhodana" label="Suddhodana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="25603" end="25609" title="Buddha" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25908" end="25995" title=":File:Bimbisara with his royal cortege issuing from the city of Rajagriha to visit the Buddha.jpg" label="Bimbisara with his royal cortege issuing from the city of Rajagriha to visit the Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008014" start="26044" end="26062" title="Greco-Buddhist art" label="Greco-Buddhist art"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="26066" end="26074" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376456" start="26126" end="26139" title="John Marshall (archaeologist)" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q633994" start="26398" end="26410" title="Sarvastivada" label="Sarvastivada"/>
<link wikidata="Q848764" start="26411" end="26417" title="vinaya" label="vinaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q633994" start="26467" end="26479" title="Sarvastivada" label="Sarvastivada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="26966" end="26972" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="27234" end="27240" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27863" end="27931" title=":File:Foreigners making a dedication to Stupa 1at the Northern Gateway of Stupa 1 Sanchi.jpg" label="Foreigners making a dedication at the Southern Gateway of Stupa No 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257" start="28426" end="28436" title="Satavahana" label="Satavahana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637471" start="28972" end="28979" title="Vidisha" label="Vidisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q200119" start="28981" end="28987" title="Ujjain" label="Ujjain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347967" start="28992" end="28996" title="Eran" label="Eran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425865" start="29012" end="29021" title="Satakarni" label="Satakarni"/>
<link wikidata="Q240123" start="29144" end="29152" title="Indo-Scythians" label="Scythian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086608" start="29153" end="29168" title="Western Satraps" label="Western Satraps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566672" start="29185" end="29193" title="Nahapana" label="Nahapana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260392" start="29229" end="29241" title="Rudradaman I" label="Rudradaman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q11864" start="29288" end="29296" title="Junagadh" label="Junagadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q48726638" start="29451" end="29463" title="Rudrasena II (Western Satrap)" label="Rudrasena II"/>
<link wikidata="Q48726672" start="29556" end="29577" title="Kanakerha inscription" label="Kanakerha inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q81486667" start="29670" end="29684" title="Sridharavarman" label="Sridharavarman"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="29727" end="29740" title="Kushan Empire" label="Kushan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q200311" start="29849" end="29856" title="Mathura" label="Mathura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511011" start="29927" end="29935" title="Vasishka" label="Vasishka"/>
<link wikidata="Q844536" start="30059" end="30074" title="Chandragupta II" label="Chandragupta II"/>
<link wikidata="Q44539" start="30207" end="30213" title="temple" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q388774" start="30251" end="30279" title="Indian rock-cut architecture" label="Indian rock-cut architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="30307" end="30312" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q80706" start="30519" end="30544" title="Hindu temple architecture" label="Hindu temple architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130537" start="30864" end="30875" title="Nasik Caves" label="Nasik Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q208454" start="31000" end="31006" title="Abacus (architecture)" label="abacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059208" start="31129" end="31136" title="chaitya" label="chaitya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366849" start="31324" end="31333" title="Vajrapani" label="Vajrapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q193849" start="31360" end="31369" title="Padmapani" label="Padmapani"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31389" end="31399" title=":File:WLA vanda The Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara.jpg" label="the statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="31414" end="31440" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="31442" end="31448" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4250472" start="31759" end="31773" title="Udayagiri Caves" label="Udayagiri hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q180720" start="32123" end="32129" title="chakra" label="chakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q208454" start="32899" end="32905" title="abacus (architecture)" label="abacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="33415" end="33427" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33571" end="33581" title=":File:Sanchi Ashoka pillar and capital cropped.jpg" label="this image"/>
<link wikidata="Q30625457" start="33928" end="33956" title="Sanchi Archaeological Museum" label="Sanchi Archaeological Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q28116147" start="34059" end="34078" title="Later Gupta dynasty" label="Later Gupta dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q129072" start="35112" end="35124" title="Persepolitan" label="Persepolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193893" start="35125" end="35132" title="capital (architecture)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q12806" start="35144" end="35150" title="abacus" label="abacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q850794" start="35400" end="35405" title="dhoti" label="dhoti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366849" start="35630" end="35639" title="Vajrapani" label="Vajrapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q695709" start="35700" end="35705" title="vajra" label="vajra"/>
<link wikidata="Q30625457" start="36348" end="36376" title="Sanchi Archaeological Museum" label="Sanchi Archaeological Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21050766" start="36465" end="36476" title="Alchon Huns" label="Alchon Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630269" start="36491" end="36519" title="decline of Buddhism in India" label="decline of Buddhism in India"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36571" end="36580" title=":File:Sanchi (Ruins of Gupta Temple).JPG" label="Temple 45"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="36763" end="36771" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="37164" end="37170" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637471" start="37219" end="37226" title="Vidisha" label="Vidisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637471" start="37228" end="37234" title="Bhilsa" label="Bhilsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="37390" end="37398" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q40889054" start="37439" end="37456" title="Sanchi Stupa No.2" label="Sanchi Stupa No.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008014" start="37596" end="37614" title="Greco-Buddhist art" label="Greco-Buddhist art"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="37618" end="37626" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001041" start="37765" end="37777" title="Buddhist art" label="Buddhist art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310870" start="37843" end="37850" title="Bharhut" label="Bharhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="37980" end="37997" title="Mahayana Buddhism" label="Mahayana Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="38292" end="38304" title="Bodhisattvas" label="Bodhisattvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376141" start="38321" end="38329" title="pantheon (religion)" label="pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q860785" start="38479" end="38487" title="aniconic" label="aniconic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215643" start="38693" end="38703" title="Indo-Greek" label="Indo-Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854330" start="38715" end="38725" title="Heliodurus" label="Heliodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637471" start="38729" end="38736" title="Vidisha" label="Vidisha"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38754" end="38813" title=":File:Foreigners at Sanchi Stupa I North Gateway.jpg" label="foreigners illustrated at Sanchi worshiping the Great Stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q617210" start="39086" end="39103" title="Third Anglo-Maratha War" label="Third Maratha War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790637" start="39303" end="39322" title="Thomas Herbert Maddock" label="Sir Herbert Maddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q455430" start="39401" end="39421" title="Alexander Cunningham" label="Alexander Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q84602300" start="39426" end="39450" title="Frederick Charles Maisey" label="Frederick Charles Maisey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="39564" end="39578" title="archaeologists" label="archaeologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376456" start="39776" end="39793" title="John Marshall (archaeologist)" label="Sir John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376456" start="40376" end="40389" title="John Marshall (archaeologist)" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="" start="41183" end="41212" title=":File:WLA vanda The Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara.jpg" label="the Gupta statue of Padmapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="41223" end="41249" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="41253" end="41259" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019578" start="41265" end="41284" title="Sanchi Yakshi Figure" label="one of the Yashinis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="41304" end="41318" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="41497" end="41503" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="41504" end="41524" title="World Heritage Sites" label="World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="42023" end="42049" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606262" start="42143" end="42160" title="Mahabodhi Society" label="Mahabodhi Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q320142" start="42215" end="42224" title="Sariputta" label="Sariputta"/>
<link wikidata="Q379814" start="42229" end="42239" title="Maudgalyayana" label="Moggallana"/>
<link wikidata="Q185083" start="42740" end="42746" title="Brahmi" label="Brahmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q740234" start="42859" end="42872" title="James Prinsep" label="James Prinsep"/>
<link wikidata="Q200119" start="43204" end="43210" title="Ujjain" label="Ujjain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637471" start="43212" end="43219" title="Vidisha" label="Vidisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642049" start="43322" end="43328" title="Yavana" label="Yavana"/>
<link wikidata="Q215643" start="43330" end="43340" title="Indo-Greek" label="Indo-Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642049" start="43446" end="43450" title="Yona" label="Yona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310870" start="43526" end="43533" title="Bharhut" label="Bharhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895875" start="43536" end="43574" title="Relics of Sariputra and Mahamoggallana" label="Relics of Sariputra and Mahamoggallana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880597" start="43577" end="43591" title="Begram ivories" label="Begram ivories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182325" start="43594" end="43607" title="Deekshabhoomi" label="Deekshabhoomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376456" start="44062" end="44080" title="John Marshall (archaeologist)" label="Marshall, Sir John"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="275015" wikidata="Q4986445" url="?curid=275015" title="Building (mathematics)">
<text>In mathematics, a building (also Tits building, named after Jacques Tits) is a combinatorial and geometric structure which simultaneously generalizes certain aspects of flag manifolds, finite projective planes, and Riemannian symmetric spaces. Buildings were initially introduced by Jacques Tits as a means to understand the structure of isotropic reductive linear algebraic groups over arbitrary fields. The more specialized theory of Bruhat–Tits buildings (named also after François Bruhat) plays a role in the study of -adic Lie groups analogous to that of the theory of symmetric spaces in the theory of Lie groups.

==Overview==

The notion of a building was invented by Jacques Tits as a means of describing simple algebraic groups over an arbitrary field. Tits demonstrated how to every such group one can associate a simplicial complex with an action of , called the spherical building of . The group imposes very strong combinatorial regularity conditions on the complexes that can arise in this fashion. By treating these conditions as axioms for a class of simplicial complexes, Tits arrived at his first definition of a building. A part of the data defining a building is a Coxeter group , which determines a highly symmetrical simplicial complex , called the &quot;Coxeter complex&quot;. A building is glued together from multiple copies of , called its &quot;apartments&quot;, in a certain regular fashion. When is a finite Coxeter group, the Coxeter complex is a topological sphere, and the corresponding buildings are said to be of spherical type. When is an affine Weyl group, the Coxeter complex is a subdivision of the affine plane and one speaks of affine, or Euclidean, buildings. An affine building of type is the same as an infinite tree without terminal vertices.

Although the theory of semisimple algebraic groups provided the initial motivation for the notion of a building, not all buildings arise from a group. In particular, projective planes and generalized quadrangles form two classes of graphs studied in incidence geometry which satisfy the axioms of a building, but may not be connected with any group. This phenomenon turns out to be related to the low rank of the corresponding Coxeter system (namely, two). Tits proved a remarkable theorem: all spherical buildings of rank at least three are connected with a group; moreover, if a building of rank at least two is connected with a group then the group is essentially determined by the building ().

Iwahori–Matsumoto, Borel–Tits and Bruhat–Tits demonstrated that in analogy with Tits&#x27; construction of spherical buildings, affine buildings can also be constructed from certain groups, namely, reductive algebraic groups over a local non-Archimedean field. Furthermore, if the split rank of the group is at least three, it is essentially determined by its building. Tits later reworked the foundational aspects of the theory of buildings using the notion of a chamber system, encoding the building solely in terms of adjacency properties of simplices of maximal dimension; this leads to simplifications in both spherical and affine cases. He proved that, in analogy with the spherical case, every building of affine type and rank at least four arises from a group.

==Definition==
An -dimensional building is an abstract simplicial complex which is a union of subcomplexes called apartments such that

* every -simplex of is within at least three -simplices if ;
* any -simplex in an apartment lies in exactly two &quot;adjacent&quot; -simplices of and the graph of adjacent -simplices is connected;
* any two simplices in lie in some common apartment ;
* if two simplices both lie in apartments and , then there is a simplicial isomorphism of onto fixing the vertices of the two simplices.

An -simplex in is called a chamber (originally &quot;chambre&quot;, i.e. &quot;room&quot; in French).

The rank of the building is defined to be .

==Elementary properties==
Every apartment in a building is a Coxeter complex. In fact, for every two -simplices intersecting in an -simplex or &quot;panel&quot;, there is a unique period two simplicial automorphism of , called a &quot;reflection&quot;, carrying one -simplex onto the other and fixing their common points. These reflections generate a Coxeter group , called the Weyl group of , and the simplicial complex corresponds to the standard geometric realization of . Standard generators of the Coxeter group are given by the reflections in the walls of a fixed chamber in . Since the apartment is determined up to isomorphism by the building, the same is true of any two simplices in lying in some common apartment . When is finite, the building is said to be spherical. When it is an affine Weyl group, the building is said to be affine or Euclidean.

The chamber system is the adjacency graph formed by the chambers; each pair of adjacent chambers can in addition be labelled by one of the standard
generators of the Coxeter group (see ).

Every building has a canonical length metric inherited from the geometric realisation obtained by identifying the vertices with an orthonormal basis of a Hilbert space. For affine buildings, this metric satisfies the  comparison inequality of Alexandrov, known in this setting as the Bruhat–Tits &quot;non-positive curvature condition&quot; for geodesic triangles: the distance from a vertex to the midpoint of the opposite side is no greater than the distance in the corresponding Euclidean triangle with the same side-lengths (see ).

==Connection with pairs==
If a group acts simplicially on a building , transitively on pairs of chambers and apartments containing them, then the stabilisers of such a pair define a pair or Tits system. In fact the pair of subgroups
: and 
satisfies the axioms of a pair and the Weyl group can be identified with .

Conversely the building can be recovered from the pair, so that every pair canonically defines a building. In fact, using the terminology of pairs and calling any conjugate of a Borel subgroup and any group containing a Borel subgroup a parabolic subgroup,
* the vertices of the building correspond to maximal parabolic subgroups;
* vertices form a -simplex whenever the intersection of the corresponding maximal parabolic subgroups is also parabolic;
* apartments are conjugates under of the simplicial subcomplex with vertices given by conjugates under of maximal parabolics containing .

The same building can often be described by different pairs. Moreover, not every building comes from a pair: this corresponds to the failure of classification results in low rank and dimension (see below).

The Solomon-Tits theorem is a result which states the homotopy type of a building of a group of Lie type is the same as that of a bouquet of spheres.

==Spherical and affine buildings for ==
The simplicial structure of the affine and spherical buildings associated to , as well as their interconnections, are easy to explain directly using only concepts from elementary algebra and geometry (see ). In this case there are three different buildings, two spherical and one affine. Each is a union of &quot;apartments&quot;, themselves simplicial complexes. For the affine building, an apartment is a simplicial complex tessellating Euclidean space by -dimensional simplices; while for a spherical building it is the finite simplicial complex formed by all simplices with a given common vertex in the analogous tessellation in .

Each building is a simplicial complex which has to satisfy the following axioms:

* is a union of apartments.
* Any two simplices in are contained in a common apartment.
* If a simplex is contained in two apartments, there is a simplicial isomorphism of one onto the other fixing all common points.

===Spherical building===
Let be a field and let be the simplicial complex with vertices the non-trivial vector subspaces of . Two subspaces and are connected if one of them is a subset of the other. The -simplices of are formed by sets of mutually connected subspaces. Maximal connectivity is obtained by taking proper non-trivial subspaces and the corresponding -simplex corresponds to a &quot;complete flag&quot;

Lower dimensional simplices correspond to partial flags with fewer intermediary subspaces .

To define the apartments in , it is convenient to define a &quot;frame&quot; in as a basis () determined up to scalar multiplication of each of its vectors ; in other words a frame is a set of one-dimensional subspaces such that any of them generate a -dimensional subspace. Now an ordered frame defines a complete flag via

Since reorderings of the various also give a frame, it is straightforward to see that the subspaces, obtained as sums of the , form a simplicial complex of the type required for an apartment of a spherical building. The axioms for a building can easily be verified using the classical Schreier refinement argument used to prove the uniqueness of the Jordan–Hölder decomposition.

===Affine building===
Let be a field lying between and its -adic completion with respect to the usual non-Archimedean -adic norm on for some prime . Let be the subring of defined by

When , is the localization of at and, when , , the -adic integers, i.e. the closure of in .

The vertices of the building are the -lattices in , i.e. -submodules of the form

where is a basis of over . Two lattices are said to be &quot;equivalent&quot; if one is a scalar multiple of the other by an element of the multiplicative group of (in fact only integer powers of need be used). Two lattices and are said to be &quot;adjacent&quot; if some lattice equivalent to lies between and its sublattice : this relation is symmetric. The -simplices of are equivalence classes of mutually adjacent lattices, The -simplices correspond, after relabelling, to chains

where each successive quotient has order . Apartments are defined by fixing a basis of and taking all lattices with basis where lies in and is uniquely determined up to addition of the same integer to each entry.

By definition each apartment has the required form and their union is the whole of . The second axiom follows by a variant of the Schreier refinement argument. The last axiom follows by a simple counting argument based on the orders of finite Abelian groups of the form

A standard compactness argument shows that is in fact independent of the choice of . In particular taking , it follows that is countable. On the other hand, taking , the definition shows that admits a natural simplicial action on the building.

The building comes equipped with a &quot;labelling&quot; of its vertices with values in . Indeed, fixing a reference lattice , the label of is given by

for sufficiently large. The vertices of any -simplex in has distinct labels, running through the whole of . Any simplicial automorphism of defines a permutation of such that . In particular for in ,

Thus preserves labels if lies in .

===Automorphisms===
Tits proved that any label-preserving automorphism of the affine building arises from an element of . Since automorphisms of the building permute the labels, there is a natural homomorphism

The action of gives rise to an -cycle . Other automorphisms of the building arise from outer automorphisms of associated with automorphisms of the Dynkin diagram. Taking the standard symmetric bilinear form with orthonormal basis , the map sending a lattice to its dual lattice gives an automorphism whose square is the identity, giving the permutation that sends each label to its negative modulo . The image of the above homomorphism is generated by and and is isomorphic to the dihedral group of order ; when , it gives the whole of .

If is a finite Galois extension of and the building is constructed from instead of , the Galois group will also act by automorphisms on the building.

===Geometric relations===
Spherical buildings arise in two quite different ways in connection with the affine building for :

* The link of each vertex in the affine building corresponds to submodules of under the finite field . This is just the spherical building for .
* The building can be &quot;compactified&quot; by adding the spherical building for as boundary &quot;at infinity&quot; (see or ).

===Bruhat–Tits trees with complex multiplication===

When is an archimedean local field then on the building for the group an additional structure can be imposed of a building with complex multiplication. These were first introduced by Martin L. Brown (). These buildings arise when a quadratic extension of acts on the vector space . These building with complex multiplication can be extended to any global field. They describe the action of the Hecke operators on Heegner points on the classical modular curve as well as on the Drinfeld modular curve . These buildings with complex multiplication are completely classified for the case of in 

==Classification==
Tits proved that all irreducible spherical buildings (i.e. with finite Weyl group) of rank greater than 2 are associated to simple algebraic or classical groups.

A similar result holds for irreducible affine buildings of dimension greater than 2 (their buildings &quot;at infinity&quot; are spherical of rank greater than two). In lower rank or dimension, there is no such classification. Indeed, each incidence structure gives a spherical building of rank 2 (see ); and Ballmann and Brin proved that every 2-dimensional simplicial complex in which the links of vertices are isomorphic to the flag complex of a finite projective plane has the structure of a building, not necessarily classical. Many 2-dimensional affine buildings have been constructed using hyperbolic reflection groups or other more exotic constructions connected with orbifolds.

Tits also proved that every time a building is described by a pair in a group, then in almost all cases the automorphisms of the building correspond to automorphisms of the group (see ).

==Applications==

The theory of buildings has important applications in several rather disparate fields. Besides the already mentioned connections with the structure of reductive algebraic groups over general and local fields, buildings are used to study their representations. The results of Tits on determination of a group by its building have deep connections with rigidity theorems of George Mostow and Grigory Margulis, and with Margulis arithmeticity.

Special types of buildings are studied in discrete mathematics, and the idea of a geometric approach to characterizing simple groups proved very fruitful in the classification of finite simple groups. The theory of buildings of type more general than spherical or affine is still relatively undeveloped, but these generalized buildings have already found applications to construction of Kac–Moody groups in algebra, and to nonpositively curved manifolds and hyperbolic groups in topology and geometric group theory.

== See also ==

* Buekenhout geometry
* Coxeter group
* pair
* Affine Hecke algebra
* Bruhat decomposition
* Generalized polygon
* Mostow rigidity
* Coxeter complex
* Weyl distance function
==References==
*
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
*

==External links==
* Rousseau: Euclidean Buildings</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986445" start="18" end="26" title="Building (mathematics)" label="building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986445" start="33" end="46" title="Building (mathematics)" label="Tits building"/>
<link wikidata="Q451331" start="60" end="72" title="Jacques Tits" label="Jacques Tits"/>
<link wikidata="Q938283" start="169" end="182" title="flag manifold" label="flag manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475760" start="192" end="208" title="projective plane" label="projective plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058244" start="215" end="241" title="Riemannian symmetric space" label="Riemannian symmetric space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="338" end="347" title="Reductive_group#Non-split_reductive_groups" label="isotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006450" start="348" end="357" title="Reductive group" label="reductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553407" start="358" end="381" title="Linear algebraic group" label="linear algebraic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q931374" start="476" end="491" title="François Bruhat" label="François Bruhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="522" end="538" title="p-adic Lie group" label="-adic Lie groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058244" start="574" end="590" title="symmetric spaces" label="symmetric spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="608" end="617" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q451331" start="676" end="688" title="Jacques Tits" label="Jacques Tits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406425" start="714" end="737" title="group of Lie type" label="simple algebraic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="756" end="761" title="field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="799" end="804" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q994399" start="825" end="843" title="simplicial complex" label="simplicial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="852" end="858" title="Group action (mathematics)" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874246" start="1186" end="1199" title="Coxeter group" label="Coxeter group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874246" start="1575" end="1592" title="affine Weyl group" label="affine Weyl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q272735" start="1756" end="1760" title="tree (graph theory)" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475760" start="1955" end="1972" title="Projective plane" label="projective planes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754558" start="1977" end="1999" title="generalized quadrangle" label="generalized quadrangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582901" start="2039" end="2057" title="incidence geometry" label="incidence geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868517" start="2720" end="2747" title="local field" label="local non-Archimedean field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669959" start="3304" end="3331" title="abstract simplicial complex" label="abstract simplicial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="3549" end="3554" title="graph theory" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3877" end="3883" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179939" start="3993" end="4008" title="Coxeter complex" label="Coxeter complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874246" start="4283" end="4296" title="Coxeter group" label="Coxeter group"/>
<link wikidata="Q768074" start="4310" end="4320" title="Weyl group" label="Weyl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874246" start="4726" end="4743" title="affine Weyl group" label="affine Weyl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855712" start="5014" end="5027" title="intrinsic metric" label="length metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365325" start="5114" end="5131" title="orthonormal basis" label="orthonormal basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="5137" end="5150" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008891" start="5200" end="5200" title="CAT(k) space" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q934314" start="5226" end="5236" title="Aleksandr Danilovich Aleksandrov" label="Alexandrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317188" start="5702" end="5706" title="BN pair" label="pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317188" start="5710" end="5721" title="Tits system" label="Tits system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944913" start="6014" end="6028" title="Borel subgroup" label="Borel subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6638" end="6658" title="Solomon-Tits theorem" label="Solomon-Tits theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781358" start="6764" end="6782" title="bouquet of spheres" label="bouquet of spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="7004" end="7011" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="7016" end="7024" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q214856" start="7251" end="7263" title="tessellation" label="tessellating"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="7795" end="7800" title="field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392130" start="8156" end="8169" title="Flag (linear algebra)" label="complete flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432872" start="8880" end="8908" title="Schreier refinement theorem" label="Schreier refinement argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525646" start="8945" end="8972" title="Jordan–Hölder decomposition" label="Jordan–Hölder decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q311627" start="9034" end="9050" title="p-adic number" label="-adic completion"/>
<link wikidata="Q634579" start="9077" end="9092" title="Archimedean property" label="non-Archimedean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4008396" start="9093" end="9103" title="p-adic norm" label="-adic norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q929536" start="9135" end="9142" title="subring" label="subring"/>
<link wikidata="Q289093" start="9172" end="9184" title="Localization of a ring" label="localization"/>
<link wikidata="Q311627" start="9209" end="9223" title="p-adic integer" label="-adic integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18848" start="9309" end="9319" title="submodules" label="submodules"/>
<link wikidata="Q782566" start="10996" end="11008" title="automorphism" label="automorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q212130" start="11180" end="11186" title="cyclic permutation" label="-cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q77980689" start="11236" end="11254" title="outer automorphism" label="outer automorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319218" start="11296" end="11310" title="Dynkin diagram" label="Dynkin diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q558339" start="11630" end="11644" title="dihedral group" label="dihedral group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020004" start="11703" end="11719" title="Galois extension" label="Galois extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q730384" start="11777" end="11789" title="Galois group" label="Galois group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554239" start="11971" end="11975" title="link (geometry)" label="link"/>
<link wikidata="Q546145" start="12138" end="12150" title="compactification (mathematics)" label="compactified"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12478" end="12493" title="Martin L. Brown" label="Martin L. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q768074" start="12978" end="12988" title="Weyl group" label="Weyl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q367329" start="13310" end="13329" title="incidence structure" label="incidence structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134413" start="13501" end="13513" title="flag complex" label="flag complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307244" start="13678" end="13694" title="reflection group" label="reflection group"/>
<link wikidata="Q40460" start="13746" end="13754" title="orbifold" label="orbifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055807" start="14207" end="14222" title="group representation" label="representations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984063" start="14315" end="14332" title="Mostow rigidity theorem" label="rigidity theorems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507954" start="14336" end="14349" title="George Mostow" label="George Mostow"/>
<link wikidata="Q325705" start="14354" end="14370" title="Grigory Margulis" label="Grigory Margulis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14381" end="14403" title="Margulis arithmeticity" label="Margulis arithmeticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340623" start="14567" end="14605" title="classification of finite simple groups" label="classification of finite simple groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q856666" start="14793" end="14809" title="Kac–Moody algebra" label="Kac–Moody groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q81194" start="14864" end="14880" title="hyperbolic group" label="hyperbolic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662474" start="14898" end="14920" title="geometric group theory" label="geometric group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985363" start="14941" end="14960" title="Buekenhout geometry" label="Buekenhout geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874246" start="14963" end="14976" title="Coxeter group" label="Coxeter group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317188" start="14979" end="14983" title="(B, N) pair" label="pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688934" start="14986" end="15006" title="Affine Hecke algebra" label="Affine Hecke algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978699" start="15009" end="15029" title="Bruhat decomposition" label="Bruhat decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532502" start="15032" end="15051" title="Generalized polygon" label="Generalized polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984063" start="15054" end="15069" title="Mostow rigidity" label="Mostow rigidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179939" start="15072" end="15087" title="Coxeter complex" label="Coxeter complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303876" start="15090" end="15112" title="Weyl distance function" label="Weyl distance function"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="275016" wikidata="Q151165" url="?curid=275016" title="Charles Dana Gibson">
<text>Charles Dana Gibson (September 14, 1867 – December 23, 1944) was an American illustrator who created the Gibson Girl, an iconic representation of the beautiful and independent American woman at the turn of the 20th century.

He published his illustrations in &quot;Life&quot; magazine and other major national publications for more than 30 years, becoming editor in 1918 and later owner of the general interest magazine.

==Early life==
Gibson was born in Roxbury, Massachusetts on September 14, 1867. He was a son of Josephine Elizabeth (née Lovett) and Charles DeWolf Gibson. He had five siblings and was a descendant of U.S. Senators James DeWolf and William Bradford.

A talented youth with an early interest in art, Gibson was enrolled by his parents in New York City&#x27;s Art Students League, where he studied for two years.

==Career==

Peddling his pen-and-ink sketches, Gibson sold his first work in 1886 to &quot;Life&quot; magazine, founded by John Ames Mitchell and Andrew Miller. It featured general interest articles, humor, illustrations, and cartoons. His works appeared weekly in the popular national magazine for more than 30 years. He quickly built a wider reputation, with his drawings being featured in all the major New York publications, including &quot;Harper&#x27;s Weekly&quot;, &quot;Scribners&quot; and &quot;Collier&#x27;s&quot;. His illustrated books include the 1898 editions of Anthony Hope&#x27;s &quot;The Prisoner of Zenda&quot; and its sequel &quot;Rupert of Hentzau&quot; as well as Richard Harding Davis&#x27; &quot;Gallegher and Other Stories&quot;.

It is an oft-repeated urban legend that Gibson&#x27;s wife and her elegant Langhorne sisters inspired his famous Gibson Girls, who became iconic images in early 20th-century society. The truth is that the first Gibson Girl appeared in 1890, more than two years before Gibson ever met the Langhorne family, and in later years it became fashionable for many of Gibson&#x27;s friends and family to model for his illustrations. Their dynamic and resourceful father Chiswell Langhorne had his wealth severely reduced by the Civil War, but by the late 19th century, he had rebuilt his fortune on tobacco auctioneering and the railroad industry.

After the death of John Ames Mitchell in 1918, Gibson became editor of &quot;Life&quot; and later took over as owner of the magazine. As the popularity of the Gibson Girl faded after World War I, Gibson took to working in oils for his own pleasure. In 1918, he was elected into the National Academy of Design as an Associate member, and became a full Academician in 1932.

He retired in 1936, the same year Scribner&#x27;s published his biography, &quot;Portrait of an Era as Drawn by C. D. Gibson: A Biography&quot; by Fairfax Downey. At the time of his death in 1944, he was considered &quot;the most celebrated pen-and-ink artist of his time as well as a painter applauded by the critics of his later work.&quot;
== Personal life ==
On November 7, 1895, Gibson was married to Irene Langhorne (1873–1956), a daughter of railroad industrialist Chiswell Langhorne. Irene was born in Danville, Virginia, and was one of five sisters, all noted for their beauty, including Nancy Astor, Viscountess Astor, the first woman to serve as a Member of Parliament (MP) in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom. Irene and Charles were the parents of two children:

* Irene Langhorne Gibson (1897–1973), who married George Browne Post III (1890–1952), a grandson of architect George B. Post, in 1916. They divorced and she married real estate developer John Josiah Emery (1898–1976) in 1926.
* Langhorne Gibson (1899–1982), who married Marion Taylor (1902–1960) in 1922. He later married Parthenia Burke Ross (1911–1998) in 1936.

For part of his career, Gibson lived in New Rochelle, New York, a popular art colony among actors, writers and artists of the period. The community was best known for its unprecedented number of prominent American illustrators. Gibson also owned an island off Islesboro, Maine which came to be known as 700 Acre Island; he and his wife spent an increasing amount of time there through the years.

Gibson died of a heart ailment in 1944, aged 77, at 127 East 73rd Street, his home in New York City. After a private funeral service at the Gibson home in New York, he was interred at Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge, Massachusetts. His widow died at her home in Greenwood, Virginia in April 1956 at the age of 83.

==Work==
==See also==
*Longfield (Charles Dana Gibson House)

== Citations ==
== General and cited sources ==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q151165" start="0" end="19" title="Charles Dana Gibson" label="Charles Dana Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q607596" start="105" end="116" title="Gibson Girl" label="Gibson Girl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="265" end="269" title="Life (magazine)#1883 humor and general interest magazine" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q20138" start="456" end="478" title="Roxbury, Massachusetts" label="Roxbury, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618956" start="637" end="649" title="James DeWolf" label="James DeWolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q932530" start="654" end="670" title="William Bradford (Rhode Island)" label="William Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q705737" start="780" end="799" title="Art Students League of New York" label="Art Students League"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="925" end="929" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218902" start="957" end="975" title="John Ames Mitchell" label="John Ames Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758031" start="980" end="993" title="Andrew Miller (publisher)" label="Andrew Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127693" start="1279" end="1299" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Weekly" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q845617" start="1313" end="1322" title="Scribners" label="Scribners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109549" start="1339" end="1353" title="Collier&amp;#x27;s Weekly" label="Collier&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q457287" start="1412" end="1424" title="Anthony Hope" label="Anthony Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193766" start="1438" end="1459" title="The Prisoner of Zenda" label="The Prisoner of Zenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380383" start="1487" end="1504" title="Rupert of Hentzau" label="Rupert of Hentzau"/>
<link wikidata="Q922457" start="1522" end="1543" title="Richard Harding Davis" label="Richard Harding Davis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1556" end="1583" title="Gallegher and Other Stories" label="Gallegher and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102159" start="2053" end="2071" title="Chiswell Langhorne" label="Chiswell Langhorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q502218" start="2514" end="2540" title="National Academy of Design" label="National Academy of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102159" start="3077" end="3095" title="Chiswell Langhorne" label="Chiswell Langhorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q511922" start="3115" end="3133" title="Danville, Virginia" label="Danville, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q195013" start="3202" end="3232" title="Nancy Astor, Viscountess Astor" label="Nancy Astor, Viscountess Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="3264" end="3284" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="3297" end="3335" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q670136" start="3500" end="3514" title="George B. Post" label="George B. Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241042" start="3577" end="3594" title="John Josiah Emery" label="John Josiah Emery"/>
<link wikidata="Q744948" start="3795" end="3817" title="New Rochelle, New York" label="New Rochelle, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877130" start="3829" end="3839" title="New Rochelle artist colony" label="art colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447585" start="4015" end="4031" title="Islesboro, Maine" label="Islesboro, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186235" start="4169" end="4182" title="Myocarditis" label="heart ailment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277703" start="4208" end="4224" title="73rd Street (Manhattan)" label="East 73rd Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950363" start="4336" end="4357" title="Mount Auburn Cemetery" label="Mount Auburn Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="4361" end="4385" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604922" start="4417" end="4436" title="Greenwood, Albemarle County, Virginia" label="Greenwood, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673805" start="4493" end="4530" title="Longfield (Bristol, Rhode Island)" label="Longfield (Charles Dana Gibson House)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="275018" wikidata="Q2002520" url="?curid=275018" title="University of the West of England">
<text>The University of the West of England (also known as UWE Bristol) is a public research university, located in and around Bristol, England, UK. With more than 39,912 students and 4,300 staff, it is the largest provider of higher education in the South West of England.

The institution was known as the Bristol Polytechnic in 1969; it received university status in 1992 and became the University of the West of England, Bristol. In common with the University of Bristol and University of Bath, it can trace its origins to the Merchant Venturers&#x27; Technical College, founded as a school in 1595 by the Society of Merchant Venturers.

UWE Bristol is made up of several campuses in Greater Bristol. Frenchay Campus is the largest campus in terms of student numbers, as most of its courses are based there. City campus provides courses in the creative and cultural industries, and is made up of Bower Ashton Studios, Arnolfini, Spike Island, and Watershed. The institution is affiliated with the Bristol Old Vic Theatre School and validates its higher education courses. Frenchay Campus and Glenside Campus are home to most of the Faculty of Health and Applied Sciences.

==History==
===Early foundations===
The University of the West of England can trace its roots back to the foundation of the Merchant Venturers Navigation School in 1595.

In 1894, the school became the Merchant Venturers Technical College. The University of Bristol was formed just a few years after this, leaving the college for the foundation of UWE Bristol. The college was partly responsible for the creation of the Bristol College of Science and Technology (BCST) in 1960, which later gained a royal charter to form the University of Bath in 1965.

The technical college in turn became &quot;Bristol Polytechnic&quot; in 1970; the then-main campus was at Ashley Down, now a campus of the City of Bristol College.

Bower Ashton Studios was formed in 1969 as the West of England College of Art, which was formerly the art school of the Royal West of England Academy in Queens Road, Bristol. The St Matthias site (which is no longer owned by the university) was originally built in Victorian times and was a teacher training college. These campuses, together with campuses in Redland, Ashley Down, Unity Street and Frenchay became part of Bristol Polytechnic around 1976.

===University status===
The institution gained university status and its present name as a result of the Further and Higher Education Act, 1992. The Avon and Gloucestershire College of Health, which is now Glenside Campus, and the Bath and Swindon College of Health Studies joined in January 1996. Hartpury campus joined in 1997. The university was a lead academic sponsor of Bristol Technology and Engineering Academy, a new university technical college, until its closure in 2022.

===Rebrand===

In the spring of 2016, UWE Bristol launched a rebranding campaign which introduced a new look to the university, with a new logo as part of the Strategy 2020.

==Campuses==


===Frenchay Campus===

UWE Bristol&#x27;s largest and primary campus is located north of Bristol city centre in the Stoke Park and Cheswick parish of South Gloucestershire, part of the North Fringe of Bristol. It is named after the village of Frenchay, to the east. Filton is to the west and Stoke Gifford to the north.

Frenchay Campus opened in 1975 on of what had been farmland in Stoke Gifford parish. In September 2008, UWE purchased a further of adjoining land which had been occupied by Hewlett-Packard, enabling a western expansion of the campus.

The campus is home to:

* Bristol Robotics Laboratory, which opened in 2012.
* UWE Bristol International College, opened in 2012, providing international students with academic, subject-based and English language skills.
*The Students&#x27; Union, which moved to two interlinked buildings in 2015, bringing all Students&#x27; Union services together.
* Future Space, a business incubator providing space for over 70 hi-tech companies, one of only four university enterprise zones in the UK when it opened in 2016.
* Bristol Business School and Bristol Law School, which moved to the new Business School building completed in 2017.
* The engineering building, a 4-storey building with laboratories, workshops and lecture theatres that cater explicitly to engineering disciplines, which opened 2020.
* A sports centre which opened in 2016.
* An exhibition and conference centre, opened in former Hewlett-Packard buildings in 2010.

=== City Campus ===
City Campus is made up of Bower Ashton Studios, Spike Island, Arnolfini and Watershed.

====Bower Ashton Studios====
Bower Ashton Studios is home to the creative and cultural subjects, which are part of the Faculty of Arts, Creative Industries and Education. Adjacent to the Ashton Court estate, on the edge of the city of Bristol, the West of England College of Art was established in purpose-built premises in 1969, moving from its previous location as the art school of the Royal West of England Academy in Clifton. In 1970 the college became part of Bristol Polytechnic, the precursor of the university.

Every year in June the campus houses a degree show attended by Bristol residents as well as friends and families of the graduating students.

===Glenside Campus===

Glenside Campus is the home of the Faculty of Health and Applied Sciences. It is located on Blackberry Hill in the suburb of Fishponds. The Faculty of Health and Applied Sciences (formerly the Faculty of Health and Social Care) was created in 1996 when the former Avon and Gloucestershire College of Health and Bath and Swindon College of Health Studies joined with the existing Faculty of Health and Community Studies at UWE Bristol. The Glenside Museum is situated within the campus.

The Faculty of Health and Applied Sciences includes the following departments:
* Department of Allied Health Professions
* Department of Applied Sciences
* Department of Health and Social Sciences
* Department of Nursing and Midwifery

It offers full- and part-time courses at all levels in the areas of Midwifery, Nursing, Occupational Therapy, Physiotherapy, Radiography, Social Work and other health-related professions.

===St Matthias Campus===
St Matthias Campus was in Fishponds in Bristol. Built in the Victorian times by the Church of England, the campus has some Victorian Gothic buildings, set around a sunken lawn. St Matthias campus was home to various departments of the faculty of Creative Arts, Humanities and Education. UWE closed the campus in 2014 and the departments moved to new facilities at Frenchay campus. The site has since been redeveloped for housing and the listed buildings converted to a Steiner School.

==Organisation and administration==

===Structure===
The university is divided into four faculties which are then subdivided into departments:
* Faculty of Arts, Creative Industries and Education
** Department of Arts and Cultural Industries
** School of Art and Design
** Department of Education and Childhood
** School of Film and Journalism
** Bristol School of Animation (Affiliated School)
** Bristol Old Vic Theatre School (Associate School)
* Faculty of Business and Law
** Bristol Business School
***Department of Accounting, Economics and Finance
***Department of Business and Management
** Bristol Law School
* Faculty of Environment and Technology
** Department of Architecture and the Built Environment
** Department of Computer Science and Creative Technologies
** Department of Engineering Design and Mathematics
** Department of Geography and Environmental Management
* Faculty of Health and Applied Sciences
** Department of Allied Health Professions
** Department of Biological, Biomedical and Analytical Sciences
** Department of Health and Social Sciences
** Department of Nursing and Midwifery
* Hartpury College (Associate Faculty)
** Sport
** Equine
** Agriculture
** Professional
** Veterinary nursing

===School of Art and Design===

The School of Art and Design became part of the Faculty of Arts, Creative Industries and Education (ACE) following the university&#x27;s reorganisation in 2010/11. Adjacent to the Ashton Court estate in Bower Ashton, the West of England College of Art was established in purpose-built premises in 1969, moving from its previous location as the art school of the Royal West of England Academy in Clifton.

Among its principals and deans were the war artist Jack Bridger Chalker, the graphic designer Paul van Der Lem, and Paul Gough RWA, a researcher and art historian, who became the first pro-vice chancellor and executive dean of the former faculty in its expanded form of over 2,600 students.

===Department of Education and Childhood===
The Department of Education and Childhood (formerly the School of Education) is part of the Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities. Its origins lie in teacher training colleges at Redland and St Matthias which became part of the former Bristol Polytechnic in 1969. The dean of the school is Ron Ritchie, who is also an assistant vice-chancellor of the university. A new purpose built home for the department was completed in 2000 for the department at the university&#x27;s Frenchay campus.

The department offers undergraduate degrees in initial teacher education in early years education or primary education, as well as an education studies + PGCE (3+1) programme. Postgraduate Certificate in Education courses are offered as well as a range of professional development courses for teachers, further and higher education teachers and lecturers, and school support staff.

===Coat of arms===
Echoing Bristol&#x27;s long connection with the sea and the Merchant Venturers&#x27; Navigation School, the top of the crest depicts a ship&#x27;s mainmast and rigging. The flaming fire basket indicates guidance, hope and the desire for learning.

The shield at the centre is adapted from that of the College of St Matthias with the wavy line representing the rivers of Avon and Severn. The unicorn is taken from the arms of the City of Bristol and the sea stag from those of the former County of Avon. Both these creatures wear a crown of King Edgar around their necks. Edgar is regarded as a local monarch because he was crowned in Bath Abbey in 973. The wavy lines enclosed in circles on the shoulders represent the fountain of knowledge and learning.

The unicorn and sea stag each support an apple tree, known as the tree of knowledge and is taken from the coat of arms of the Council for National Academic Awards which used to authorise degrees awarded to students of Bristol Polytechnic.

The motto &quot;Light, Liberty, Learning&quot; is a Disraeli quotation and corresponds directly to the symbolism of the coat of arms. The fire basket represents the Light, the Bristol and Avon supporters represent liberty, and the trees of knowledge and learning.

==Academic profile==

===Rankings and reputation===

UWE Bristol was ranked within the top 25 universities in the UK by &quot;The Guardian University Guide&quot; 2021. UWE Bristol is only one of four universities in the UK to have a University Enterprise Zone providing space for over 70 businesses, and the largest UK robotics lab.

The 2018 Teaching Excellence Framework, a government assessment of the quality of undergraduate teaching in universities, awarded the university with a Gold rating. In 2017, UWE Bristol was ranked as one of the top 150 universities in the world under 50 in THE Times&#x27; ranking. In 2019, it ranked 464th among the universities around the world by &quot;SCImago Institutions Rankings&quot;.

Ofsted reports have rated UWE Bristol&#x27;s primary, secondary and further education initial teacher training (ITT) courses as good.

===Research===
The volume of world-leading research at UWE Bristol has gone up by 170%, according to the results of the Research Excellence Framework (REF) 2014. The REF 2014 results reveal that 57 percent of the research submitted by UWE Bristol was judged to be either world leading or internationally excellent. The results highlight UWE Bristol&#x27;s particular strengths in the areas of allied health and nursing, and communications, cultural and media studies. Results were also outstanding in areas such as architecture, built environment and planning; engineering; art and design; computer science; and business and management.

In 2010, UWE Bristol launched a research repository in order to host electronic versions of the research of its academics. The UWE Bristol Research Repository is open access.

===Bristol Robotics Laboratory and Future Space===
Bristol Robotics Laboratory (BRL), the largest robotics laboratory of its type in the UK was officially opened on 10 May 2012 by David Willetts, Minister for Universities and Science. The laboratory is a partnership between University of the West of England (UWE) and the University of Bristol.

According to EE/Times, it is the largest robotics laboratory in Europe. The BRL is home to a community of 70 academics and businesses who are leading current thinking in nouvelle and service robotics, intelligent autonomous systems and bio-engineering. Over £1.65 million has been spent on the new facilities. The total area of the BRL is circa 2,400 m2, with over 300 square metres of specialised laboratory space and two Flying Arenas.
Future Space is a business incubator adjacent to the Bristol Robotics Laboratory, in a former Hewlett-Packard factory building which was bought by UWE Bristol in 2015 and converted. It can house up to 70 hi-tech startup companies and early-stage companies. It is the £16.5 million realisation of the West of England University Enterprise Zone (UEZ), one of four UEZs supported by the UK government, which were initially announced by Chancellor George Osborne in 2014. The main areas of focus of the UEZ are robotics, biotechnology and biomedicine. It is a collaboration with the West of England Local Enterprise Partnership and the University of Bristol, supported by South Gloucestershire Council, the University of Bath and the West of England Academic Health Science Network. Future Space opened in autumn 2016.

===National College for Legal Training===
The National College of Legal Training (NCLT) is a collaboration between UWE Bristol and Central Law Training, launched in January 2010 to provide postgraduate legal training. NCLT Study centres are located at Coventry University, Manchester Metropolitan University, Southampton Solent University and University of Westminster.

===The Bristol Distinguished Address Series===

Based at the University of the West of England Campus in Frenchay the series of lectures bring business leaders to Bristol. The conference covers a wide range of topics including business, technology &amp; innovation, science and local &amp; global issues.

==Student life==

===Students&#x27; Union===

The Students&#x27; Union at UWE, formerly UWE Students&#x27; Union (&#x27;UWESU&#x27;), is based at Frenchay campus and was established in 1971. It is run by a team of five sabbatical officers, who are elected annually from the student population. The new Students&#x27; Union building was completed in Summer 2015 and operates a bar, a coffee shop and two convenience stores at Frenchay Campus. A Students&#x27; Union bar and shop is also available at Glenside Campus and Bower Ashton Studios. The student radio station, Hub Radio operates out of a studio on campus.

===Student accommodation===
In September 2006, Frenchay Student Village opened providing on-campus accommodation for 1,932 students, adding to the 252 units already provided in Carroll Court. Campus accommodation is also provided at Glenside. In partnership with UNITE Student Housing a further 1,500 places are provided in Bristol City Centre and UWE Bristol Accommodation services also places students in vetted private rentals. All accommodation at UWE is self-catering.

In September 2014, Wallscourt Park opened on Frenchay Campus.
Following the 2020–21 academic year, Carroll Court was knocked down and construction began on new accommodation in its place in order to accommodate extra students.

In September 2023, TV presenter Kirstie Allsopp accused the university of &quot;grossly exploiting&quot; students, after delays to the completion of new accommodation on campus meant that students were being allocated student accommodation in Cheltenham and Gloucester. UWE later confirmed 87 students had started their degree courses in Cheltenham and another 47 in Gloucester, but that it planned to relocate them back to the UWE campus &quot;as soon as it’s available&quot;. The university had previously been criticised for offering students places at Usk Way student accommodation in Newport, South Wales.

The main halls of residence are:

Student Village – Frenchay Campus
* Brecon Court 
* Cotswold Court
* Mendip Court 
* Quantock Court 
Frenchay Campus
* Ashley Village (demolished around 2005 to make way for the S Block)
* Carroll Court (demolished in 2022 to make way for new accommodations) 
* Wallscourt Park 
Glenside Campus
* Glenside (on Glenside campus)
* The Hollies (opposite Glenside Campus)
Bristol City Centre
* Marketgate (owned by Unite Group)
* Nelson and Drake House (owned by Unite Group)
* Blenheim Court (owned by Unite Group)
* Phoenix Court (owned by Unite Group)
* Transom House (owned by Host students)

===Sport===
The University of the West of England Boat Club is the rowing club belonging to the university.

The UWE Bullets are the American Football team belonging to the university. The team won the British Universities American Football League championship between 2022 and 2024.

==Notable alumni==

* Silas Adekunle – entrepreneur
* Angellica Bell – BBC Politics, TV and radio presenter
* Helen Blaby – BBC radio reporter, newspaper columnist
* Samantha Cameron – business executive, wife of David Cameron
* Ian Cognito – comedian
* Paul Coldwell – artist
* David Fisher – artist
* Bear Grylls – English adventurer and TV presenter
* Larry Godfrey – Olympic archer
* Peter J. Hall (1926–2010), costume designer for the Dallas Opera.
* Miranda Hart – comedian
* Russell Howard – comedian
* Myles Jackman – lawyer
* CY Leung – Vice Chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese People&#x27;s Political Consultative Conference
* Lee Chee Leong – Malaysian Deputy Home Minister
* Lady Davina Lewis – member of British Royal Family
* Richard Long – sculptor
* Kate Malone – studiopotter
* Jamie Oliver – keyboardist of Welsh rock band Lostprophets
* Dawn Primarolo – Labour Party Member of Parliament
* Pete Reed – Olympic rower
* Seyi Rhodes – television presenter and investigative journalist
* Jack Russell – cricketer
* Christopher Sadler – animator director, who works with Aardman Animations
* Simon Shaw – rugby union England international
* Lyndon Smith – academic
* Hugo Southwell – rugby union Scotland international
* Marko Stanojevic – rugby union Italy international
* Shirley Teed – artist
* Teo Nie Ching – Malaysian Democratic Action Party Member of Parliament
* Dominic Waghorn – U.S. correspondent of &quot;Sky News&quot;
* Tim Atkins - Scotland hockey player
* Simon Carroll - Studio potter

== Notable faculty ==

* Alison Assiter, professor of feminist theory
* Victoria Clarke
* Richard Coates
* Owen Holland
* Aaron Schuman
* Peter Howells
* Stephen J. Hunt
* Julie Kent
* Howard Newby
* Lyndon Smith
* Steven West

==See also==
* Armorial of UK universities
* List of universities in the UK
* Post-1992 universities

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==

* University of West of England website
* Students&#x27; Union website
* UWE Research Repository</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2002520" start="4" end="37" title="University of the West of England" label="University of the West of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002520" start="53" end="64" title="University of the West of England" label="UWE Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="71" end="77" title="Public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="78" end="97" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="121" end="128" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q48026" start="245" end="266" title="South West of England" label="South West of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q459506" start="447" end="468" title="University of Bristol" label="University of Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422458" start="473" end="491" title="University of Bath" label="University of Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487452" start="604" end="633" title="Merchant Venturers" label="Society of Merchant Venturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096564" start="682" end="697" title="Greater Bristol" label="Greater Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795363" start="916" end="925" title="Arnolfini, Bristol" label="Arnolfini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577196" start="927" end="939" title="Spike Island, Bristol" label="Spike Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974412" start="945" end="954" title="Watershed (Bristol)" label="Watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q608723" start="995" end="1025" title="Bristol Old Vic Theatre School" label="Bristol Old Vic Theatre School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487452" start="1295" end="1313" title="Society of Merchant Venturers" label="Merchant Venturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q459506" start="1415" end="1436" title="University of Bristol" label="University of Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422458" start="1696" end="1714" title="University of Bath" label="University of Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123606" start="1864" end="1887" title="City of Bristol College" label="City of Bristol College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594712" start="2069" end="2080" title="St Matthias, Bristol" label="St Matthias"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091069" start="2451" end="2489" title="Further and Higher Education Act, 1992" label="Further and Higher Education Act, 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569338" start="2552" end="2567" title="Glenside, Bristol" label="Glenside Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255497" start="2722" end="2764" title="Bristol Technology and Engineering Academy" label="Bristol Technology and Engineering Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894959" start="2772" end="2800" title="university technical college" label="university technical college"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3136" end="3159" title="Stoke Park and Cheswick" label="Stoke Park and Cheswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369280" start="3170" end="3191" title="South Gloucestershire" label="South Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055457" start="3205" end="3228" title="North Fringe of Bristol" label="North Fringe of Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502687" start="3263" end="3271" title="Frenchay" label="Frenchay"/>
<link wikidata="Q537692" start="3286" end="3292" title="Filton" label="Filton"/>
<link wikidata="Q530885" start="3312" end="3325" title="Stoke Gifford" label="Stoke Gifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="3514" end="3529" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969119" start="3602" end="3629" title="Bristol Robotics Laboratory" label="Bristol Robotics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132207" start="3945" end="3963" title="business incubator" label="business incubator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968941" start="4120" end="4138" title="Bristol Law School" label="Bristol Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806024" start="4801" end="4813" title="Ashton Court" label="Ashton Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375007" start="5003" end="5032" title="Royal West of England Academy" label="Royal West of England Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376216" start="5036" end="5043" title="Clifton, Bristol" label="Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455126" start="5425" end="5434" title="Fishponds" label="Fishponds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569343" start="5739" end="5754" title="Glenside Museum" label="Glenside Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q20862341" start="6091" end="6100" title="Midwifery" label="Midwifery"/>
<link wikidata="Q121176" start="6102" end="6109" title="Nursing" label="Nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q380141" start="6111" end="6131" title="Occupational Therapy" label="Occupational Therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="6133" end="6146" title="Physiotherapy" label="Physiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q245341" start="6148" end="6159" title="Radiography" label="Radiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455126" start="6263" end="6272" title="Fishponds" label="Fishponds"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="6360" end="6376" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Victorian Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6706" end="6720" title="Waldorf education#United Kingdom" label="Steiner School"/>
<link wikidata="Q608723" start="7121" end="7151" title="Bristol Old Vic Theatre School" label="Bristol Old Vic Theatre School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968941" start="7323" end="7341" title="Bristol Law School" label="Bristol Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q132451294" start="7839" end="7855" title="Hartpury College" label="Hartpury College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806024" start="8161" end="8173" title="Ashton Court" label="Ashton Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q15204021" start="8184" end="8196" title="Bower Ashton" label="Bower Ashton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375007" start="8343" end="8372" title="Royal West of England Academy" label="Royal West of England Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376216" start="8376" end="8383" title="Clifton, Bristol" label="Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111404" start="8437" end="8457" title="Jack Bridger Chalker" label="Jack Bridger Chalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306009" start="8905" end="8912" title="Redland, Bristol" label="Redland"/>
<link wikidata="Q44020" start="8917" end="8928" title="St Matthias" label="St Matthias"/>
<link wikidata="Q178019" start="9393" end="9430" title="Postgraduate Certificate in Education" label="Postgraduate Certificate in Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q19711" start="9989" end="9993" title="River Avon (Bristol)" label="Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="9998" end="10004" title="River Severn" label="Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246" start="10010" end="10017" title="unicorn" label="unicorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q929902" start="10106" end="10120" title="County of Avon" label="County of Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192925" start="10159" end="10169" title="Edgar of England" label="King Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q334399" start="10253" end="10263" title="Bath Abbey" label="Bath Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176305" start="10501" end="10537" title="Council for National Academic Awards" label="Council for National Academic Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="10667" end="10675" title="Benjamin Disraeli, 1st Earl of Beaconsfield" label="Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293303" start="11006" end="11035" title="The Guardian University Guide" label="The Guardian University Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688465" start="11223" end="11252" title="Teaching Excellence Framework" label="Teaching Excellence Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089293" start="11570" end="11599" title="SCImago Institutions Rankings" label="SCImago Institutions Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315085" start="11863" end="11892" title="Research Excellence Framework" label="Research Excellence Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065413" start="12422" end="12432" title="Institutional repository" label="repository"/>
<link wikidata="Q232932" start="12543" end="12554" title="Open access (publishing)" label="open access"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969119" start="12608" end="12635" title="Bristol Robotics Laboratory" label="Bristol Robotics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q266064" start="12737" end="12751" title="David Willetts" label="David Willetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132207" start="13360" end="13378" title="business incubator" label="business incubator"/>
<link wikidata="Q129238" start="13554" end="13571" title="startup companies" label="startup companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q96412744" start="13658" end="13684" title="University Enterprise Zone" label="University Enterprise Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q332493" start="13786" end="13800" title="George Osborne" label="George Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020724" start="14010" end="14039" title="South Gloucestershire Council" label="South Gloucestershire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138080" start="14410" end="14429" title="Coventry University" label="Coventry University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888771" start="14431" end="14465" title="Manchester Metropolitan University" label="Manchester Metropolitan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065695" start="14467" end="14496" title="Southampton Solent University" label="Southampton Solent University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247544" start="14501" end="14526" title="University of Westminster" label="University of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q877998" start="14885" end="14912" title="Students&amp;#x27; Union" label="Students&amp;#x27; Union at UWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395998" start="15054" end="15072" title="sabbatical officer" label="sabbatical officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5926710" start="15403" end="15412" title="Hub Radio" label="Hub Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250855" start="15713" end="15734" title="Unite Group" label="UNITE Student Housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q525221" start="16185" end="16200" title="Kirstie Allsopp" label="Kirstie Allsopp"/>
<link wikidata="Q206988" start="16396" end="16406" title="Cheltenham" label="Cheltenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="16411" end="16421" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q101254" start="16742" end="16749" title="Newport, Wales" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="16757" end="16762" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q99472175" start="17408" end="17451" title="University of the West of England Boat Club" label="University of the West of England Boat Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="17525" end="17542" title="American football" label="American Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971174" start="17594" end="17639" title="British Universities American Football League" label="British Universities American Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q56651149" start="17699" end="17713" title="Silas Adekunle" label="Silas Adekunle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762813" start="17731" end="17745" title="Angellica Bell" label="Angellica Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="17748" end="17751" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199456" start="17787" end="17798" title="Helen Blaby" label="Helen Blaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="17801" end="17804" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636948" start="17843" end="17859" title="Samantha Cameron" label="Samantha Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="17890" end="17903" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5981230" start="17906" end="17917" title="Ian Cognito" label="Ian Cognito"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149898" start="17931" end="17944" title="Paul Coldwell" label="Paul Coldwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233658" start="17956" end="17968" title="David Fisher (artist)" label="David Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q485365" start="17980" end="17991" title="Bear Grylls" label="Bear Grylls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706433" start="18032" end="18045" title="Larry Godfrey" label="Larry Godfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174872" start="18065" end="18078" title="Peter J. Hall" label="Peter J. Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323191" start="18092" end="18108" title="costume designer" label="costume designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354550" start="18117" end="18129" title="Dallas Opera" label="Dallas Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217295" start="18133" end="18145" title="Miranda Hart" label="Miranda Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5814891" start="18159" end="18173" title="Russell Howard" label="Russell Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962115" start="18187" end="18200" title="Myles Jackman" label="Myles Jackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15023" start="18212" end="18220" title="CY Leung" label="CY Leung"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116298" start="18223" end="18325" title="Vice Chairperson of the Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Political Consultative Conference" label="Vice Chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Political Consultative Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513258" start="18328" end="18342" title="Lee Chee Leong" label="Lee Chee Leong"/>
<link wikidata="Q268139" start="18378" end="18395" title="Lady Davina Lewis" label="Lady Davina Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="18408" end="18428" title="British Royal Family" label="British Royal Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q368645" start="18431" end="18443" title="Richard Long (artist)" label="Richard Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193972" start="18457" end="18468" title="Kate Malone" label="Kate Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405258" start="18486" end="18498" title="Jamie Oliver (musician)" label="Jamie Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q18852" start="18532" end="18544" title="Lostprophets" label="Lostprophets"/>
<link wikidata="Q575217" start="18547" end="18561" title="Dawn Primarolo" label="Dawn Primarolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="18564" end="18576" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061517" start="18600" end="18609" title="Pete Reed" label="Pete Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459068" start="18628" end="18639" title="Seyi Rhodes" label="Seyi Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526123" start="18694" end="18706" title="Jack Russell (Gloucestershire cricketer)" label="Jack Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113187" start="18721" end="18739" title="Christopher Sadler" label="Christopher Sadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q301092" start="18776" end="18794" title="Aardman Animations" label="Aardman Animations"/>
<link wikidata="Q433643" start="18797" end="18807" title="Simon Shaw" label="Simon Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q98097757" start="18846" end="18858" title="Lyndon Smith (academic)" label="Lyndon Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142449" start="18872" end="18886" title="Hugo Southwell" label="Hugo Southwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294382" start="18926" end="18942" title="Marko Stanojevic" label="Marko Stanojevic"/>
<link wikidata="Q113135" start="18957" end="18976" title="Italy national rugby union team" label="Italy international"/>
<link wikidata="Q21457007" start="18979" end="18991" title="Shirley Teed" label="Shirley Teed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700985" start="19003" end="19016" title="Teo Nie Ching" label="Teo Nie Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185837" start="19029" end="19052" title="Democratic Action Party (Malaysia)" label="Democratic Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986392" start="19053" end="19073" title="Parliament of Malaysia" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290669" start="19076" end="19091" title="Dominic Waghorn" label="Dominic Waghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q217228" start="19122" end="19130" title="Sky News" label="Sky News"/>
<link wikidata="Q50365057" start="19139" end="19149" title="Tim Atkins" label="Tim Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q21457247" start="19177" end="19190" title="Simon Carroll" label="Simon Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429906" start="19233" end="19247" title="Alison Assiter" label="Alison Assiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q39069999" start="19280" end="19295" title="Victoria Clarke (psychologist)" label="Victoria Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324807" start="19298" end="19312" title="Richard Coates" label="Richard Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114509" start="19315" end="19327" title="Owen Holland (academic)" label="Owen Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q93434165" start="19330" end="19343" title="Aaron Schuman" label="Aaron Schuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174754" start="19346" end="19359" title="Peter Howells (economist)" label="Peter Howells"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495556" start="19362" end="19377" title="Stephen J. Hunt" label="Stephen J. Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429903" start="19380" end="19390" title="Julie Kent (sociologist)" label="Julie Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q927887" start="19393" end="19405" title="Howard Newby" label="Howard Newby"/>
<link wikidata="Q98097757" start="19408" end="19420" title="Lyndon Smith (academic)" label="Lyndon Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194394" start="19423" end="19434" title="Steve West (university administrator)" label="Steven West"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359871" start="19451" end="19478" title="Armorial of UK universities" label="Armorial of UK universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746976" start="19481" end="19511" title="List of universities in the UK" label="List of universities in the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q987075" start="19514" end="19536" title="Post-1992 universities" label="Post-1992 universities"/>
</links>
</doc>
