<doc id="290327" wikidata="Q141817" url="?curid=290327" title="German Americans">
<text>German Americans (, ) are Americans who have full or partial German ancestry.

According to the United States Census Bureau&#x27;s figures from 2022, German Americans make up roughly 41 million people in the US, which is approximately 12% of the population. This represents a decrease from the 2012 census where 50.7 million Americans identified as German. The census is conducted in a way that allows this total number to be broken down in two categories. In the 2020 census, roughly two thirds of those who identify as German also identified as having another ancestry, while one third identified as German alone. German Americans account for about one third of the total population of people of German ancestry in the world.

The first significant groups of German immigrants arrived in the British colonies in the 1670s, and they settled primarily in the colonial states of Pennsylvania, New York, and Virginia. The Mississippi Company of France later transported thousands of Germans from Europe to what was then the German Coast, Orleans Territory in present-day Louisiana between 1718 and 1750. Immigration to the U.S. ramped up sharply during the 19th century.

Pennsylvania, with 3.5 million people of German ancestry, has the largest population of German-Americans in the U.S. and is home to one of the group&#x27;s original settlements, the Germantown section of present-day Philadelphia, founded in 1683. Germantown is also the birthplace of the American antislavery movement, which emerged there in 1688. Germantown also was the location of the Battle of Germantown, an American Revolutionary War battle fought between the British Army, led by William Howe, and the Continental Army, led by George Washington, on October 4, 1777.

German Americans were drawn to colonial-era British America by its abundant land and religious freedom, and were pushed out of Germany by shortages of land and religious or political oppression. Many arrived seeking religious or political freedom, others for economic opportunities greater than those in Europe, and others for the chance to start fresh in the New World. The arrivals before 1850 were mostly farmers who sought out the most productive land, where their intensive farming techniques would pay off. After 1840, many came to cities, where German-speaking districts emerged.

German Americans established the first kindergartens in the United States, introduced the Christmas tree tradition, and introduced popular foods such as hot dogs and hamburgers to America.

The great majority of people with some German ancestry have become Americanized; fewer than five percent speak German. German-American societies abound, as do celebrations that are held throughout the country to celebrate German heritage of which the German-American Steuben Parade in New York City is one of the most well-known and is held every third Saturday in September. Oktoberfest celebrations and the German-American Day are popular festivities. There are major annual events in cities with German heritage including Chicago, Cincinnati, Milwaukee, Pittsburgh, San Antonio, and St. Louis. There is a German belt consisting of areas with predominantly German American populations that extends across the United States from eastern Pennsylvania, where many of the first German Americans settled, to the Oregon coast.

Around 190,000 permanent residents from Germany were living in the United States in 2025.

==History==
The Germans included many quite distinct subgroups with differing religious and cultural values. Lutherans and Catholics typically opposed Yankee moralizing programs such as the prohibition of beer, and favored paternalistic families with the husband deciding the family position on public affairs. They generally opposed women&#x27;s suffrage but this was used as argument in favor of suffrage when German Americans became pariahs during World War I. On the other hand, there were Protestant groups who emerged from European pietism such as the German Methodist and United Brethren; they more closely resembled the Yankee Methodists in their moralism.

===Colonial era===
The first English settlers arrived at Jamestown, Virginia in 1607, and were accompanied by the first German that was to settle in North America, physician and botanist Johannes (John) Fleischer (in South America Ambrosius Ehinger had already founded Maracaibo in 1529). He was followed in 1608 by five glassmakers and three carpenters or house builders. The first permanent German settlement in what became the United States was Germantown, Pennsylvania, founded near Philadelphia on October 6, 1683.

Large numbers of Germans migrated from the 1680s to 1760s, with Pennsylvania the favored destination. They migrated to America for a variety of reasons. &quot;Push factors&quot; involved worsening opportunities for farm ownership in central Europe, persecution of some religious groups, and military conscription; &quot;pull factors&quot; were better economic conditions, especially the opportunity to own land, and religious freedom. Often immigrants paid for their passage by selling their labor for a period of years as indentured servants.

Large sections of Pennsylvania, Upstate New York, and the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia attracted Germans. Most were Lutheran or German Reformed; many belonged to small religious sects such as the Moravians and Mennonites. German Catholics did not arrive in number until after the War of 1812.

====Palatines====
In 1709, Protestant Germans from the Pfalz or Palatine region of Germany escaped conditions of poverty, traveling first to Rotterdam and then to London. Queen Anne helped them get to the American colonies. The trip was long and difficult to survive because of the poor quality of food and water aboard ships and the infectious disease typhus. Many immigrants, particularly children, died before reaching America in June 1710.

The Palatine immigration of about 2100 people who survived was the largest single immigration to America in the colonial period. Most were first settled along the Hudson River in work camps, to pay off their passage. By 1711, seven villages had been established in New York on the Robert Livingston manor. In 1723 Germans became the first Europeans allowed to buy land in the Mohawk Valley west of Little Falls. One hundred homesteads were allocated in the Burnetsfield Patent. By 1750, the Germans occupied a strip some long along both sides of the Mohawk River. The soil was excellent; some 500 houses were built, mostly of stone, and the region prospered in spite of Indian raids. Herkimer was the best-known of the German settlements in a region long known as the &quot;German Flats&quot;.

They kept to themselves, married their own, spoke German, attended Lutheran churches, and retained their own customs and foods. They emphasized farm ownership. Some mastered English to become conversant with local legal and business opportunities. They tolerated slavery (although few were rich enough to own a slave).

The most famous of the early German Palatine immigrants was editor John Peter Zenger, who led the fight in colonial New York City for freedom of the press in America. A later immigrant, John Jacob Astor, who came from Walldorf, Electoral Palatinate, since 1803 Baden, after the Revolutionary War, became the richest man in America from his fur trading empire and real estate investments in New York.

====Louisiana====
John Law organized the first colonization of Louisiana with German immigrants. Of the over 5,000 Germans initially immigrating primarily from the Alsace Region as few as 500 made up the first wave of immigrants to leave France en route to the Americas. Less than 150 of those first indentured German farmers made it to Louisiana and settled along what became known as the German Coast. With tenacity, determination and the leadership of D&#x27;arensburg these Germans felled trees, cleared land, and cultivated the soil with simple hand tools as draft animals were not available. The German coast settlers supplied the budding City of New Orleans with corn, rice, eggs. and meat for many years following.

The Mississippi Company settled thousands of German pioneers in French Louisiana during 1721. It encouraged Germans, particularly Germans of the Alsatian region who had recently fallen under French rule, and the Swiss to immigrate. Alsace was sold to France within the greater context of the Thirty Years&#x27; War (1618–1648).

The Jesuit Charlevoix traveled New France (Canada and Louisiana) in the early 1700s. His letter said &quot;these 9,000 Germans, who were raised in the Palatinate (Alsace part of France) were in Arkansas. The Germans left Arkansas en masse. They went to New Orleans and demanded passage to Europe. The Mississippi Company gave the Germans rich lands on the right bank of the Mississippi River about above New Orleans. The area is now known as &#x27;the German Coast&#x27;.&quot;

A thriving population of Germans lived upriver from New Orleans, Louisiana, known as the German Coast. They were attracted to the area through pamphlets such as J. Hanno Deiler&#x27;s &quot;Louisiana: A Home for German Settlers&quot;.
====Southeast====
Two waves of German colonists in 1714 and 1717 founded a colony in Virginia called Germanna, located near modern-day Culpeper, Virginia. Virginia Lieutenant Governor Alexander Spotswood, taking advantage of the headright system, had bought land in present-day Spotsylvania and encouraged German immigration by advertising in Germany for miners to move to Virginia and establish a mining industry in the colony. The name &quot;Germanna&quot;, selected by Governor Alexander Spotswood, reflected both the German immigrants who sailed across the Atlantic to Virginia and the British queen, Anne, who was in power at the time of the first settlement at Germanna. In 1721, twelve German families departed Germanna to found Germantown. They were swiftly replaced by 70 new German arrivals from the Palatinate, the start of a westward and southward trend of German migration and settlement across the Virginia Piedmont and Shenandoah Valley around the Blue Ridge Mountains, where Palatine German predominated. Meanwhile, in Southwest Virginia, Virginia German acquired a Swabian German accent.

In North Carolina, an expedition of German Moravians living around Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, and a party from Europe led by August Gottlieb Spangenberg, headed down the Great Wagon Road and purchased from Lord Granville (one of the British Lords Proprietor) in the Piedmont of North Carolina in 1753. The tract was dubbed , Latinized Wachovia, because the streams and meadows reminded Moravian settlers of the Wachau valley in Austria. They established German settlements on that tract, especially in the area around what is now Winston-Salem. They also founded the transitional settlement of Bethabara, North Carolina, translated as House of Passage, the first planned Moravian community in North Carolina, in 1759. Soon after, the German Moravians founded the town of Salem in 1766 (now a historical section in the center of Winston-Salem) and Salem College (an early female college) in 1772.

In the Georgia Colony, Germans mainly from the Swabia region settled in Savannah, St. Simon&#x27;s Island and Fort Frederica in the 1730s and 1740s. They were actively recruited by James Oglethorpe and quickly distinguished themselves through improved farming, advanced tabby (cement)-construction, and leading joint Lutheran-Anglican-Reformed religious services for the colonists.

German immigrants also settled in other areas of the American South, including around the Dutch (Deutsch) Fork area of South Carolina, and Texas, especially in the Austin and San Antonio areas.

====New England====
Between 1742 and 1753, roughly 1,000 Germans settled in Broad Bay, Massachusetts (now Waldoboro, Maine). Many of the colonists fled to Boston, Maine, Nova Scotia, and North Carolina after their houses were burned and their neighbors killed or carried into captivity by Native Americans. The Germans who remained found it difficult to survive on farming, and eventually turned to the shipping and fishing industries.

====Pennsylvania====
The tide of German immigration to Pennsylvania swelled between 1725 and 1775, with immigrants arriving as redemptioners or indentured servants. By 1775, Germans constituted about one-third of the population of the state. German farmers were renowned for their highly productive animal husbandry and agricultural practices. Politically, they were generally inactive until 1740, when they joined a Quaker-led coalition that took control of the legislature, which later supported the American Revolution. Despite this, many of the German settlers were loyalists during the Revolution, possibly because they feared their royal land grants would be taken away by a new republican government, or because of loyalty to a British German monarchy who had provided the opportunity to live in a liberal society. The Germans, comprising Lutherans, Reformed, Mennonites, Amish, and other sects, developed a rich religious life with a strong musical culture. Collectively, they came to be known as the Pennsylvania Dutch (from &quot;Deutsch&quot;).

Etymologically, the word Dutch originates from the Old High German word &quot;diutisc&quot; (from &quot;diot&quot; &quot;people&quot;), referring to the Germanic &quot;language of the people&quot; as opposed to Latin, the language of the learned (see also theodiscus). Eventually the word came to refer to people who speak a Germanic language, and only in the last couple centuries the people of the Netherlands. Other Germanic language variants for &quot;deutsch/deitsch/dutch&quot; are: Dutch &quot;Duits&quot; and &quot;Diets&quot;, Yiddish &quot;daytsh&quot;, Danish/Norwegian &quot;tysk&quot;, or Swedish &quot;tyska.&quot; The Japanese &quot;ドイツ&quot; (/doitsu/) also derives from the aforementioned &quot;Dutch&quot; variations.

The Studebaker brothers, forefathers of the wagon and automobile makers, arrived in Pennsylvania in 1736 from the famous blade town of Solingen. With their skills, they made wagons that carried the frontiersmen westward; their cannons provided the Union Army with artillery in the American Civil War, and their automobile company became one of the largest in America, although never eclipsing the &quot;Big Three&quot;, and was a factor in the war effort and in the industrial foundations of the Army.

===American Revolution===
Great Britain, whose King George III was also the Elector of Hanover in Germany, hired 18,000 Hessians. They were mercenary soldiers rented out by the rulers of several small German states such as Hesse to fight on the British side. Many were captured; they remained as prisoners during the war but some stayed and became U.S. citizens. In the American Revolution the Mennonites and other small religious sects were neutral pacifists. The Lutherans of Pennsylvania were on the patriot side. The Muhlenberg family, led by Rev. Henry Muhlenberg was especially influential on the Patriot side. His son Peter Muhlenberg, a Lutheran clergyman in Virginia became a major general and later a Congressman. However, in upstate New York, many Germans were neutral or supported the Loyalist cause.

From names in the 1790 U.S. census, historians estimate Germans constituted nearly 9% of the white population in the United States.

===Colonial German American population by state===
The brief Fries&#x27;s Rebellion was an anti-tax movement among Germans in Pennsylvania in 1799–1800.

===19th century===


The largest flow of German immigration to America occurred between 1820 and World WarI, during which time nearly six million Germans immigrated to the United States. From 1840 to 1880, they were the largest group of immigrants. Following the Revolutions of 1848 in the German states, a wave of political refugees fled to America, who became known as Forty-Eighters. They included professionals, journalists, and politicians. Prominent Forty-Eighters included Carl Schurz and Henry Villard.

&quot;Latin farmer&quot; or Latin Settlement is the designation of several settlements founded by some of the Dreissiger and other refugees from Europe after rebellions like the Frankfurter Wachensturm beginning in the 1830s—predominantly in Texas and Missouri, but also in other U.S. states—in which German intellectuals (freethinkers, , and Latinists) met together to devote themselves to the German literature, philosophy, science, classical music, and the Latin language. A prominent representative of this generation of immigrants was Gustav Koerner who lived most of the time in Belleville, Illinois until his death.

====Jewish Germans====
A few German Jews came in the colonial era. The largest numbers arrived after 1820, especially in the mid-19th century. They spread across the North and South (and California, where Levi Strauss arrived in 1853). They formed small German-Jewish communities in cities and towns. They typically were local and regional merchants selling clothing; others were livestock dealers, agricultural commodity traders, bankers, and operators of local businesses. Henry Lehman, who founded Lehman Brothers in Alabama, was a particularly prominent example of such a German-Jewish immigrant. They formed Reform synagogues and sponsored numerous local and national philanthropic organizations, such as B&#x27;nai B&#x27;rith. This German-speaking group is quite distinct from the Yiddish-speaking East-European Jews who arrived in much larger numbers starting in the late 19th century and concentrated in New York.

====Northeastern cities====

The port cities of New York City, and Baltimore had large populations, as did Hoboken, New Jersey.

====Cities of the Midwest====
In the 19th century, German immigrants settled in Midwest, where land was available. Cities along the Great Lakes, the Ohio River, and the Mississippi and Missouri Rivers attracted a large German element. The Midwestern cities of Milwaukee, Cincinnati, St. Louis, Chicago were favored destinations of German immigrants. The Northern Kentucky and Louisville area along the Ohio River was also a favored destination. By 1900, the populations of the cities of Cleveland, Milwaukee, and Cincinnati were all more than 40% German American. Dubuque and Davenport, Iowa had even larger proportions, as did Omaha, Nebraska, where the proportion of German Americans was 57% in 1910. In many other cities of the Midwest, such as Fort Wayne, Indiana, German Americans were at least 30% of the population. By 1850 there were 5,000 Germans, mostly Schwabians living in, and around, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

Many concentrations acquired distinctive names suggesting their heritage, such as the &quot;Over-the-Rhine&quot; district in Cincinnati, &quot;Dutchtown&quot; in South St Louis, and &quot;German Village&quot; in Columbus, Ohio.

A particularly attractive destination was Milwaukee, which came to be known as &quot;the German Athens&quot;. Radical Germans trained in politics in the old country dominated the city&#x27;s Socialists. Skilled workers dominated many crafts, while entrepreneurs created the brewing industry; the most famous brands included Pabst, Schlitz, Miller, and Blatz.

Whereas half of German immigrants settled in cities, the other half established farms in the Midwest. From Ohio to the Plains states, a heavy presence persists in rural areas into the 21st century.

====Deep South====
Few German immigrants settled in the Deep South, apart from New Orleans, the German Coast, and Texas.

====Texas====

Texas attracted many Germans who entered through Galveston and Indianola, both those who came to farm, and later immigrants who more rapidly took industrial jobs in cities such as Houston. As in Milwaukee, Germans in Houston built the brewing industry. By the 1920s, the first generation of college-educated German Americans were moving into the chemical and oil industries.

Texas had about 20,000 German Americans in the 1850s. They did not form a uniform bloc, but were highly diverse and drew from geographic areas and all sectors of European society, except that very few aristocrats or upper middle class businessmen arrived. In this regard, Texas Germania was a microcosm of the Germania nationwide.

The Germans who settled Texas were diverse in many ways. They included peasant farmers and intellectuals; Protestants, Catholics, Jews, and atheists; Prussians, Saxons, and Hessians; abolitionists and slave owners; farmers and townsfolk; frugal, honest folk and ax murderers. They differed in dialect, customs, and physical features. A majority had been farmers in Germany, and most arrived seeking economic opportunities. A few dissident intellectuals fleeing the 1848 revolutions sought political freedom, but few, save perhaps the Wends, went for religious freedom. The German settlements in Texas reflected their diversity. Even in the confined area of the Hill Country, each valley offered a different kind of German. The Llano valley had stern, teetotaling German Methodists, who renounced dancing and fraternal organizations; the Pedernales valley had fun-loving, hardworking Lutherans and Catholics who enjoyed drinking and dancing; and the Guadalupe valley had freethinking Germans descended from intellectual political refugees. The scattered German ethnic islands were also diverse. These small enclaves included Lindsay in Cooke County, largely Westphalian Catholic; Waka in Ochiltree County, Midwestern Mennonite; Hurnville in Clay County, Russian German Baptist; and Lockett in Wilbarger County, Wendish Lutheran.

====Germans from Russia====

Germans from Russia were the most traditional of German-speaking arrivals. They were Germans who had lived for generations throughout the Russian Empire, but especially along the Volga River and the Black Sea. Their ancestors had come from all over the German-speaking world, invited by Catherine the Great in 1762 and 1763 to settle and introduce more advanced German agriculture methods to rural Russia. They had been promised by the manifesto of their settlement the ability to practice their respective Christian denominations, retain their culture and language, and retain immunity from conscription for them and their descendants. As time passed, the Russian monarchy gradually eroded the ethnic German population&#x27;s relative autonomy. Conscription eventually was reinstated; this was especially harmful to the Mennonites, who practice pacifism. Throughout the 19th century, pressure increased from the Russian government to culturally assimilate. Many Germans from Russia found it necessary to emigrate to avoid conscription and preserve their culture. About 100,000 immigrated by 1900, settling primarily in the Great Plains.

Negatively influenced by the violation of their rights and cultural persecution by the Tsar, the Germans from Russia who settled in the northern Midwest saw themselves as a downtrodden ethnic group separate from Russian Americans and having an entirely different experience from the German Americans who had emigrated from German lands. They settled in tight-knit communities who retained their German language and culture. They raised large families, built German-style churches, buried their dead in distinctive cemeteries using cast iron grave markers, and sang German hymns. Many farmers specialized in the production of sugar beets and wheat, which are still major crops in the upper Great Plains. During World WarI, their identity was challenged by anti-German sentiment. By the end of World WarII, the German language, which had always been used with English for public and official matters, was in serious decline. Today, German is preserved mainly through singing groups, recipes, and educational settings. While most descendants of Germans from Russia primarily speak English, many are choosing to learn German in an attempt to reconnect with their heritage. Germans from Russia often use loanwords, such as &quot;Kuchen&quot; for cake. Despite the loss of their language, the ethnic group remains distinct, and has left a lasting impression on the American West.

Musician Lawrence Welk (1903–1992) became an iconic figure in the German-Russian community of the northern Great Plains—his success story personified the American dream.

====Civil War====
Sentiment among German Americans was largely anti-slavery, especially among Forty-Eighters. Notable Forty-Eighter Hermann Raster wrote passionately against slavery and was very pro-Lincoln. Raster published anti-slavery pamphlets and was the editor of the most influential German language newspaper in America at the time. He helped secure the votes of German-Americans across the United States for Abraham Lincoln. When Raster died the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; published an article regarding his service as a correspondent for America to the German states saying, &quot;His writings during and after the Civil War did more to create understanding and appreciation of the American situation in Germany and to float U.S. bonds in Europe than the combined efforts of all the U.S. ministers and consuls.&quot; Hundreds of thousands of German Americans volunteered to fight for the Union in the American Civil War (1861–1865). The Germans were the largest immigrant group to participate in the Civil War; over 176,000 U.S. soldiers were born in Germany. A popular Union commander among Germans, Major General Franz Sigel was the highest-ranking German officer in the Union Army, with many German immigrants claiming to enlist to &quot;fight &quot;mit&quot; Sigel&quot;.

Although only one in four Germans fought in all-German regiments, they created the public image of the German soldier. Pennsylvania fielded five German regiments, New York eleven, and Ohio six.

====Farmers====
Western railroads, with large land grants available to attract farmers, set up agencies in Hamburg and other German cities, promising cheap transportation, and sales of farmland on easy terms. For example, the Santa Fe railroad hired its own commissioner for immigration, and sold over to German-speaking farmers.

Throughout the 19th and 20th centuries, the German Americans showed a high interest in becoming farmers, and keeping their children and grandchildren on the land. While they needed profits to stay in operation, they used profits as a tool &quot;to maintain continuity of the family&quot;. They used risk averse strategies, and carefully planned their inheritances to keep the land in the family. Their communities showed smaller average farm size, greater equality, less absentee ownership and greater geographic persistence. As one farmer explained, &quot;To protect your family has turned out to be the same thing as protecting your land.&quot;

Germany was a large country with many diverse subregions which contributed immigrants. Dubuque was the base of the &quot;Ostfriesische Nachrichten&quot; (&quot;East Frisian News&quot;) from 1881 to 1971. It connected the 20,000 immigrants from East Friesland (Ostfriesland), Germany, to each other across the Midwest, and to their old homeland. In Germany East Friesland was often a topic of ridicule regarding backward rustics, but editor Leupke Hündling shrewdly combined stories of proud memories of Ostfriesland. The editor enlisted a network of local correspondents. By mixing local American and local German news, letters, poetry, fiction, and dialogue, the German-language newspaper allowed immigrants to honor their origins and celebrate their new life as highly prosperous farmers with much larger farms than were possible back in impoverished Ostfriesland. During the world wars, when Germania came under heavy attack, the paper stressed its humanitarian role, mobilizing readers to help the people of East Friesland with relief funds. Younger generations could usually speak German but not read it, so the subscription base dwindled away as the target audience Americanized itself.

====Politics====
Relatively few German Americans held office, but the men voted once they became citizens. In general during the Third party System (1850s–1890s), the Protestants and Jews leaned toward the Republican party and the Catholics were strongly Democratic. When prohibition was on the ballot, the Germans voted solidly against it. They strongly distrusted moralistic crusaders, whom they called &quot;Puritans&quot;, including the temperance reformers and many Populists. The German community strongly opposed Free Silver, and voted heavily against crusader William Jennings Bryan in 1896. In 1900, many German Democrats returned to their party and voted for Bryan, perhaps because of President William McKinley&#x27;s foreign policy.

At the local level, historians have explored the changing voting behavior of the German-American community and one of its major strongholds, St. Louis, Missouri. The German Americans had voted 80 percent for Lincoln in 1860, and strongly supported the war effort. They were a bastion of the Republican Party in St. Louis and nearby immigrant strongholds in Missouri and southern Illinois. The German Americans were angered by a proposed Missouri state constitution that discriminated against Catholics and freethinkers. The requirement of a special loyalty oath for priests and ministers was troublesome. Despite their strong opposition the constitution was ratified in 1865. Racial tensions with the blacks began to emerge, especially in terms of competition for unskilled labor jobs. Germania was nervous about black suffrage in 1868, fearing that blacks would support puritanical laws, especially regarding the prohibition of beer gardens on Sundays. The tensions split off a large German element in 1872, led by Carl Schurz. They supported the Liberal Republican party led by Benjamin Gratz Brown for governor in 1870 and Horace Greeley for president in 1872.

Many Germans in late 19th century cities were communists; Germans played a significant role in the labor union movement. A few were anarchists. Eight of the forty-two anarchist defendants in the Haymarket Affair of 1886 in Chicago were German.

===World Wars===

====Intellectuals====
Hugo Münsterberg (1863–1916), a German psychologist, moved to Harvard in the 1890s and became a leader in the new profession. He was president of the American Psychological Association in 1898, and the American Philosophical Association in 1908, and played a major role in many other American and international organizations.

Arthur Preuss (1871–1934) was a leading journalist, and theologian. A layman in St Louis. His &quot;Fortnightly Review&quot; (in English) was a major conservative voice read closely by church leaders and intellectuals from 1894 until 1934. He was intensely loyal to the Vatican. Preuss upheld the German Catholic community, denounced the &quot;Americanism&quot; heresy, promoted the Catholic University of America, and anguished over the anti-German America hysteria during World WarI. He provided lengthy commentary regarding the National Catholic Welfare Conference, the anti-Catholic factor in the presidential campaign of 1928, the hardships of the Great Depression, and the liberalism of the New Deal.

====World War I anti-German sentiment====
During World War I, German Americans were often accused of being too sympathetic to Imperial Germany. Former president Theodore Roosevelt denounced &quot;hyphenated Americanism&quot;, insisting that dual loyalties were impossible in wartime. A small minority came out for Germany, such as H. L. Mencken. Similarly, Harvard psychology professor Hugo Münsterberg dropped his efforts to mediate between America and Germany, and threw his efforts behind the German cause. There was also some Anti-German hysteria like the killing of Pastor Edmund Kayser.

The Justice Department prepared a list of all German aliens, counting approximately 480,000 of them, more than 4,000 of whom were imprisoned in 1917–18. The allegations included spying for Germany or endorsing the German war effort. Thousands were forced to buy war bonds to show their loyalty. The Red Cross barred individuals with German last names from joining in fear of sabotage. One person was killed by a mob; in Collinsville, Illinois, German-born Robert Prager was dragged from jail as a suspected spy and lynched. A Minnesota minister was tarred and feathered when he was overheard praying in German with a dying woman. Questions of German American loyalty increased due to events like the German bombing of Black Tom island and the U.S. entering World War I, many German Americans were arrested for refusing allegiance to the U.S. War hysteria led to the removal of German names in public, names of things such as streets, and businesses. Schools also began to eliminate or discourage the teaching of the German language.

In Chicago, Frederick Stock temporarily stepped down as conductor of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra until he finalized his naturalization papers. Orchestras replaced music by German composer Wagner with French composer Berlioz. In Cincinnati, the public library was asked to withdraw all German books from its shelves. German-named streets were renamed. The town, Berlin, Michigan, was changed to Marne, Michigan (honoring those who fought in the Battle of Marne). In Iowa, in the 1918 Babel Proclamation, the governor prohibited all foreign languages in schools and public places. Nebraska banned instruction in any language except English, but the U.S. Supreme Court ruled the ban illegal in 1923 (&quot;Meyer v. Nebraska&quot;). The response of German Americans to these tactics was often to &quot;Americanize&quot; names (e.g., Schmidt to Smith, Müller to Miller) and limit the use of the German language in public places, especially churches.

====World War II====
Between 1931 and 1940, 114,000 Germans moved to the United States, many of whom—including Nobel prize winner Albert Einstein and author Erich Maria Remarque—were Jewish Germans or anti-Nazis fleeing government oppression. About 25,000 people became paying members of the pro-Nazi German American Bund during the years before the war. German aliens were the subject of suspicion and discrimination during the war, although prejudice and sheer numbers meant they suffered as a group generally less than Japanese Americans. The Alien Registration Act of 1940 required 300,000 German-born resident aliens who had German citizenship to register with the Federal government and restricted their travel and property ownership rights. Under the still active Alien Enemy Act of 1798, the United States government interned nearly 11,000 German citizens between 1940 and 1948. Civil rights violations occurred. An unknown number of &quot;voluntary internees&quot; joined their spouses and parents in the camps and were not permitted to leave.
Many Americans of German ancestry had top war jobs, including General Dwight D. Eisenhower, Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, and USAAF General Carl Andrew Spaatz. Roosevelt appointed Republican Wendell Willkie (who ironically ran against Roosevelt in the 1940 presidential election) as a personal representative. German Americans who had fluent German language skills were an important asset to wartime intelligence, and they served as translators and as spies for the United States. The war evoked strong pro-American patriotic sentiments among German Americans, few of whom by then had contacts with distant relatives in the old country.
===Contemporary period===
In the aftermath of World War II, millions of ethnic Germans were forcibly expelled from their homes within the redrawn borders of Central and Eastern Europe, including the Soviet Union, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Romania, Hungary and Yugoslavia. Most resettled in Germany, but others came as refugees to the United States in the late 1940s, and established cultural centers in their new homes. Some Danube Swabians, for instance, ethnic Germans who had maintained language and customs after settlement in Hungary and the Balkans, immigrated to the U.S. after the war.

After 1970, the anti-German sentiment aroused by World War II faded away. Today, German Americans who immigrated after World WarII share the same characteristics as any other Western European immigrant group in the U.S. 
 The German American community supported reunification in 1990.

In the 1990 U.S. Census, 58 million Americans claimed to be solely or partially of German descent. According to the 2005 American Community Survey, 50 million Americans have German ancestry. German Americans represent 17% of the total U.S. population and 26% of the non-Hispanic white population.

&quot;The Economist&quot; magazine in 2015 interviewed Petra Schürmann, the director of the German-American Heritage Museum in Washington D.C. for a major article on German-Americans. She notes that all over the United States, celebrations such as German fests and Oktoberfests have been appearing.

==Demographics==
States with the highest proportions of German Americans tend to be those of the upper Midwest, including Iowa, Minnesota, Nebraska, Wisconsin, and the Dakotas; all at over 30%.

Of the four major U.S. regions, German was the most-reported ancestry in the Midwest, second in the West, and third in both the Northeast and the South. German was the top reported ancestry in 23 states, and it was one of the top five reported ancestries in every state except Maine and Rhode Island.

===German-speakers and German-Americans of color===
During the 1800s, there were a number of German-speaking African-Americans, including Black Pennsylvania Dutch people. A few German-speaking African-Americans were Jewish. Some German-speaking African-Americans were adopted by white German-American families. Other Black German-Americans were immigrants from Germany. In the 1870 Census, 15 Black immigrants from Germany were listed living in New Orleans. Afro-German immigrants were also listed on the census living in Memphis, New York City, Charleston, and Cleveland.

In Texas, many Tejanos have German ancestry. Tejano culture, particularly Tejano music, has been deeply influenced by German immigrants to Texas and Mexico. In German-speaking parts of Texas during the 19th and 20th centuries, many African-Americans spoke German. Many Black people who were enslaved by white German-Americans, as well as their descendants, learned to speak German.

===German American population by state===

As of 2020, the distribution of German Americans across the 50 states and DC is as presented in the following table: 
===German-American communities===
Today, most German Americans have assimilated to the point they no longer have readily identifiable ethnic communities, though there are still many metropolitan areas where German is the most reported ethnicity, such as Cincinnati, Northern Kentucky, Cleveland, Columbus, Indianapolis, Milwaukee, Minneapolis – Saint Paul, Pittsburgh, and St. Louis.

====Communities with highest percentages of people of German ancestry====
The 25 U.S. communities with the highest percentage of residents claiming German ancestry are:
# Monterey, Ohio 83.6%
# Granville Township, Ohio 79.6%
# St. Henry, Ohio 78.5%
# Germantown Township, Illinois 77.6%
# Jackson, Indiana 77.3%
# Washington Township, Ohio 77.2%
# St. Rose, Illinois 77.1%
# Butler, Ohio 76.4%
# Marion Township, Ohio 76.3%
# Jennings, Ohio and Germantown, Illinois (village) 75.6%
# Coldwater, Ohio 74.9%
# Jackson, Ohio 74.6%
# Union, Ohio 74.1%
# Minster, Ohio and Kalida, Ohio 73.5%
# Greensburg, Ohio 73.4%
# Aviston, Illinois 72.5%
# Teutopolis, Illinois (village) 72.4%
# Teutopolis, Illinois (township) and Cottonwood, Minnesota 72.3%
# Dallas, Michigan 71.7%
# Gibson Township, Ohio 71.6%
# Town of Marshfield, Fond du Lac County, Wisconsin 71.5%
# Santa Fe, Illinois 70.8%
# Recovery Township, Ohio 70.4%
# Town of Brothertown, Wisconsin 69.9%
# Town of Herman, Dodge County, Wisconsin 69.8%

====Large communities with high percentages of people of German ancestry====
Large U.S. communities with a high percentage of residents claiming German ancestry are:
# Bismarck, North Dakota 56.1%
# Dubuque, Iowa 43%
# St. Cloud, Minnesota 38.8%
# Fargo, North Dakota 31%
# Madison, Wisconsin 29%
# Green Bay, Wisconsin 29%
# Levittown, Pennsylvania 22%
# Erie, Pennsylvania 22%
# Cincinnati, Ohio 19.8%
# Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 19.7%
# Columbus, Ohio 19.4%
# Beaverton, Oregon 17%

====Communities with the most residents born in Germany====
The 25 U.S. communities with the most residents born in Germany are:
# Lely Resort, Florida 6.8%
# Pemberton Heights, New Jersey 5.0%
# Kempner, Texas 4.8%
# Cedar Glen Lakes, New Jersey 4.5%
# Alamogordo, New Mexico 4.3%
# Sunshine Acres, Florida and Leisureville, Florida 4.2%
# Wakefield, Kansas 4.1%
# Quantico, Virginia 4.0%
# Crestwood Village, New Jersey 3.8%
# Shandaken, New York 3.5%
# Vine Grove, Kentucky 3.4%
# Burnt Store Marina, Florida and Boles Acres, New Mexico 3.2%
# Allenhurst, Georgia, Security-Widefield, Colorado, Grandview Plaza, Kansas, and Fairbanks Ranch, California 3.0%
# Standing Pine, Mississippi 2.9%
# Millers Falls, Massachusetts, Marco Island, Florida, Daytona Beach Shores, Florida, Radcliff, Kentucky, Beverly Hills, Florida, Davilla, Texas, Annandale, New Jersey, and Holiday Heights, New Jersey 2.8%
# Fort Riley North, Kansas, Copperas Cove, Texas, and Cedar Glen West, New Jersey 2.7%
# Pelican Bay, Florida, Masaryktown, Florida, Highland Beach, Florida, Milford, Kansas, and Langdon, New Hampshire 2.6%
# Forest Home, New York, Southwest Bell, Texas, Vineyards, Florida, South Palm Beach, Florida, and Basye-Bryce Mountain, Virginia 2.5%
# Sausalito, California, Bovina, New York, Fanwood, New Jersey, Fountain, Colorado, Rye Brook, New York and Desoto Lakes, Florida 2.4%
# Ogden, Kansas, Blue Berry Hill, Texas, Lauderdale-by-the-Sea, Florida, Sherman, Connecticut, Leisuretowne, New Jersey, Killeen, Texas, White House Station, New Jersey, Junction City, Kansas, Ocean Ridge, Florida, Viola, New York, Waynesville, Missouri and Mill Neck, New York 2.3%
# Level Plains, Alabama, Kingsbury, Nevada, Tega Cay, South Carolina, Margaretville, New York, White Sands, New Mexico, Stamford, New York, Point Lookout, New York, and Terra Mar, Florida 2.2%
# Rifton, New York, Manasota Key, Florida, Del Mar, California, Yuba Foothills, California, Daleville, Alabama. Tesuque, New Mexico, Plainsboro Center, New Jersey, Silver Ridge, New Jersey and Palm Beach, Florida 2.1%
# Oriental, North Carolina, Holiday City-Berkeley, New Jersey, North Sea, New York, Ponce Inlet, Florida, Woodlawn-Dotsonville, Tennessee, West Hurley, New York, Littlerock, California, Felton, California, Laguna Woods, California, Leisure Village, New Jersey, Readsboro, Vermont, Nolanville, Texas, and Groveland-Big Oak Flat, California 2.0%
# Rotonda, Florida, Grayson, California, Shokan, New York, The Meadows, Florida, Southeast Comanche, Oklahoma, Lincolndale, New York, Fort Johnson South, Louisiana, and Townsend, Massachusetts 1.9%
# Pine Ridge, Florida, Boca Pointe, Florida, Rodney Village, Delaware, Palenville, New York, and Topsfield, Massachusetts 1.8%

==Culture==

The Germans worked hard to maintain and cultivate their language, especially through newspapers and classes in elementary and high schools. German Americans in many cities, such as Milwaukee, brought their strong support of education, establishing German-language schools and teacher training seminaries (&quot;Töchter-Institut&quot;) to prepare students and teachers in German language training. By the late 19th century, the Germania Publishing Company was established in Milwaukee, a publisher of books, magazines, and newspapers in German.

&quot;Germania&quot; was the common term for German American neighborhoods and their organizations. &quot;Deutschtum&quot; was the term for transplanted German nationalism, both culturally and politically. Between 1875 and 1915, the German American population in the United States doubled, and many of its members insisted on maintaining their culture. German was used in local schools and churches, while numerous &quot;Vereine&quot;, associations dedicated to literature, humor, gymnastics, and singing, sprang up in German American communities. German Americans tended to support the German government&#x27;s actions, and, even after the United States entered World WarI, they often voted for antidraft and antiwar candidates. &#x27;Deutschtum&#x27; in the United States disintegrated after 1918.

===Music===
Beginning in 1741, the German-speaking Moravian Church Settlements of Bethlehem, Nazareth and Lititz, Pennsylvania, and Wachovia in North Carolina had highly developed musical cultures. Choral music, Brass and String Music and Congregational singing were highly cultivated. The Moravian Church produced many composers and musicians. Haydn&#x27;s &quot;Creation&quot; had its American debut in Bethlehem in the early 19th century.

The spiritual beliefs of Johann Conrad Beissel (1690–1768) and the Ephrata Cloister—such as the asceticism and mysticism of this Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, group – are reflected in Beissel&#x27;s treatises on music and hymns, which have been considered the beginning of America&#x27;s musical heritage.

In most major cities, Germans took the lead in creating a musical culture, with popular bands, singing societies, operas and symphonic orchestras.

A small city, Wheeling, West Virginia could boast of 11 singing societies—Maennerchor, Harmonie, Liedertafel, Beethoven, Concordia, Liederkranz, Germania, Teutonia, Harmonie-Maennerchor, Arion, and Mozart. The first began in 1855; the last folded in 1961. An important aspect of Wheeling social life, these societies reflected various social classes and enjoyed great popularity until anti-German sentiments during World WarI and changing social values dealt them a death blow.

The Liederkranz, a German-American music society, played an important role in the integration of the German community into the life of Louisville, Kentucky. Started in 1848, the organization was strengthened by the arrival of German liberals after the failure of the revolution of that year. By the mid-1850s the Germans formed one-third of Louisville&#x27;s population and faced nativist hostility organized in the Know-Nothing movement. Violent demonstrations forced the chorus to suppress publicity of its performances that included works by composer Richard Wagner. The Liederkranz suspended operations during the Civil War, but afterward grew rapidly, and was able to build a large auditorium by 1873. An audience of 8,000 that attended a performance in 1877 demonstrated that the Germans were an accepted part of Louisville life.

The Imperial government in Berlin promoted German culture in the U.S., especially music. A steady influx of German-born conductors, including Arthur Nikisch and Karl Muck, spurred the reception of German music in the United States, while German musicians seized on Victorian Americans&#x27; growing concern with &#x27;emotion&#x27;. The performance of pieces such as Beethoven&#x27;s &quot;Ninth Symphony&quot; established German serious music as the superior language of feeling.

===Turners===
Turner societies in the United States were first organized during the mid-19th century so German American immigrants could visit with one another and become involved in social and sports activities. The National Turnerbund, the head organization of the Turnvereine, started drilling members as in militia units in 1854. Nearly half of all Turners fought in the Civil War, mostly on the Union side, and a special group served as bodyguards for President Lincoln.

By the 1890s, Turners numbered nearly 65,000. At the turn of the 21st century, with the ethnic identity of European Americans in flux and Americanization a key element of immigrant life, there were few Turner groups, athletic events were limited, and non-Germans were members. A survey of surviving groups and members reflects these radical changes in the role of Turner societies and their marginalization in 21st-century American society, as younger German Americans tended not to belong, even in strongholds of German heritage in the Midwest.

===Media===

As for any immigrant population, the development of a foreign-language press helped immigrants more easily learn about their new home, maintain connections to their native land, and unite immigrant communities. By the late 19th century, Germania published over 800 regular publications. The most prestigious daily newspapers, such as the &quot;New Yorker Staats-Zeitung&quot;, the &quot;Anzeiger des Westens&quot; in St. Louis, and the &quot;Illinois Staats-Zeitung&quot; in Chicago, promoted middle-class values and encouraged German ethnic loyalty among their readership. The Germans were proud of their language, supported many German-language public and private schools, and conducted their church services in German. They published at least two-thirds of all foreign language newspapers in the U.S. The papers were owned and operated in the U.S., with no control from Germany. As Wittke emphasizes, press. it was &quot;essentially an American press published in a foreign tongue&quot;. The papers reported on major political and diplomatic events involving Germany, with pride but from the viewpoint of its American readers. For example, during the latter half of the 19th century, at least 176 different German-language publications began operations in the city of Cincinnati alone. Many of these publications folded within a year, while a select few, such as the &quot;Cincinnati Freie Presse&quot;, lasted nearly a century. Other cities experienced similar turnover among immigrant publications, especially from opinion press, which published little news and focused instead on editorial commentary.

By the end of the 19th century, there were over 800 German-language publications in the United States. German immigration was on the decline, and with subsequent generations integrating into English-speaking society, the German language press began to struggle. The periodicals that managed to survive in immigrant communities faced an additional challenge with anti-German sentiment during World WarI and with the Espionage and Sedition Acts, which authorized censorship of foreign language newspapers. Prohibition also had a destabilizing impact on the German immigrant communities upon which the German-language publications relied. By 1920, there were only 278 German language publications remaining in the country. After 1945, only a few publications have been started. One example is Hiwwe wie Driwwe (Kutztown, PA), the nation&#x27;s only Pennsylvania German newspaper, which was established in 1997.

===Athletics===
Germans brought organized gymnastics to America, and were strong supporters of sports programs. They used sport both to promote ethnic identity and pride and to facilitate integration into American society. Beginning in the mid-19th century, the Turner movement offered exercise and sports programs, while also providing a social haven for the thousands of new German immigrants arriving in the United States each year. Another highly successful German sports organization was the Buffalo Germans basketball team, winners of 762 games (against only 85 losses) in the early years of the 20th century. These examples, and others, reflect the evolving place of sport in the assimilation and socialization of much of the German-American population. Notable German Americans include Babe Ruth and Lou Gehrig, both native German speakers.

===Religion===
German immigrants who arrived before the 19th century tended to have been members of the Evangelical Lutheran Churches in Germany, and created the Lutheran Synods of Pennsylvania, North Carolina and New York. The largest Lutheran denominations in the U.S. today—the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod, and the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod—are all descended from churches started by German immigrants among others. Calvinist Germans founded the Reformed Church in the United States (especially in New York and Pennsylvania), and the Evangelical Synod of North America (strongest in the Midwest), which is now part of the United Church of Christ. Many immigrants joined different churches from those that existed in Germany. Protestants often joined the Methodist church. In the 1740s, Count Nicolas von Zinzendorf tried to unite all the German-speaking Christians—(Lutheran, Reformed, and Separatists)—into one &quot;Church of God in the Spirit&quot;. The Moravian Church in America is one of the results of this effort, as are the many &quot;Union&quot; churches in rural Pennsylvania.

Before 1800, communities of Amish, Mennonites, Schwarzenau Brethren and Moravians had formed and are still in existence today. The Old Order Amish and a majority of the Old Order Mennonites still speak dialects of German, including Pennsylvania German, informally known as Pennsylvania Dutch. The Amish, who were originally from southern Germany and Switzerland, arrived in Pennsylvania during the early 18th century. Amish immigration to the United States reached its peak between the years 1727 and 1770. Religious freedom was perhaps the most pressing cause for Amish immigration to Pennsylvania, which became known as a haven for persecuted religious groups.

The Hutterites are another example of a group of German Americans who continue a lifestyle similar to that of their ancestors. Like the Amish, they fled persecution for their religious beliefs, and came to the United States between 1874 and 1879. Today, Hutterites mostly reside in Montana, the Dakotas, and Minnesota, and the western provinces of Canada. Hutterites continue to speak Hutterite German. Most are able to understand Standard German in addition to their dialect. The German speaking &quot;Russian&quot; Mennonites migrated during the same time as the Hutterites, but assimilated relatively quickly in the United States, whereas groups of &quot;Russian&quot; Mennonites in Canada resisted assimilation.

Immigrants from Germany in the mid-to-late-19th century brought many different religions with them. The most numerous were Lutheran or Catholic, although the Lutherans were themselves split among different groups. The more conservative Lutherans comprised the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod and the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Other Lutherans formed various synods, most of which merged with Scandinavian-based synods in 1988, forming the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America. Catholic Germans started immigrating in large numbers in the mid to latter 19th century, spurred in particular by the &quot;Kulturkampf&quot;.

Some 19th-century immigrants, especially the &quot;Forty-Eighters&quot;, were secular, rejecting formal religion. About 250,000 German Jews had arrived by the 1870s, and they sponsored reform synagogues in many small cities across the country. About two million Central and Eastern European Jews arrived from the 1880s to 1924, bringing more traditional religious practices.

===Language===
After two or three generations, most German Americans adopted mainstream American customs – some of which they heavily influenced – and switched their language to English. As one scholar concludes, &quot;The overwhelming evidence... indicates that the German-American school was a bilingual one much (perhaps a whole generation or more) earlier than 1917, and that the majority of the pupils may have been English-dominant bilinguals from the early 1880s on.&quot; By 1914, the older members attended German-language church services, while younger ones attended English services (in Lutheran, Evangelical and Catholic churches). In German parochial schools, the children spoke English among themselves, though some of their classes were in German. In 1917–18, after the American entry into World WarI on the side of the Allies, nearly all German language instruction ended, as did most German-language church services.

About 1.5 million Americans speak German at home, according to the 2000 census. From 1860 to 1917, German was widely spoken in German neighborhoods; see German in the United States. There is a false claim, called the Muhlenberg legend, that German was almost the official language of the U.S. There was never any such proposal. The U.S. has no official language, but use of German was strongly discouraged during World WarI and fell out of daily use in many places.

There were fierce battles in Wisconsin and Illinois around 1890 regarding proposals to stop the use of German as the primary language in public and parochial schools. The Bennett Law was a highly controversial state law passed in Wisconsin in 1889 that required the use of English to teach major subjects in all public and private elementary and high schools. It affected the state&#x27;s many German-language private schools (and some Norwegian schools), and was bitterly resented by German American communities. The German Catholics and Lutherans each operated large networks of parochial schools in the state. Because the language used in the classroom was German, the law meant the teachers would have to be replaced with bilingual teachers, and in most cases shut down. The Germans formed a coalition between Catholics and Lutherans, under the leadership of the Democratic Party, and the language issue produced a landslide for the Democrats, as Republicans dropped the issue until World WarI. By 1917, almost all schools taught in English, but courses in German were common in areas with large German populations. These courses were permanently dropped.

==Assimilation==

===Apparent disappearance of German American identity===
German Americans are no longer a conspicuous ethnic group. As Melvin G. Holli puts it, &quot;Public expression of German ethnicity is nowhere proportionate to the number of German Americans in the nation&#x27;s population. Almost nowhere are German Americans as a group as visible as many smaller groups. Two examples suffice to illustrate this point: when one surveys the popular television scene of the past decade, one hears Yiddish humor done by comedians; one sees Polish, Greek, and East European detective heroes; Italian-Americans in situation comedies; and blacks such as the Jeffersons and Huxtables. But one searches in vain for quintessentially German-American characters or melodramas patterned after German-American experiences... A second example of the virtual invisibility is that, though German Americans have been one of the largest ethnic groups in the Chicago area (numbering near one-half million between 1900 and 1910), no museum or archive exists to memorialize that fact. On the other hand, many smaller groups such as Lithuanians, Poles, Swedes, Jews, and others have museums, archives, and exhibit halls dedicated to their immigrant forefathers&quot;.

But this inconspicuousness was not always the case. By 1910, German Americans had created their own distinctive, vibrant, prosperous German-language communities, referred to collectively as &quot;Germania&quot;. According to historian Walter Kamphoefner, a &quot;number of big cities introduced German into their public school programs&quot;. Indianapolis, Cincinnati, Cleveland and other cities &quot;had what we now call two-way immersion programs: school taught half in German, half in English&quot;. This was a tradition which continued &quot;all the way down to World WarI&quot;. According to Kamphoefner, German &quot;was in a similar position as the Spanish language is in the 20th and 21st century&quot;; it &quot;was by far the most widespread foreign language, and whoever was the largest group was at a definite advantage in getting its language into the public sphere&quot;. Kamphoefner has come across evidence that as late as 1917, a German version of &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot; was still being sung in public schools in Indianapolis.

Cynthia Moothart O&#x27;Bannon, writing about Fort Wayne, Indiana, states that before World WarI &quot;German was the primary language in the homes, churches and parochial schools&quot; of German American settlers. She states that &quot;Many street signs were in German. (Main Street, for instance, was Haupt Strasse.) A large portion of local industry and commercial enterprises had at its roots German tooling and emigres. (An entire German town was moved to Fort Wayne when Wayne Knitting Mills opened.) Mayors, judges, firefighters and other community leaders had strong German ties. Social and sporting clubs and Germania Park in St. Joseph Township provided outlets to engage in traditional German activities&quot;. She goes on to state that &quot;The cultural influences were so strong, in fact, that the Chicago Tribune in 1893 declared Fort Wayne a &#x27;most German town&#x27;.&quot; Melvin G. Holli states that &quot;No continental foreign-born group had been so widely and favorably received in the United States, or had won such high marks from its hosts as had the Germans before World WarI. Some public opinion surveys conducted before the war showed German Americans were even more highly regarded than immigrants from the mother culture, England&quot;. Holli states that the Chicago Symphony Orchestra once &quot;had so many German-American musicians that the conductor often addressed them in the German language&quot;, and he states that &quot;No ethnic theater in Chicago glittered with such a classy repertory as did the German-American theater, or served to introduce so many European classical works to American audiences&quot;.

=== Impact of World War I ===
The transition to the English language was abrupt, forced by federal, state and local governments, and by public opinion, when the U.S. was at war with Germany in 1917–18. After 1917, the German language was seldom heard in public; most newspapers and magazines closed; churches and parochial schools switched to English. Melvin G. Holli states, &quot;In 1917, the Missouri Synod&#x27;s Lutheran Church conference minutes appeared in English for the first time, and the synod&#x27;s new constitution dropped its insistence on using the language of Luther only and instead suggested bilingualism. Dozens of Lutheran schools also dropped instruction in the German language. English-language services also intruded themselves into parishes where German had been the &quot;lingua franca&quot;. Whereas only 471 congregations nationwide held English services in 1910, the number preaching in English in the synod skyrocketed to 2,492 by 1919. The German Evangelical Synod of Missouri, Ohio, and other states also anglicized its name by dropping German from the title&quot;. Writing about Fort Wayne, Indiana, Cynthia Moothart O&#x27;Bannon states that, in the First World War, &quot;Local churches were forced to discontinue sermons in German, schools were pressured to stop teaching in German, and the local library director was ordered to purchase no more books written in German. The library shelves also were purged of English-language materials deemed sympathetic to or neutral on Germany. Anti-German sentiment forced the renaming of several local institutions. Teutonia Building, Loan &amp; Savings became Home Loan &amp; Savings, and The German-American bank became Lincoln National Bank &amp; Trust Co.&quot; She continues that &quot;in perhaps the most obvious bend to prevailing trends, Berghoff Brewery changed its motto from &quot;A very German brew&quot; to &quot;A very good brew,&quot; according to &quot;Fort Wayne: A Most German Town,&quot; a documentary produced by local public television station WFWA, Channel 39&quot;. Film critic Roger Ebert wrote how &quot;I could hear the pain in my German-American father&#x27;s voice as he recalled being yanked out of Lutheran school during World WarI and forbidden by his immigrant parents ever to speak German again&quot;.

Melvin G. Holli states, regarding Chicago, that &quot;After the Great War it became clear that no ethnic group was so de-ethnicized in its public expression by a single historic event as German Americans. While Polish Americans, Lithuanian Americans, and other subject nationalities underwent a great consciousness raising, German ethnicity fell into a protracted and permanent slump. The war damaged public expression of German ethnic, linguistic, and cultural institutions almost beyond repair&quot;. He states that, after the war, German ethnicity &quot;would never regain its prewar public acclaim, its larger-than-life public presence, with its symbols, rituals, and, above all, its large numbers of people who took pride in their Teutonic ancestry and enjoyed the role of Uncle Sam&#x27;s favored adopted son&quot;. He states &quot;A key indicator of the decline of &quot;Deutschtum&quot; in Chicago was the census: the number identifying themselves to the census-taker as German-born plummeted from 191,000 in 1910 to 112,000 in 1920. This drop far exceeds the natural mortality rate or the number who might be expected to move. Self-identifiers had found it prudent to claim some nationality other than German. To claim German nationality had become too painful an experience&quot;. Along similar lines, Terrence G. Wiley states that, in Nebraska, &quot;around 14 percent of the population had identified itself as being of German-origin in 1910; however, only 4.4 percent made comparable assertions in 1920. In Wisconsin, the decline in percentage of those identifying themselves as Germans was even more obvious. The 1920 census reported only 6.6. percent of the population as being of German-origin, as opposed to nearly 29 percent ten years earlier... These statistics led Burnell... to conclude that: &quot;No other North American ethnic group, past or present, has attempted so forcefully to officially conceal their... ethnic origins. One must attribute this reaction to the wave of repression that swept the Continent and enveloped anyone with a German past&quot;&quot;.

The Catholic high schools were deliberately structured to commingle ethnic groups so as to promote ethnic (but not interreligious) intermarriage. German-speaking taverns, beer gardens and saloons were all shut down by Prohibition; those that reopened in 1933 spoke English.

=== Impact of World War II ===

While its impact appears to be less well-known and studied than the impact which World WarI had on German Americans, World WarII was likewise difficult for them and likewise had the impact of forcing them to drop distinctive German characteristics and assimilate into the general U.S. culture. According to Melvin G. Holli, &quot;By 1930, some German American leaders in Chicago felt, as Dr. Leslie Tischauser put it, &#x27;the damage done by the wartime experience had been largely repaired&#x27;. The German language was being taught in the schools again; the German theater still survived; and German Day celebrations were drawing larger and larger crowds. Although the assimilation process had taken its toll of pre-1914 German immigrants, a smaller group of newer postwar arrivals had developed a vocal if not impolitic interest in the rebuilding process in Germany under Nazism. As the 1930s moved on, Hitler&#x27;s brutality and Nazi excesses made Germanism once again suspect. The rise of Nazism, as Luebke notes, &#x27;transformed German ethnicity in America into a source of social and psychological discomfort, if not distress. The overt expression of German-American opinion consequently declined, and in more recent years, virtually disappeared as a reliable index of political attitudes...&#x27;&quot;

Holli goes on to state that &quot;The pain increased during the late 1930s and early 1940s, when Congressman Martin Dies held public hearings about the menace of Nazi subversives and spies among the German Americans. In 1940, the Democratic party&#x27;s attack on anti-war elements as disloyal and pro-Nazi, and the advent of the war itself, made German ethnicity too heavy a burden to bear. As Professor Tischauser wrote, &quot;The notoriety gained by those who supported the German government between 1933 and 1941 cast a pall over German-Americans everywhere. Leaders of the German-American community would have great difficulty rebuilding an ethnic consciousness... Few German-Americans could defend what Hitler... had done to millions of people in pursuit of the &#x27;final solution&#x27;, and the wisest course for German-Americans was to forget any attachment to the German half of their heritage.&quot;&quot;

A notable example which highlights the generational effect of this de-germanization on German-American cultural identity is U.S. President Donald Trump&#x27;s erroneous assertion of Swedish heritage as late as 1987 in The Art of the Deal. This error stems from Donald Trump&#x27;s father, Fred Trump, who was of German heritage but attempted to pass himself off as Swedish amid the anti-German sentiment sparked by World WarII, a claim which would continue to mislead his family for decades.

By the 1940s, Germania had largely vanished outside some rural areas and the Germans were thoroughly assimilated. According to Melvin G. Holli, by the end of World WarII, German Americans &quot;were ethnics without any visible national or local leaders. Not even politicians would think of addressing them explicitly as an ethnic constituency as they would say, Polish Americans, Jewish Americans, or African Americans.&quot; Holli states that &quot;Being on the wrong side in two wars had a devastating and long-term negative impact on the public celebration of German-American ethnicity&quot;.

Historians have tried to explain what became of the German Americans and their descendants. Kazal (2004) looks at Germans in Philadelphia, focusing on four ethnic subcultures: middle-class &quot;Vereinsdeutsche&quot;, working-class socialists, Lutherans, and Catholics. Each group followed a somewhat distinctive path toward assimilation. Lutherans, and the better situated &quot;Vereinsdeutsche&quot; with whom they often overlapped, after World WarI abandoned the last major German characteristics and redefined themselves as old stock or as &quot;Nordic&quot; Americans, stressing their colonial roots in Pennsylvania and distancing themselves from more recent immigrants. On the other hand, working-class and Catholic Germans, groups that heavily overlapped, lived and worked with Irish and other European ethnics; they also gave up German characteristics but came to identify themselves as White ethnics, distancing themselves above all from African American recent arrivals in nearby neighborhoods. Well before World WarI, women in particular were becoming more and more involved in a mass consumer culture that lured them out of their German-language neighborhood shops and into English-language downtown department stores. The 1920s and 1930s brought English-language popular culture via movies and radio that drowned out the few surviving German language venues.

===Factors favoring assimilation===
Kazal points out that German Americans have not had an experience that is especially typical of immigrant groups. &quot;Certainly, in a number of ways, the German-American experience was idiosyncratic. No other large immigrant group was subjected to such strong, sustained pressure to abandon its ethnic identity for an American one. None was so divided internally, a characteristic that made German Americans especially vulnerable to such pressure. Among the larger groups that immigrated in the country after 1830, none – despite regional variations – appears to have muted its ethnic identity to so great an extent.&quot; This quote from Kazal identifies both external pressures on German Americans and internal dividedness among them as reasons for their high level of assimilation.

Regarding the external pressures, Kazal writes: &quot;The pressure imposed on German Americans to forsake their ethnic identity was extreme in both nature and duration. No other ethnic group saw its &#x27;adoptive fatherland&#x27; twice enter a world war against its country of origin. To this stigma, the Third Reich added the lasting one of the Holocaust. In her study of ethnic identity in the 1980s, sociologist Mary Waters noted that the &#x27;effect of the Nazi movement and World WarII was still quite strong&#x27; in shaping &#x27;popular perceptions of the German-American character&#x27;, enough so that some individuals of mixed background often would acknowledge only the non-German part of their ancestry.&quot; Kazal contrasts this experience with the experiences of the Japanese, Poles, Czechs, Lithuanians, Italians, east European Jews, and Irish. &quot;Japanese Americans, of course, suffered far more during the Second World War&quot;, but until at least the 1950s, the pressure on Japanese Americans &quot;ran toward exclusion from, rather than inclusion in, the nation&quot;. &quot;The state and many ordinary European Americans refused to recognize Asians as potentially American. In contrast, they pressured Germans to accept precisely that American identity in place of a German one&quot;.

Kazal goes on to state &quot;The burden of &quot;enemy&quot; status made those pressures far greater for Germans than for other European ethnic groups. To some extent, American intervention in World WarI actually helped fuel ethnic nationalism in the United States among Poles, Czechs, Lithuanians, Italians, and east European Jews, who felt their desires for existing or prospective homelands stood to gain from an Allied victory. Indeed, some historians have depicted the following decade as one when immigrants transcended local or regional homeland affiliations to craft or further consolidate national identities as Poles, Czechs, and Italians. Such groups escaped the fury of &quot;100 percent Americanism&quot; during the war, in part because of their obvious stake in the defeat of the Central Powers&quot;. As for Irish Americans, Kazal states that the lack of enthusiasm of many of them for helping England made them &quot;vulnerable to the wartime &quot;antihyphen&quot; climate&quot;, but that &quot;Irish nationalist activity intensified during and immediately after that war, as many Irish Americans became swept up in the events leading to the creation of the Irish Free State&quot;, and that &quot;It made a difference for the long-term viability of Irish-American identity that the Irish homeland not only did not go to war with the United States but, in fact, emerged during the interwar years as a sovereign nation&quot;.

Kazal then goes on to discuss the internal dividedness. He writes: &quot;German-American identity fell victim not only to a peculiar set of events, but also to an extraordinarily high level of internal diversity. All ethnic groups have internal divides, whether of class, religion, gender, politics, or homeland region. What distinguished German America was that it incorporated not just some but &quot;all&quot; of these divisions. Irish Americans, for example, had lost their status as primarily a proletarian group by 1900, yet they were united by religion and politics. &quot;Irish American&quot; had come to mean Irish Catholic; the vast majority of Irish Americans subscribed to some form of Irish nationalism conflated with American patriotism; and Irish-American voters were overwhelmingly Democrats.

The power of this synthesis, Kerby Miller argued, explains the survival of Irish-American identity despite the ebbing of organized Irish-American nationalism after the Free State&#x27;s founding. For German Americans, religion and party politics were sources of division rather than of unity&quot;. Kazal goes on to state that &quot;The subcultures of German America, meanwhile, had ample opportunity for contact, however testy, with non-German counterparts. The latter beckoned as destinations when the cost of being German-American rose too high&quot;. It is not just Kazal who has pointed out the internal dividedness of the German American community. Kathleen Neils Conzen has pointed it out; David Peterson states that Conzen, &quot;along with many others, concludes that German-Americans&#x27; heterogeneity, particularly in religion, hampered their ability to build socially and politically stable ethnic communities&quot;, and that Conzen &quot;stresses that German Americans assimilated relatively rapidly and that their diversity played a key role in that assimilation&quot;. (Conzen is also drawn upon by Joy Kristina Adams, who cites Conzen when she (Adams) states that &quot;The diversity and size of the German settlements made them susceptible to long-term Americanization by fostering factionalism, increasing contacts between Germans and non-Germans, and weakening unified leadership&quot;.) The &quot;Encyclopedia of the Great Plains&quot; also stresses the internal dividedness, stating &quot;One of the distinguishing characteristics of the German population in North America (especially in comparison to other immigrant groups) has been its relative degree of cultural diversity, reflected especially in the number of Christian denominations to which Germans belonged. In part this reflects patterns that had developed over centuries in Germany, whose population came to include nearly every variety of Christianity–from Catholics, Lutherans, and Reformed groups to more radical Anabaptist pietistic movements such as Amish, Mennonites, Schwenkfelders, and the Moravian church. It is not surprising, then, that nearly all of these denominations were represented among the German immigrant population in North America.&quot;

Robert Paul McCaffery points out that &quot;Despite their numbers... and unlike many immigrant groups, Germans never united as a powerful ethnic block. Religious disputes brought from the old country prevented them from uniting in the new. The two strongest denominations, Catholics and Lutherans, could not come together; and the Free Thinkers distrusted and shunned them both.&quot; &quot;These divisions ran so deep that German-Americans could neither unite to fend off attacks engendered by World WarI, nor elect German candidates for political office&quot;. McCaffery states that &quot;Discussions of the disunity of the Germans are many&quot;, giving a work by Nathan Glazer and Daniel Patrick Moynihan and a work by Kathleen Neils Conzen as examples, and he states that Leslie V. Tischauser &quot;maintains that neither World WarI, political questions of importance to Germans, nor German candidates could unite the German-Americans of Chicago&quot;. Jason Todd Baker, meanwhile, writes that &quot;Divided by imported regional prejudices, religious differences, political affiliations, and spread in pockets across the city, the Germans in nineteenth-century St. Louis comprised the city&#x27;s largest immigrant ethnicity and possibly its least cohesive&quot;.

He goes on to state that German Americans in St. Louis &quot;could not be relied upon to do much of anything as a group. St. Louis served (and still does) as the seat of the Lutheran Church Missouri Synod, a conservative American Lutheran confession, and their local strength led to friction with Germans of other faiths. These Lutherans did not traffic much with the sizable German Catholic population of the city, who often shared their houses of worship and political stances with the Irish. The small rabbinical German Jewish community remained insular. The Freethinkers, atheists, socialists, et al., had little use for any of these groups. In addition, the Germans, while heavily concentrated in a few pockets of north and south St. Louis, were spread across the city proper and into the larger countryside&quot;. And according to the Max Kade Institute for German-American Studies, &quot;The diversity of religious expression among German-speaking immigrants was paralleled by a high degree of heterogeneity stemming from differences in regional and linguistic origins. This situation differed from that of other nineteenth-century immigrant groups, notably the Irish, but also Italians and people of other European backgrounds. The resulting lack of a unified and clearly definable German-American community explains in part why only few Americans, including those of German descent, have any idea when Steuben Day or German-American Day falls, whereas the Irish St. Patrick&#x27;s Day is one of America&#x27;s most popular celebrations, and Columbus Day, named after the Italian explorer, is a federal holiday&quot;.

=== Persistence of German language ===
Despite the remarkable level of language assimilation reached by German Americans, distinct German usage survived well into the mid-to-late-20th century in some places. Writing about the town of Hustisford, Wisconsin, Jennifer Ludden discusses Mel Grulke, who was born in 1941, with German his first language at home; &quot;Grulke&#x27;s great-grandparents immigrated to the U.S. in the late 1880s, yet three generations later, his farmer parents still spoke German at home, attended German language church services and chatted in German with shopkeepers when they brought their farm eggs into town to sell&quot;.

To this day, German speakers can be found in the United States among long-established Anabaptist groups – the Old Order Amish and most Old Order Mennonites speak Pennsylvania Dutch (or Bernese German or Alsatian by a minority of Amish) along with High German to various degrees (though they are generally fluent in English). All Hutterites speak Hutterite German and many &quot;Russian&quot; Mennonites speak Plautdietsch, a Low German dialect coming originally from the area around Danzig. The three Amish dialects as well as Hutterite German are still learned by all children of the group, whereas Plautdietsch-speakers tend much more to switch to English. Another group of German-speakers can be found in the Amana Colonies in Iowa; according to the website Statistical Atlas, all the residents of East Amana speak German at home, and only 67.7% can speak English &quot;very well&quot;.

It has been shown that cultural differences between the attitudes towards farming of German Americans, on the one hand, and of British-ancestry &quot;Yankees&quot;, on the other, lasted into the 1980s and have to some extent lasted into the 21st century; German Americans have tended to see farming in a more family-oriented manner than Yankees.

==German-American influence==
===Cuisine and beers===

The influence of German cuisine is seen in the cuisine of the United States throughout the country, especially regarding pastries, meats and sausages, and above all, beer. Frankfurters (or &quot;wieners&quot;, originating from Frankfurt am Main and Vienna, respectively), hamburgers, bratwurst, sauerkraut, and strudel are common dishes. German bakers introduced the pretzel, which is popular across the United States. Germans introduced America to lager, the most-produced beer style in the United States, and have been the dominant ethnic group in the beer industry since 1850.

The oldest extant brewery in the United States is D. G. Yuengling &amp; Son of Pottsville, Pennsylvania (approximately 80 miles northwest of Philadelphia), founded in 1829 by an immigrant from Aldingen in what is today Baden-Württemberg; the brewery&#x27;s flagship product remains a 19th-century German-style amber lager. By the late 19th century, Milwaukee, with a large population of German origin, was once the home to four of the world&#x27;s largest breweries owned by ethnic Germans (Schlitz, Blatz, Pabst, and Miller) and was the number one beer producing city in the world for many years. Almost half of all current beer sales in the United States can be attributed to German immigrants, Capt. A. Pabst, Eberhard Anheuser, and Adolphus Busch, who founded Anheuser-Busch in St. Louis in 1860. Later German immigrants figured prominently in the rebirth of craft brews following Prohibition, culminating in the microbrew movement that swept the U.S. beginning in the late 1980s.

===Festivals===
German and German-American celebrations, such as Oktoberfest, Rhenish Carnival, German-American Day, and Von Steuben Day are held regularly throughout the country. One of the largest is the German-American Steuben Parade in New York City, held every third Saturday in September. There are also major annual events in Chicago&#x27;s Lincoln Square neighborhood, a traditional a center of the city&#x27;s German population, in Cincinnati, where its annual &quot;Oktoberfest Zinzinnati&quot; is the largest Oktoberfest outside of Germany and in Milwaukee, which celebrates its German heritage with an annual German Fest. Many of the immigrants from Germany and other German-speaking countries came to Pennsylvania to what was then &quot;Allegheny City&quot; (now part of the North Side of the City of Pittsburgh). So many German speakers arrived, the area became known as &quot;Deutschtown&quot; and has been revived as such. Within Deutschtown and since 1854, The Teutonia Männerchor has been promoting and furthering German cultural traditions.

Skat, the most popular card game in Germany, is also played in areas of the United States with large German American populations, such as Wisconsin and Texas.

==Education==
The following German international schools are in operation in the United States, serving German citizens, Americans, and other U.S. residents:
* German International School Boston
* German School New York
* German American School of Portland
* German International School of Silicon Valley
* German School Washington, D.C.

==Notable people==
German Americans have been influential in almost every field in American society, including science, architecture, business, sports, entertainment, theology, politics, and the military.

German American general/flag military officers Baron von Steuben, George Armstrong Custer, John Pershing, Dwight D. Eisenhower, Chester W. Nimitz, Carl Andrew Spaatz and Norman Schwarzkopf commanded the United States Army in the American Revolutionary War, American Civil War, Indian Wars, World WarI, World WarII, and the Persian Gulf War, respectively.

German Americans were famous American politicians, including Carl Schurz, Friedrich Hecker, Frederick Muhlenberg, Henry Morgenthau, Sr., Henry Morgenthau Jr., John Boehner, and Donald Trump. Henry Kissinger was a famous diplomat.
Many German Americans have played a prominent role in American industry and business, including Henry J. Heinz (H. J. Heinz Company), Harvey S. Firestone (Firestone Tire and Rubber Company), Frank Seiberling (Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company), Walt Disney (Disney), John D. Rockefeller (Standard Oil), William Boeing (The Boeing Company and United Airlines), Walter Chrysler (Chrysler Corporation), Frederick and August Duesenberg (Duesenberg Automobile Corporation), Studebaker brothers (Studebaker Automobile Corporation), George Westinghouse (Westinghouse Electric Corporation), Mark Zuckerburg (Meta Platforms), Levi Strauss (Levi Strauss &amp; Co.), Charles Guth (PepsiCo Inc.), Bill Gates (Microsoft Corporation), Jawed Karim (YouTube), Elon Musk (SolarCity, SpaceX and Tesla Motors), James L. Kraft (Kraft Foods Inc.), Henry E. Steinway (Steinway &amp; Sons), Charles Pfizer (Pfizer, Inc.), John Jacob Astor (Waldorf Astoria Hotels and Resorts), Conrad Hilton (Hilton Hotels &amp; Resorts), Guggenheim family (Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation), (Guggenheim Partners), Marcus Goldman and Samuel Sachs (The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.), Lehman Brothers (Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc.), Charles Diebold (Diebold Nixdorf), Bernard Kroger (Kroger), Carl Laemmle (Universal Studios), Marcus Loew (Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios Inc.), Harry Cohn (Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc.), Herman Hollerith (International Business Machines Corporation (IBM)), Steve Jobs (Apple Inc.), Michael Dell (Dell Inc.), Eric Schmidt (Google Inc. and Alphabet Inc.), Peter Thiel (PayPal Inc.), Adolph Simon Ochs and Arthur Ochs Sulzberger (&quot;The New York Times&quot;), Charles Bergstresser (&quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;), Al Neuharth (&quot;USA Today&quot;), Eugene Meyer (&quot;The Washington Post&quot;) etc.

German Americans were pioneers and dominated beer brewing for much of American history, beginning with breweries founded in the 19th century by German immigrants August Schell (August Schell Brewing Company), Christian Moerlein (Christian Moerlein Brewing Co.), Eberhard Anheuser and Adolphus Busch (Anheuser-Busch, currently part of AB InBev), Adolph Coors (Molson Coors Brewing Company), Frederick Miller (Miller Brewing Company), Frederick Pabst (Pabst Brewing Company), Bernhard Stroh (Stroh Brewery Company) and Joseph Schlitz (Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company).
Brooklyn Bridge engineer John A. Roebling and architects Walter Gropius and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, left behind visible landmarks. Thomas Ustick Walter designed the famous United States Capitol dome.

American literature have been greatly enriched by German-American authors such as William Dean Howells, Theodore Dreiser, Wallace Stevens, Henry Miller, Pearl S. Buck, Thomas Wolfe, John Steinbeck, Charles Bukowski, Patricia Highsmith, Kurt Vonnegut, and Sylvia Plath. L. Frank Baum and Dr. Seuss were popular children&#x27;s authors, while H. L. Mencken, Walter Lippmann, and Lee Miller were famous journalists.
David Rittenhouse was an important scientist, inventor and astronomer of colonial Pennsylvania. His nephew Benjamin Smith Barton, was an early naturalist and publisher of the first botanical textbook in the United States. Adam Kuhn, Michael Leib, and Caspar Wistar were noted physicians. The 19th century saw pioneering inventions by Isaac Singer (sewing machines), Ottmar Mergenthaler (Linotype), Herman Hollerith (tabulating machine), and John Froelich (gasoline-powered tractor). Howard H. Aiken, George Stibitz, Claude Shannon, Joseph Weizenbaum, Douglas Engelbart, and Donald Knuth made significant contributions to the field of computing. The Wright brothers invented the world&#x27;s first successful airplane in 1903. Famous German-American scientists include Albert A. Michelson, Albert Einstein, Joseph Erlanger, Herbert Spencer Gasser, Otto Stern, Hermann Joseph Muller, John H. Northrop, Arthur H. Compton, Harold C. Urey, Charles Richter, Linus Pauling, J. Robert Oppenheimer, Maria Goeppert-Mayer, Hans Bethe, Paul Flory, Polykarp Kusch, and Norman Ramsey Jr., among others.
After World War II, Wernher von Braun, and most of the leading engineers from the former German V-2 rocket base at Peenemünde, were brought to the U.S. They contributed decisively to the development of U.S. military rockets, as well as rockets for the NASA space program and the initiation of the Apollo program to land on the Moon. Similarly, fellow German aviation technologist Siegfried Knemeyer, the former top aviation technologist within the Reich Air Ministry during World WarII, was brought to the United States through a similar path to von Braun, and served as a civilian employee of the USAF for over twenty years. Neil Armstrong was the first human to land on the moon.
There were many celebrities. James Stephen Donaldson(commonly known as MrBeast), Bruce Willis, George Eyser, Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig, Johnny Depp, Jack Nicklaus, Michael Keaton, Dale Earnhardt, Doris Mary Ann Kappelhoff (Doris Day), Grace Kelly, Clark Gable, Marlene Dietrich, Deborah Ann Woll, Johnny Weissmuller, Ernst Lubitsch, Walter Damrosch, Henry John Deutschendorf (John Denver), Hailee Steinfeld, John Kay, Heidi Klum, Meryl Streep, Marlon Brando, Kim Basinger, Kevin Costner, Michelle Pfeiffer, Bryan Cranston, Sandra Bullock, David Hasselhoff, Leonardo DiCaprio, Kirsten Dunst, Evan Peters, Bridgit Mendler, Zazie Beetz, Kevin George Knipfing (Kevin James) and Sabrina Carpenter; became prominent athletes, actors, film directors or artists.

===U.S. presidents===

There have been three presidents whose fathers were of German descent: Dwight D. Eisenhower (original family name &quot;Eisenhauer&quot; and maternal side is also German/Swiss), Herbert Hoover (original family name &quot;Huber&quot;), and Donald Trump (original family name &quot;Drumpf&quot;; his paternal grandparents, Frederick Trump and Elizabeth Christ Trump immigrated from Kallstadt in 1902).

Presidents with maternal German ancestry include Harry Truman, whose maternal grandfather Solomon Young was a descendant of Johann Georg Jung and Hans Michael Gutknecht, who emigrated from Germany together in 1752, Richard Milhous Nixon, whose maternal ancestors were Germans who anglicized &quot;Melhausen&quot; to Milhous, and Barack Obama, whose maternal family&#x27;s ancestry includes German immigrants from the South German town of Besigheim and from Bischwiller in the historically culturally Germanic Alsace region that is now part of France; both families came to America around 1750.

==See also==

* Americans in Germany
* German Canadians
* German diaspora
* German-American Heritage Foundation of the USA
* German language in the United States 
* German Puerto Rican
* Germany–United States relations, covers diplomacy, trade and culture
* Hyphenated American
* Nativism (politics) in the United States#Anti-German
* Ellis County, Kansas#English and Russian-German immigrants

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
==Further reading==

* Adams, Willi Paul. &quot;The German-Americans: An Ethnic Experience&quot; (1993). 
* Bade, Klaus J. &quot;From emigration to immigration: The German experience in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.&quot; &quot;Central European History&quot; 28.4 (1995): 507–535.
* Bade, Klaus J. &quot;German emigration to the United States and continental immigration to Germany in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.&quot; &quot;Central European History&quot; 13.4 (1980): 348–377.
* Bank, Michaela. &quot;Women of Two Countries: German-American Women, Women&#x27;s Rights and Nativism, 1848–1890&quot; (Berghahn, 2012).
* Baron, Frank, &quot;Abraham Lincoln and the German Immigrants: Turners and Forty-Eighters,&quot; &quot;Yearbook of German-American Studies,&quot; 4 (Supplemental Issue 2012), 1–254.
* Barry, Colman J. &quot;The Catholic Church and German Americans&quot;. (1953).
* Bronner, Simon J. and Joshua R. Brown, eds. &quot;Pennsylvania Germans: An Interpretive Encyclopedia&quot; (: Johns Hopkins UP, 2017), xviii, 554 pp. 
* Brancaforte, Charlotte L., ed. &quot;The German Forty-Eighters in the United States&quot;. (1989).
* Bungert, Heike, Cora Lee Kluge, &amp; Robert C. Ostergren (eds.). &quot;Wisconsin German Land and Life&quot;. Madison, Wis.: Max Kade Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2006.
* Coburn, Carol K. &quot;Life at Four Corners: Religion, Gender, and Education in a German-Lutheran Community, 1868–1945&quot;. (1992).
* Conzen, Kathleen Neils. &quot;German-Americans and ethnic political culture: Stearns County, Minnesota, 1855—1915&quot; (JOHN F. KENNEDY-INSTITUT FÜR NORDAMERIKASTUDIEN Abteilung für Geschichte WORKING PAPER No. 16/1989) pp, 1–12. major scholarly paper online
* Conzen, Kathleen Neils. &quot;Germans&quot; in Thernstrom, Stephan; Orlov, Ann; Handlin, Oscar, eds. &quot;Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups&quot;. Harvard University Press. . (1980). pp. 405–425.
* Conzen, Kathleen Neils. &quot;Germans in Minnesota&quot;. (2003).
* Conzen, Kathleen Neils. &quot;Immigrant Milwaukee, 1836–1860: Accommodation and Community in a Frontier City&quot;. (1976).
* DeWitt, Petra. &quot;Degrees of Allegiance: Harassment and Loyalty in Missouri&#x27;s German-American Community during World WarI&quot; (Ohio University Press, 2012).
* Dobbert, Guido A. &quot;German-Americans between New and Old Fatherland, 1870–1914 &quot;. &quot;American Quarterly&quot; 19 (1967): 663–680.
* Efford, Alison Clark. &quot;German Immigrants: Race and Citizenship in the Civil War Era.&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 2013).
* Ellis, M. and P. Panayi. &quot;German Minorities in World WarI: A Comparative Study of Britain and the USA&quot;, &quot;Ethnic and Racial Studies&quot; 17 (April 1994): 238–259.
* Emmerich, Alexander. &quot;John Jacob Astor and the First Great American Fortune&quot;. (2013), he was an immigrant from Germany
* Ernst, Robert. &quot;Immigrant Life in New York City, 1825–1863&quot; (1949), detailed coverage of Germans and Irish.
* Faust, Albert Bernhardt. &quot;The German Element in the United States with Special Reference to Its Political, Moral, Social, and Educational Influence&quot;. 2 vol (1909). vol. 1, vol. 2
* Fogleman, Aaron. &quot;Hopeful Journeys: German Immigration, Settlement, and Political Culture in Colonial America, 1717–1775&quot; (University of Pennsylvania Press, 1996)
* German Historical Institute. &quot;Immigrant Entrepreneurship: German-American Business Biographies, 1720 to the Present &quot;. (2010, updated continually)
* Gross, Stephen John. &quot;Handing down the farm: Values, strategies, and outcomes in inheritance practices among rural German Americans&quot;, &quot;Journal of Family History&quot;, (1996) 21: 2, 192–217.
* Grubb, Farley. &quot; German Immigration and Servitude in America, 1709–1920&quot; (Routledge Explorations in Economic History) (2011).
* Guenther, Karen. &quot;A Question of Loyalty: German Churches in Reading During the First World War,&quot; &quot;Pennsylvania History&quot; (2017) 84#3:325-53 online
* Hawgood, John. &quot;The Tragedy of German-America&quot;. (1940).
* Iverson, Noel. &quot;Germania, U.S.A.: Social Change in New Ulm, Minnesota&quot;. (1966). emphasizes Turners.
* Jensen, Richard. &quot;The Winning of the Midwest, Social and Political Conflict 1888–1896&quot;. (1971). Voting behavior of Germans, prohibition, language, and school issues.
* Johnson, Hildegard B. &quot;The Location of German Immigrants in the Middle West&quot;. &quot;Annals of the Association of American Geographers&quot; 41 (1951): 1–41.
* Jordon, Terry G. &quot;German Seed in Texas Soil: Immigrant Farmers in Nineteenth-century Texas&quot;. (1966).
* Kamphoefner, Walter D. and Wolfgang Helbich, eds. &quot;German-American Immigration and Ethnicity in Comparative Perspective&quot;. Madison, Wisconsin: Max Kade Institute, University of Wisconsin–Madison (2004).
* Kamphoefner, Walter D., &quot;Uprooted or Transplanted? Reflections on Patterns of German Immigration to Missouri,&quot; &quot;Missouri Historical Review,&quot; 103 (January 2009), 71–89.
* Kamphoefner, Walter D. &quot;Immigrant Epistolary and Epistemology: On the Motivators and Mentality of Nineteenth-Century German Immigrants.&quot; &quot;Journal of American Ethnic History&quot; (2009): 34–54. in JSTOR 
* Kamphoefner, Walter D. &quot;Germans in America: A Concise History.&quot; Lanham: Rowman &amp; Littlefield Publishers, 2021.
* Kazal, Russell A. &quot;Becoming Old Stock: The Paradox of German-American Identity&quot;. (2004). a major study of Philadelphia
* Keil, Hartmut and Jentz, John B., eds. &quot;German Workers in Industrial Chicago, 1850–1910: A Comparative Perspective&quot; (1983). 252 pp.
* Keller, Christian B. &quot;Flying Dutchmen and Drunken Irishmen: The Myths and Realities of Ethnic Civil War Soldiers,&quot; &quot;Journal of Military History&quot;, 73 (January 2009), 117–145.
* Keller, Phyllis. &quot;States of Belonging: German-American Intellectuals and the First World War&quot;. (Harvard UP, 1979).
* Kibler, Amanda. &quot;Speaking like a &#x27;good American&#x27;: National identity and the legacy of German-language education.&quot; &quot;Teachers College Record&quot; 110.6 (2008): 1241–1268. online
* Krawatzek, Félix, and Gwendolyn Sasse. &quot;Integration and Identities: The Effects of Time, Migrant Networks, and Political Crises on Germans in the United States.&quot; &quot;Comparative Studies in Society and History&quot; 60.4 (2018): 1029–1065. online 
* Kulas, S. John. &quot;Der Wanderer of St. Paul: The First Decade, 1867–1877: a Mirror of the German-Catholic Immigrant Experience in Minnesota&quot; (Peter Lang, 1996), newspaper history
* Levine, Bruce. &quot;The Spirit of 1848: German Immigrants, Labor Conflict, and the Coming of the Civil War&quot;. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1992.
* Luebke, Frederick C. &quot;Bonds of Loyalty: German Americans During World WarI&quot;. (1974).
* Luebke, Frederick C., ed. &quot;Ethnic Voters and the Election of Lincoln&quot;. (1971).
* Luebke, Frederick C. &quot;Germans in the New World&quot;. (1990).
* Luebke, Frederick. &quot;Immigrants and Politics: The Germans of Nebraska, 1880–1900&quot;. (1969).
* Nadel, Stanley. &quot;Little Germany: Ethnicity, Religion, and Class in New York City, 1845–80&quot; (1990).
* O&#x27;Connor, Richard. &quot;German-Americans: an Informal History&quot;. (1968), popular history
* Otterness, Philip. &quot;Becoming German: The 1709 Palatine Migration to New York&quot; (2004) 235 pp.
* Pickle, Linda. &quot;Contented among Strangers: Rural German-Speaking Women and Their Families in the Nineteenth-Century Midwest&quot; (1996).
* Pochmann, Henry A. and Arthur R. Schultz; &quot;German Culture in America, 1600–1900: Philosophical and Literary Influences&quot;. (1957).
* Rippley, LaVern J. &quot;German Americans.&quot; &quot;Gale Encyclopedia of Multicultural America,&quot; edited by Thomas Riggs, (3rd ed., vol. 2, Gale, 2014, pp. 207–223) Online 
* Ritter, Luke, &quot;Sunday Regulation and the Formation of German American Identity in St. Louis, 1840–1860,&quot; &quot;Missouri Historical Review,&quot; (2012), vol. 107, no. 1, pp. 23–40.
* Roeber, A. G. &quot;Palatines, Liberty, and Property: German Lutherans in Colonial British America&quot;. (1998).
* Salamon, Sonya. &quot;Prairie Patrimony: Family, Farming, and Community in the Midwest&quot; (U of North Carolina Press, 1992), focus on German Americans.
* Salmons, Joseph C. &quot;The German Language in America, 1683–1991&quot;. Madison, Wis.: Max Kade Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1993.
* Schiffman, Harold. &quot;Language loyalty in the German-American Church: The Case of an Over-confident Minority &quot; (1987).
* Schirp, Francis. &quot;Germans in the United States &quot;. &quot;The Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;. Vol. 6. New York: Appleton, 1909.
* Schlossman, Steven L. &quot;Is there an American tradition of bilingual education? German in the public elementary schools, 1840–1919.&quot; &quot;American Journal of Education&quot; (1983): 139–186. in JSTOR 
* Tatlock, Lynne and Matt Erlin, eds. &quot;German Culture in Nineteenth-Century America: Reception, Adaptation, Transformation&quot;. (2005).
* Tischauser, Leslie V. &quot;The Burden of Ethnicity: The German Question in Chicago, 1914–1941&quot;. (1990).
* Tolzmann, Don H., ed. &quot;German Americans in the World Wars&quot;, 2 vols. Munich, Germany: K.G. Saur, (1995).
* Tolzmann, Don H. &quot;German-American Literature&quot; (Scarecrow Press, 1977).
* Trommler, Frank &amp; Joseph McVeigh, eds. &quot;America and the Germans: An Assessment of a Three-Hundred-Year History&quot;. (2 vol 1985); vol 1: &quot;Immigration, Language, Ethnicity&quot;; vol 2: &quot;The Relationship in the Twentieth Century&quot;. Essays by scholars covering broad themes.
* Turk, Eleanor L. &quot;Germans in Kansas: Review Essay &quot;. &quot;Kansas History: A Journal of the Central Plains&quot; 28 (Spring 2005): 44–71.
* van Ravenswaay, Charles. &quot;The Arts and Architecture of German Settlements in Missouri: A Survey of a Vanishing Culture&quot; (1977; reprint University of Missouri Press, 2006).
* Walker, Mack. &quot;Germany and the Emigration, 1816–1885&quot; (1964).
* &quot;Where Have All the Germans Gone? &quot;. New York: Films Media Group, 1976.
* Wilkerson, Miranda E., and Heather Richmond. &quot;Germans in Illinois&quot; (Southern Illinois UP, 2019) online.
* Wittke, Carl Frederick. &quot;The German-Language Press in America&quot;. (1957).
* Wittke, Carl Frederick. &quot;Refugees of Revolution: The German Forty-Eighters in America&quot;. (1952).
* Wittke, Carl Frederick. &quot;We Who Built America: The Saga of the Immigrant&quot;. (1939), ch. 6, 9.
* Wood, Ralph, ed. &quot;The Pennsylvania Germans&quot;. (1942).
* Zeitlin, Richard. &quot;Germans in Wisconsin&quot;. Madison: Wisconsin Historical Society, (2000).

===Online PhD dissertations===

* Beckmann, Sterling.   &quot;The Language of Legitimacy: Interventionism and German-American Nativism in U.S. Political Rhetoric, 1850–1876&quot; (Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville ProQuest Dissertations &amp; Theses,  2019. 27665629) rhetoric used by German Americans to assert American identity.
* Boyd, James.  &quot;An investigation into the structural causes of German-American mass migration in the nineteenth century&quot; (Cardiff University (United Kingdom); ProQuest Dissertations &amp; Theses,  2013. U604309).
* Craig, Sarah M.   &quot;The Hun in the Heartland: Three Missouri German-American Communities During the Great War&quot; (University of Central Missouri; ProQuest Dissertations &amp; Theses,  2015. 31746937).
* DeWitt, Petra. &quot;Searching for the roots of harassment and the meaning of loyalty: A study of the German-American experience in Missouri during World War I&quot; (University of Missouri - Columbia; ProQuest Dissertations &amp; Theses,  2005. 3235136).
* Holian, Timothy J.   &quot;The German-American community during the World War II era, with a focus on Cincinnati, Ohio&quot; (University of Cincinnati; ProQuest Dissertations &amp; Theses,  1995. 9541663).
* Johnson, Charles Thomas.  &quot;The National German-American Alliance, 1901-1918: Cultural politics and ethnicity in peace and war&quot; (Western Michigan University; ProQuest Dissertations &amp; Theses,  1997. 9817115).
* Knarr, Mary L. &quot;Faith, frauen, and the formation of an ethnic identity: German Lutheran women in south and central Texas, 1831–1890&quot;. (Ph.D. dissertation, Texas Christian U. 2009). online 
* Krause, Scott H.   &quot;Outpost of Freedom: A German-American Network&#x27;s Campaign to bring Cold War Democracy to West Berlin, 1933-66&quot; (The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; ProQuest Dissertations &amp; Theses,  2016. 10119977).
* Maischak, Lars.  &quot;A cosmopolitan community: Hanseatic merchants in the German-American Atlantic of the nineteenth century&quot; (The Johns Hopkins University; ProQuest Dissertations &amp; Theses,  2006. 3197194).
* Odom, Rebecca Preiss.  &quot;Negotiating hyphenated identities: Transnational identity formation of the German-American residents of St. Charles, Missouri, during World War I&quot; (Saint Louis University; ProQuest Dissertations &amp; Theses,  2014. 3624100).
* Olson, Audrey Louise. &quot;St. Louis Germans, 1850–1920: The Nature of an Immigrant Community and Its Relation to the Assimiliation Process&quot; (PhD dissertation, University of Kansas; ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 1970. 7025388).
* Rex, Brigitte A.  &quot;A Comparative Examination of German-American Women Immigrants In The Rural and Urban Areas of America In the Nineteenth Century&quot; (University of Michigan-Flint; ProQuest Dissertations &amp; Theses,  2001. EP77026).
* Sarvela, John William.   &quot;Soldaten des Westens: An Analysis of the Wartime Experiences of Three German-American Regiments from the St. Louis-Bellville Region&quot; (The University of Southern Mississippi; ProQuest Dissertations &amp; Theses,  2019. 13858168).
* Starnes, Rebekah Ann.  &quot;Transnational Transports: Identity, Community, and Place in German-American Narratives from 1750s–1850s&quot; (The Ohio State University; ProQuest Dissertations &amp; Theses,  2012. 3520768).
* Wuepper, Sebastian P.   &quot;Reams, Radicals and Revolutionaries: The &#x27;Illinois Staats-Zeitung&#x27; and the German-American Milieu in Chicago, 1847–1877&quot; (Loyola University Chicago; ProQuest Dissertations &amp; Theses,  2021. 28419171).
* Yox, Andrew Paul. &quot;Decline of the German-American Community of Buffalo, 1855-1925&quot; (University of Chicago; ProQuest Dissertations &amp; Theses,  1983. T-28753).
* Zetsche, Anne.   &quot;The Quest for Atlanticism: German-American Elite Networking, the Atlantik-Brücke and the American Council on Germany, 1952-1974&quot; (University of Northumbria at Newcastle (United Kingdom); ProQuest Dissertations &amp; Theses,  2016. 10755301).

===Historiography===
* 
* Kluge, Cora Lee. &quot;Other Witnesses: An Anthology of Literature of the German Americans, 1850–1914&quot;. Madison, Wis.: Max Kade Institute for German-American Studies, 2007.
* Miller, Zane L. &quot;Cincinnati Germans and the Invention of an Ethnic Group&quot;, &quot;Queen City Heritage: The Journal of the Cincinnati Historical Society&quot; 42 (Fall 1984): 13–22.
* Ortlepp, Anke. &quot;Deutsch-Athen Revisited: Writing the History of Germans in Milwaukee&quot; in Margo Anderson and Victor Greene (eds.), &quot;Perspectives on Milwaukee&#x27;s Past&quot;. (University of Illinois Press, 2009).
* Pochmann, Henry A. and Arthur R. Schult. &quot; Bibliography of German Culture in America to 1940&quot; (2nd ed 1982); massive listing, but no annotations.
* Tolzmann, Don Heinrich, ed. &quot;German-American Studies: Selected Essays&quot; (Peter Lang, 2001).
===Primary sources===

* Kamphoefner, Walter D., and Wolfgang Helbich, eds. &quot;Germans in the Civil War; The Letters They Wrote Home&quot;. (U of North Carolina Press, 2006).
* Kamphoefner, Walter D., Wolfgang Johannes Helbich and Ulrike Sommer, eds. &quot;News from the Land of Freedom: German Immigrants Write Home&quot;. (Cornell University Press, 1991).
* (English translations of selected German-language newspaper articles, 1855–1938).
===In German===

* Emmerich, Alexander. &quot;Geschichte der Deutschen in Amerika von 1680 bis in die Gegenwart&quot;. (2013).
* Rehs, Michael. &quot;Wurzeln in fremder Erde: Zur Geschichte der südwestdeutschen Auswanderung nach Amerika&quot; DRW-Verlag, 1984. 


==External links==

* Discover America´s German Roots, German-American Heritage Foundation of the USA

===German-American history and culture===
* Chronology: Germans in America
* German Immigrant Culture in America: Syllabus (1998) 
* Emigrant Letters to Germany (in German)
* German-American Business Biographies from the German Historical Institute
* German-American Hall of Fame
* How German Is American?
* The German-Hollywood Connection
* Chicago Foreign Language Press Survey: English translations of 120,000 pages of newspaper articles from Chicago&#x27;s foreign language press from 1855 to 1938, many from German papers.
* German Heritage in Letters by the German Historical Institute Washington.

===German-American organizations===
* German-American Heritage Museum of the USA
* Steuben Society of America
* German American Heritage Center
* Germans from Russia Heritage Society
* Max Kade Institute for German-American Studies at the University of Wisconsin–Madison
* Max Kade German-American Center at Indiana University – Purdue University Indianapolis
* The Germantown Historical Society (Philadelphia)
* The German Society of Pennsylvania (oldest German Society in the U.S.)
* The Pennsylvania German Society
* Pennsylvania German Cultural Heritage Center at Kutztown University
* Indiana German Heritage Society

===Local German-American history and culture===
* Germans in Chicago
* German Traces NYC from the Goethe-Institut
* Interactive German-History Map of Pittsburgh
* Zinzinnati History (Cincinnati, Ohio) 
* Milwaukee German-American Radio Program
* Teutonia Männerchor in Pittsburgh
* Some German Contributions to Wisconsin Life </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="0" end="16" title="German Americans" label="German Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="26" end="35" title="Americans" label="Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="96" end="123" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="299" end="305" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="698" end="713" title="German ancestry" label="German ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="794" end="810" title="British America" label="British colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475732" start="878" end="890" title="Province of Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="892" end="900" title="Province of New York" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="906" end="914" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192494" start="920" end="939" title="John Law&amp;#x27;s Company" label="Mississippi Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838846" start="1022" end="1053" title="German Coast, Orleans Territory" label="German Coast, Orleans Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309633" start="1102" end="1125" title="Immigration to the United States" label="Immigration to the U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q279890" start="1352" end="1362" title="Germantown, Philadelphia" label="Germantown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1386" end="1398" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551872" start="1458" end="1487" title="1688 Germantown Quaker Petition Against Slavery" label="American antislavery movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q523857" start="1558" end="1578" title="Battle of Germantown" label="Battle of Germantown"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1583" end="1609" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824430" start="1636" end="1648" title="British Army during the American Revolutionary War" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q333422" start="1657" end="1669" title="William Howe, 5th Viscount Howe" label="William Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="1679" end="1695" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="1704" end="1721" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="1788" end="1803" title="British America" label="British America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899269" start="1917" end="1937" title="political repression" label="political oppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q831058" start="1973" end="1990" title="political freedom" label="political freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148482" start="2213" end="2230" title="intensive farming" label="intensive farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q126807" start="2371" end="2383" title="kindergarten" label="kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q47128" start="2422" end="2436" title="Christmas tree" label="Christmas tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q181055" start="2485" end="2492" title="hot dog" label="hot dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663" start="2498" end="2507" title="hamburger" label="hamburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745593" start="2589" end="2601" title="Americanization (immigration)" label="Americanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707612" start="2773" end="2803" title="German-American Steuben Parade" label="German-American Steuben Parade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2898" end="2922" title="Oktoberfest celebrations#United States" label="Oktoberfest celebrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q264784" start="2931" end="2950" title="German-American Day" label="German-American Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="3056" end="3066" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="3068" end="3077" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="3079" end="3089" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="3091" end="3102" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="3108" end="3117" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="3331" end="3337" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="3453" end="3460" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q193664" start="3975" end="3982" title="pietism" label="pietism"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="4016" end="4031" title="Moravian Church" label="United Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q62773" start="4334" end="4351" title="Ambrosius Ehinger" label="Ambrosius Ehinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q171632" start="4372" end="4381" title="Maracaibo" label="Maracaibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q785222" start="4424" end="4435" title="glassmakers" label="glassmakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q279890" start="4551" end="4575" title="Germantown, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Germantown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="4590" end="4602" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4783" end="4795" title="Human migration#Push and Pull" label="Push factors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4944" end="4956" title="Human migration#Push and Pull" label="pull factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="5147" end="5165" title="indentured servant" label="indentured servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="5201" end="5217" title="Upstate New York" label="Upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q65072336" start="5227" end="5244" title="Shenandoah Germans" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="5286" end="5294" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="5298" end="5313" title="Calvinism" label="German Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="5366" end="5375" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravians"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="5380" end="5389" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q570555" start="5392" end="5408" title="Roman Catholicism in Germany" label="German Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="5450" end="5461" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q326359" start="5528" end="5536" title="Palatinate (region)" label="Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="5635" end="5645" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q160649" start="5817" end="5823" title="typhus" label="typhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="6072" end="6084" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346950" start="6190" end="6207" title="Robert Livingston the Elder" label="Robert Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504658" start="6285" end="6298" title="Mohawk Valley" label="Mohawk Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428674" start="6307" end="6319" title="Little Falls (town), New York" label="Little Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345896" start="6459" end="6471" title="Mohawk River" label="Mohawk River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739251" start="6593" end="6601" title="Herkimer (town), New York" label="Herkimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215838" start="7091" end="7108" title="John Peter Zenger" label="John Peter Zenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q57423" start="7210" end="7226" title="John Jacob Astor" label="John Jacob Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q22872" start="7242" end="7250" title="Walldorf" label="Walldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="7252" end="7272" title="Electoral Palatinate" label="Electoral Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877935" start="7285" end="7290" title="Baden" label="Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q312694" start="7443" end="7451" title="John Law (economist)" label="John Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="7589" end="7602" title="Alsace" label="Alsace Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192494" start="8153" end="8172" title="Mississippi Company" label="Mississippi Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="8294" end="8302" title="Alsace" label="Alsatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q124216" start="8361" end="8366" title="Swiss people" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="8381" end="8387" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="8441" end="8463" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="8482" end="8488" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379099" start="8489" end="8499" title="Pierre François Xavier de Charlevoix" label="Charlevoix"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="8509" end="8519" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="8731" end="8742" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="8852" end="8869" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426376" start="8930" end="8942" title="German Coast" label="German Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="9009" end="9020" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426376" start="9046" end="9058" title="German Coast" label="German Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="9277" end="9285" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551971" start="9293" end="9301" title="Germanna" label="Germanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q990985" start="9327" end="9345" title="Culpeper, Virginia" label="Culpeper, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27108" start="9376" end="9395" title="Alexander Spotswood" label="Alexander Spotswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689927" start="9421" end="9437" title="headright system" label="headright system"/>
<link wikidata="Q506202" start="9470" end="9482" title="Spotsylvania County, Virginia" label="Spotsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q820037" start="9547" end="9552" title="miner" label="miner"/>
<link wikidata="Q27108" start="9673" end="9692" title="Alexander Spotswood" label="Alexander Spotswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="9797" end="9801" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476817" start="9928" end="9938" title="Germantown, Virginia" label="Germantown"/>
<link wikidata="Q326359" start="10002" end="10012" title="Palatinate (region)" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191545" start="10104" end="10121" title="Piedmont region of Virginia" label="Virginia Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="10126" end="10143" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q166755" start="10155" end="10175" title="Blue Ridge Mountains" label="Blue Ridge Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q23014" start="10183" end="10198" title="Palatine German language" label="Palatine German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571371" start="10227" end="10245" title="Southwest Virginia" label="Southwest Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q327274" start="10274" end="10288" title="Swabian German" label="Swabian German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334526" start="10301" end="10315" title="Province of North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="10341" end="10350" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravians"/>
<link wikidata="Q164380" start="10365" end="10388" title="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania" label="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q328144" start="10421" end="10448" title="August Gottlieb Spangenberg" label="August Gottlieb Spangenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600130" start="10466" end="10482" title="Great Wagon Road" label="Great Wagon Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q335274" start="10502" end="10516" title="John Carteret, 2nd Earl Granville" label="Lord Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q426977" start="10562" end="10570" title="Piedmont (United States)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032364" start="10631" end="10639" title="Wachovia Tract" label="Wachovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192201" start="10707" end="10713" title="Wachau" label="Wachau"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="10724" end="10731" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q49227" start="10826" end="10839" title="Winston-Salem, North Carolina" label="Winston-Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897671" start="10890" end="10915" title="Bethabara, North Carolina" label="Bethabara, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q844445" start="11067" end="11072" title="Old Salem" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404072" start="11143" end="11156" title="Salem College" label="Salem College"/>
<link wikidata="Q785035" start="11200" end="11214" title="Province of Georgia" label="Georgia Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812551" start="11240" end="11246" title="Swabia" label="Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438527" start="11303" end="11317" title="Fort Frederica" label="Fort Frederica"/>
<link wikidata="Q527835" start="11374" end="11390" title="James Oglethorpe" label="James Oglethorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672986" start="11463" end="11477" title="tabby (cement)" label="tabby (cement)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="11519" end="11527" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="11629" end="11643" title="Southern United States" label="American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317290" start="11666" end="11686" title="Dutch Fork" label="Dutch (Deutsch) Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513167" start="11695" end="11709" title="Province of South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="11740" end="11746" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="11751" end="11762" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450973" start="11877" end="11893" title="Waldoboro, Maine" label="Waldoboro, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="11926" end="11932" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305772" start="12335" end="12347" title="redemptioner" label="redemptioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="12625" end="12631" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="12710" end="12729" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q935481" start="12778" end="12787" title="Loyalist (American Revolution)" label="loyalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="13054" end="13063" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="13065" end="13073" title="Calvinism" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="13075" end="13084" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="13087" end="13092" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q702220" start="13217" end="13235" title="Pennsylvania Dutch" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q291495" start="13521" end="13531" title="theodiscus" label="theodiscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13438552" start="13788" end="13793" title="Diets" label="Diets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13881" end="13886" title="Theodiscus#Etymology" label="tyska"/>
<link wikidata="Q938876" start="14006" end="14016" title="Studebaker" label="Studebaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942" start="14137" end="14145" title="Solingen" label="Solingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="14250" end="14260" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="14283" end="14301" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049087" start="14446" end="14456" title="war effort" label="war effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="14552" end="14567" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="14581" end="14588" title="Prince-elector" label="Elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q706018" start="14592" end="14599" title="Electorate of Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q700853" start="14625" end="14633" title="Hessian (soldier)" label="Hessians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="15001" end="15020" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="on the patriot side"/>
<link wikidata="Q216056" start="15057" end="15073" title="Henry Muhlenberg" label="Henry Muhlenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382323" start="15130" end="15146" title="Peter Muhlenberg" label="Peter Muhlenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q935481" start="15302" end="15310" title="Loyalist (American Revolution)" label="Loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087828" start="15513" end="15535" title="Fries&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="Fries&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="15703" end="15713" title="World War I" label="World WarI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699" start="15869" end="15909" title="Revolutions of 1848 in the German states" label="Revolutions of 1848 in the German states"/>
<link wikidata="Q315189" start="15977" end="15991" title="Forty-Eighters" label="Forty-Eighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q127437" start="16086" end="16097" title="Carl Schurz" label="Carl Schurz"/>
<link wikidata="Q91417" start="16102" end="16115" title="Henry Villard" label="Henry Villard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806974" start="16146" end="16162" title="Latin Settlement" label="Latin Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258286" start="16228" end="16238" title="Dreissiger" label="Dreissiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q519690" start="16296" end="16319" title="Frankfurter Wachensturm" label="Frankfurter Wachensturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q210115" start="16441" end="16453" title="freethinkers" label="freethinkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="16461" end="16469" title="Latinist" label="Latinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q181287" start="16513" end="16530" title="German literature" label="German literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203683" start="16532" end="16542" title="German philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="16578" end="16592" title="Latin language" label="Latin language"/>
<link wikidata="Q214481" start="16658" end="16672" title="Gustav Koerner" label="Gustav Koerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q79892" start="16703" end="16723" title="Belleville, Illinois" label="Belleville, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="16771" end="16782" title="German Jews" label="German Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869638" start="16791" end="16807" title="History of the Jews in Colonial America" label="the colonial era"/>
<link wikidata="Q156343" start="16947" end="16959" title="Levi Strauss" label="Levi Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810364" start="17217" end="17229" title="Henry Lehman" label="Henry Lehman"/>
<link wikidata="Q212900" start="17243" end="17258" title="Lehman Brothers" label="Lehman Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="17355" end="17372" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform synagogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q248686" start="17452" end="17474" title="B&amp;#x27;nai B&amp;#x27;rith" label="B&amp;#x27;nai B&amp;#x27;rith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869454" start="17733" end="17742" title="History of the Germans in Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q138578" start="17773" end="17792" title="Hoboken, New Jersey" label="Hoboken, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="18034" end="18044" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="18055" end="18064" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="18066" end="18076" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="18078" end="18087" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="18089" end="18096" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058599" start="18149" end="18166" title="Northern Kentucky" label="Northern Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869457" start="18171" end="18181" title="History of the Germans in Louisville" label="Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="18197" end="18207" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio River"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="18282" end="18291" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="18293" end="18302" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="18308" end="18318" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q493794" start="18359" end="18366" title="Dubuque, Iowa" label="Dubuque"/>
<link wikidata="Q26887" start="18371" end="18386" title="Davenport, Iowa" label="Davenport, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="18423" end="18428" title="Omaha" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="18526" end="18533" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q49268" start="18543" end="18562" title="Fort Wayne, Indiana" label="Fort Wayne, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q327274" start="18659" end="18668" title="Schwabian" label="Schwabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q485172" start="18693" end="18712" title="Ann Arbor, Michigan" label="Ann Arbor, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113367" start="18807" end="18821" title="Over-the-Rhine" label="Over-the-Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317504" start="18858" end="18867" title="Dutchtown, St. Louis" label="Dutchtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420834" start="18903" end="18917" title="German Village" label="German Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="18986" end="18995" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="19040" end="19046" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q684127" start="19135" end="19145" title="Social Democratic Party (United States)" label="Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360013" start="19268" end="19273" title="Pabst Brewing Company" label="Pabst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286885" start="19275" end="19282" title="Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company" label="Schlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q658637" start="19284" end="19290" title="Miller Brewing Company" label="Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7910733" start="19296" end="19301" title="Valentin Blatz Brewing Company" label="Blatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="19397" end="19404" title="Midwest" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="19559" end="19569" title="Deep South" label="Deep South"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="19582" end="19593" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426376" start="19599" end="19611" title="German Coast" label="German Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="19689" end="19698" title="Galveston, Texas" label="Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q972308" start="19703" end="19712" title="Indianola, Texas" label="Indianola"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="19835" end="19844" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932703" start="21706" end="21725" title="Russian Germans in North America" label="Germans from Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="21844" end="21858" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="21885" end="21896" title="Volga River" label="Volga River"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="21905" end="21914" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="21993" end="22012" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="22830" end="22842" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="22932" end="22936" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="22990" end="22997" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092833" start="23600" end="23621" title="anti-German sentiment" label="anti-German sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="23959" end="23965" title="Standard German" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="24044" end="24052" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q676226" start="24229" end="24242" title="Lawrence Welk" label="Lawrence Welk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5740932" start="24523" end="24537" title="Hermann Raster" label="Hermann Raster"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="24852" end="24867" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="25290" end="25295" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="25303" end="25321" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q63190" start="25517" end="25528" title="Franz Sigel" label="Franz Sigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="25575" end="25585" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784926" start="28176" end="28194" title="Third party System" label="Third party System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870609" start="28253" end="28269" title="History of the Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="28302" end="28312" title="History of the Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46388" start="28319" end="28330" title="prohibition" label="prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q337794" start="28518" end="28527" title="Populist Party (United States)" label="Populists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500299" start="28567" end="28578" title="Free Silver" label="Free Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="28615" end="28637" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="28752" end="28768" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q376825" start="29873" end="29893" title="Benjamin Gratz Brown" label="Benjamin Gratz Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q436790" start="29919" end="29933" title="Horace Greeley" label="Horace Greeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q214148" start="30153" end="30169" title="Haymarket Affair" label="Haymarket Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q57946" start="30243" end="30259" title="Hugo Münsterberg" label="Hugo Münsterberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q466035" start="30445" end="30479" title="American Philosophical Association" label="American Philosophical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q939326" start="30570" end="30583" title="Arthur Preuss" label="Arthur Preuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q179036" start="30953" end="30983" title="Catholic University of America" label="Catholic University of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="31439" end="31457" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404066" start="31474" end="31493" title="hyphenated American" label="hyphenated American"/>
<link wikidata="Q439204" start="31609" end="31622" title="H. L. Mencken" label="H. L. Mencken"/>
<link wikidata="Q57946" start="31664" end="31680" title="Hugo Münsterberg" label="Hugo Münsterberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q98641286" start="31849" end="31869" title="Edmund Kayser" label="Pastor Edmund Kayser"/>
<link wikidata="Q470110" start="32171" end="32180" title="American Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q577845" start="32292" end="32314" title="Collinsville, Illinois" label="Collinsville, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349007" start="32328" end="32341" title="Robert Prager" label="Robert Prager"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163931" start="32421" end="32441" title="tarred and feathered" label="tarred and feathered"/>
<link wikidata="Q195216" start="32579" end="32606" title="Black Tom explosion" label="bombing of Black Tom island"/>
<link wikidata="Q481438" start="32918" end="32933" title="Frederick Stock" label="Frederick Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050470" start="32979" end="33005" title="Chicago Symphony Orchestra" label="Chicago Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="33097" end="33103" title="Richard Wagner" label="Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="33125" end="33132" title="Hector Berlioz" label="Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="33137" end="33147" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772200" start="33303" end="33318" title="Marne, Michigan" label="Marne, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837698" start="33392" end="33410" title="Babel Proclamation" label="Babel Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="33556" end="33574" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926346" start="33612" end="33629" title="Meyer v. Nebraska" label="Meyer v. Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q459318" start="33707" end="33718" title="Americanization" label="Americanize"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="33985" end="34000" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q47293" start="34012" end="34032" title="Erich Maria Remarque" label="Erich Maria Remarque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="34038" end="34052" title="History of the Jews in Germany" label="Jewish Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="34056" end="34065" title="anti-Nazi" label="anti-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q468158" start="34156" end="34176" title="German American Bund" label="German American Bund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="34377" end="34394" title="Japanese American" label="Japanese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541283" start="34401" end="34431" title="Smith Act" label="Alien Registration Act of 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118757" start="34626" end="34649" title="Alien and Sedition Acts" label="Alien Enemy Act of 1798"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024001" start="34680" end="34718" title="German American internment" label="interned nearly 11,000 German citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="34978" end="34998" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q217645" start="35008" end="35025" title="Chester W. Nimitz" label="Chester W. Nimitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="35031" end="35036" title="USAAF" label="USAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q579115" start="35045" end="35063" title="Carl Andrew Spaatz" label="Carl Andrew Spaatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q698714" start="35096" end="35111" title="Wendell Willkie" label="Wendell Willkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q699416" start="35157" end="35183" title="1940 United States presidential election" label="1940 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="35614" end="35651" title="Expulsion of Germans after World War II" label="ethnic Germans were forcibly expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q699958" start="35965" end="35980" title="Danube Swabians" label="Danube Swabians"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="35996" end="36010" title="ethnic Germans" label="ethnic Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q862577" start="36428" end="36444" title="1990 United States census" label="1990 U.S. Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304424" start="37183" end="37194" title="the Dakotas" label="the Dakotas"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="37291" end="37298" title="Midwest" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="37314" end="37318" title="Western United States" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="37342" end="37351" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="37360" end="37365" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q702220" start="37660" end="37678" title="Pennsylvania Dutch" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149615" start="37732" end="37738" title="African-American Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q86735" start="37877" end="37884" title="Afro-Germans" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975555" start="37893" end="37904" title="1870 United States census" label="1870 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q45321045" start="38105" end="38112" title="Tejanos" label="Tejanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="38888" end="38898" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058599" start="38900" end="38917" title="Northern Kentucky" label="Northern Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="38919" end="38928" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="38930" end="38938" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="38940" end="38952" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="38954" end="38963" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480013" start="38965" end="38989" title="Minneapolis – Saint Paul" label="Minneapolis – Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="38991" end="39001" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="39007" end="39016" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905361" start="39190" end="39204" title="Monterey Township, Putnam County, Ohio" label="Monterey, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596966" start="39213" end="39237" title="Granville Township, Mercer County, Ohio" label="Granville Township, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522115" start="39246" end="39261" title="St. Henry, Ohio" label="St. Henry, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5557729" start="39270" end="39299" title="Germantown Township, Clinton County, Illinois" label="Germantown Township, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6117512" start="39308" end="39324" title="Jackson Township, Dubois County, Indiana" label="Jackson, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972423" start="39333" end="39358" title="Washington Township, Mercer County, Ohio" label="Washington Township, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477149" start="39367" end="39385" title="Saint Rose Township, Clinton County, Illinois" label="St. Rose, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002660" start="39394" end="39406" title="Butler Township, Mercer County, Ohio" label="Butler, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765428" start="39415" end="39436" title="Marion Township, Mercer County, Ohio" label="Marion Township, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9040790" start="39445" end="39459" title="Jennings Township, Putnam County, Ohio" label="Jennings, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321885" start="39464" end="39494" title="Germantown, Illinois" label="Germantown, Illinois (village)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025998" start="39503" end="39518" title="Coldwater, Ohio" label="Coldwater, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903275" start="39527" end="39540" title="Jackson, Ohio" label="Jackson, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372437" start="39549" end="39560" title="Union, Ohio" label="Union, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816613" start="39569" end="39582" title="Minster, Ohio" label="Minster, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722234" start="39587" end="39599" title="Kalida, Ohio" label="Kalida, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604509" start="39608" end="39624" title="Greensburg Township, Putnam County, Ohio" label="Greensburg, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200798" start="39633" end="39650" title="Aviston, Illinois" label="Aviston, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672231" start="39659" end="39689" title="Teutopolis, Illinois" label="Teutopolis, Illinois (village)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707103" start="39698" end="39729" title="Teutopolis Township, Effingham County, Illinois" label="Teutopolis, Illinois (township)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898672" start="39734" end="39755" title="Cottonwood Township, Brown County, Minnesota" label="Cottonwood, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211441" start="39764" end="39780" title="Dallas Township, Michigan" label="Dallas, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559414" start="39789" end="39810" title="Gibson Township, Mercer County, Ohio" label="Gibson Township, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773902" start="39819" end="39868" title="Marshfield, Fond du Lac County, Wisconsin" label="Town of Marshfield, Fond du Lac County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000055" start="39877" end="39895" title="Santa Fe Township, Clinton County, Illinois" label="Santa Fe, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303004" start="39904" end="39927" title="Recovery Township, Mercer County, Ohio" label="Recovery Township, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q372649" start="39936" end="39966" title="Brothertown, Wisconsin" label="Town of Brothertown, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739444" start="39975" end="40014" title="Herman, Dodge County, Wisconsin" label="Town of Herman, Dodge County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37066" start="40190" end="40212" title="Bismarck, North Dakota" label="Bismarck, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q493794" start="40221" end="40234" title="Dubuque, Iowa" label="Dubuque, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q736834" start="40241" end="40261" title="St. Cloud, Minnesota" label="St. Cloud, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="40270" end="40289" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="40296" end="40314" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47430" start="40321" end="40341" title="Green Bay, Wisconsin" label="Green Bay, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183907" start="40348" end="40371" title="Levittown, Pennsylvania" label="Levittown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q234061" start="40378" end="40396" title="Erie, Pennsylvania" label="Erie, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="40403" end="40413" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="40428" end="40438" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="40461" end="40475" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q81856" start="40484" end="40501" title="Beaverton, Oregon" label="Beaverton, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816741" start="40638" end="40658" title="Lely Resort, Florida" label="Lely Resort, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088582" start="40666" end="40695" title="Pemberton Heights, New Jersey" label="Pemberton Heights, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q980561" start="40703" end="40717" title="Kempner, Texas" label="Kempner, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083847" start="40725" end="40753" title="Cedar Glen Lakes, New Jersey" label="Cedar Glen Lakes, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q467617" start="40761" end="40783" title="Alamogordo, New Mexico" label="Alamogordo, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669017" start="40791" end="40814" title="Sunshine Acres, Florida" label="Sunshine Acres, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q990051" start="40819" end="40840" title="Leisureville, Florida" label="Leisureville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666759" start="40848" end="40865" title="Wakefield, Kansas" label="Wakefield, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q204315" start="40873" end="40891" title="Quantico, Virginia" label="Quantico, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q936861" start="40899" end="40928" title="Crestwood Village, New Jersey" label="Crestwood Village, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708519" start="40936" end="40955" title="Shandaken, New York" label="Shandaken, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334447" start="40963" end="40983" title="Vine Grove, Kentucky" label="Vine Grove, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489974" start="40991" end="41018" title="Burnt Store Marina, Florida" label="Burnt Store Marina, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2781468" start="41023" end="41046" title="Boles Acres, New Mexico" label="Boles Acres, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q938284" start="41054" end="41073" title="Allenhurst, Georgia" label="Allenhurst, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534229" start="41075" end="41103" title="Security-Widefield, Colorado" label="Security-Widefield, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385975" start="41105" end="41128" title="Grandview Plaza, Kansas" label="Grandview Plaza, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207235" start="41134" end="41161" title="Fairbanks Ranch, California" label="Fairbanks Ranch, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283923" start="41169" end="41195" title="Standing Pine, Mississippi" label="Standing Pine, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859350" start="41203" end="41231" title="Millers Falls, Massachusetts" label="Millers Falls, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q985306" start="41233" end="41254" title="Marco Island, Florida" label="Marco Island, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q261285" start="41256" end="41285" title="Daytona Beach Shores, Florida" label="Daytona Beach Shores, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003654" start="41287" end="41305" title="Radcliff, Kentucky" label="Radcliff, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q851806" start="41307" end="41329" title="Beverly Hills, Florida" label="Beverly Hills, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q15256125" start="41331" end="41345" title="Davilla, Texas" label="Davilla, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084050" start="41347" end="41368" title="Annandale, New Jersey" label="Annandale, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086887" start="41374" end="41401" title="Holiday Heights, New Jersey" label="Holiday Heights, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388398" start="41409" end="41433" title="Fort Riley North, Kansas" label="Fort Riley North, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q974087" start="41435" end="41455" title="Copperas Cove, Texas" label="Copperas Cove, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083676" start="41461" end="41488" title="Cedar Glen West, New Jersey" label="Cedar Glen West, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393650" start="41496" end="41516" title="Pelican Bay, Florida" label="Pelican Bay, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q356789" start="41518" end="41538" title="Masaryktown, Florida" label="Masaryktown, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992688" start="41540" end="41563" title="Highland Beach, Florida" label="Highland Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901418" start="41565" end="41580" title="Milford, Kansas" label="Milford, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q378730" start="41586" end="41608" title="Langdon, New Hampshire" label="Langdon, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461071" start="41616" end="41637" title="Forest Home, New York" label="Forest Home, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570697" start="41662" end="41680" title="Vineyards, Florida" label="Vineyards, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152234" start="41682" end="41707" title="South Palm Beach, Florida" label="South Palm Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q578494" start="41713" end="41743" title="Basye-Bryce Mountain, Virginia" label="Basye-Bryce Mountain, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q828729" start="41751" end="41772" title="Sausalito, California" label="Sausalito, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708292" start="41774" end="41790" title="Bovina, New York" label="Bovina, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q949850" start="41792" end="41811" title="Fanwood, New Jersey" label="Fanwood, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003250" start="41813" end="41831" title="Fountain, Colorado" label="Fountain, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453021" start="41833" end="41852" title="Rye Brook, New York" label="Rye Brook, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570514" start="41857" end="41878" title="Desoto Lakes, Florida" label="Desoto Lakes, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496717" start="41886" end="41899" title="Ogden, Kansas" label="Ogden, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q982150" start="41901" end="41923" title="Blue Berry Hill, Texas" label="Blue Berry Hill, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q994999" start="41925" end="41955" title="Lauderdale-by-the-Sea, Florida" label="Lauderdale-by-the-Sea, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446125" start="41957" end="41977" title="Sherman, Connecticut" label="Sherman, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084076" start="41979" end="42003" title="Leisuretowne, New Jersey" label="Leisuretowne, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q128228" start="42005" end="42019" title="Killeen, Texas" label="Killeen, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088302" start="42021" end="42052" title="White House Station, New Jersey" label="White House Station, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781699" start="42054" end="42075" title="Junction City, Kansas" label="Junction City, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036889" start="42077" end="42097" title="Ocean Ridge, Florida" label="Ocean Ridge, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460291" start="42099" end="42114" title="Viola, New York" label="Viola, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q589670" start="42116" end="42137" title="Waynesville, Missouri" label="Waynesville, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448963" start="42142" end="42161" title="Mill Neck, New York" label="Mill Neck, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q68454" start="42169" end="42190" title="Level Plains, Alabama" label="Level Plains, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392180" start="42192" end="42209" title="Kingsbury, Nevada" label="Kingsbury, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153250" start="42211" end="42235" title="Tega Cay, South Carolina" label="Tega Cay, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004016" start="42237" end="42260" title="Margaretville, New York" label="Margaretville, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354791" start="42262" end="42285" title="White Sands, New Mexico" label="White Sands, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q941325" start="42287" end="42305" title="Stamford, New York" label="Stamford, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450779" start="42307" end="42330" title="Point Lookout, New York" label="Point Lookout, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500831" start="42336" end="42354" title="Terra Mar, Florida" label="Terra Mar, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460136" start="42362" end="42378" title="Rifton, New York" label="Rifton, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655410" start="42380" end="42401" title="Manasota Key, Florida" label="Manasota Key, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q674469" start="42403" end="42422" title="Del Mar, California" label="Del Mar, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q79413" start="42452" end="42470" title="Daleville, Alabama" label="Daleville, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141414" start="42472" end="42491" title="Tesuque, New Mexico" label="Tesuque, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084429" start="42493" end="42522" title="Plainsboro Center, New Jersey" label="Plainsboro Center, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084510" start="42524" end="42548" title="Silver Ridge, New Jersey" label="Silver Ridge, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q695411" start="42553" end="42572" title="Palm Beach, Florida" label="Palm Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025148" start="42580" end="42604" title="Oriental, North Carolina" label="Oriental, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086441" start="42606" end="42639" title="Holiday City-Berkeley, New Jersey" label="Holiday City-Berkeley, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460263" start="42641" end="42660" title="North Sea, New York" label="North Sea, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036813" start="42662" end="42682" title="Ponce Inlet, Florida" label="Ponce Inlet, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q502345" start="42684" end="42715" title="Montgomery County, Tennessee" label="Woodlawn-Dotsonville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462068" start="42717" end="42738" title="West Hurley, New York" label="West Hurley, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268250" start="42740" end="42762" title="Littlerock, California" label="Littlerock, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495480" start="42764" end="42782" title="Felton, California" label="Felton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q983826" start="42784" end="42808" title="Laguna Woods, California" label="Laguna Woods, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088106" start="42810" end="42837" title="Leisure Village, New Jersey" label="Leisure Village, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940658" start="42839" end="42857" title="Readsboro, Vermont" label="Readsboro, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q977955" start="42859" end="42876" title="Nolanville, Texas" label="Nolanville, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875408" start="42882" end="42916" title="Groveland-Big Oak Flat, California" label="Groveland-Big Oak Flat, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022745" start="42924" end="42940" title="Rotonda, Florida" label="Rotonda, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228200" start="42942" end="42961" title="Grayson, California" label="Grayson, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2771880" start="42963" end="42979" title="Shokan, New York" label="Shokan, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570555" start="42981" end="43001" title="The Meadows, Florida" label="The Meadows, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843858" start="43033" end="43054" title="Lincolndale, New York" label="Lincolndale, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922637" start="43056" end="43085" title="Fort Johnson South, Louisiana" label="Fort Johnson South, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900880" start="43091" end="43114" title="Townsend, Massachusetts" label="Townsend, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491858" start="43122" end="43141" title="Pine Ridge, Citrus County, Florida" label="Pine Ridge, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165520" start="43143" end="43163" title="Boca Pointe, Florida" label="Boca Pointe, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q662075" start="43165" end="43189" title="Rodney Village, Delaware" label="Rodney Village, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461940" start="43191" end="43211" title="Palenville, New York" label="Palenville, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302136" start="43217" end="43241" title="Topsfield, Massachusetts" label="Topsfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="43442" end="43451" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="44658" end="44673" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q164380" start="44689" end="44698" title="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022937" start="44700" end="44708" title="Nazareth, Pennsylvania" label="Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q142354" start="44713" end="44719" title="Lititz, Pennsylvania" label="Lititz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032364" start="44739" end="44747" title="Wachovia, North Carolina" label="Wachovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="44952" end="44957" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q838112" start="45521" end="45544" title="Wheeling, West Virginia" label="Wheeling, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="46121" end="46141" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542364" start="47319" end="47335" title="Turners" label="Turner societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711033" start="48686" end="48711" title="New Yorker Staats-Zeitung" label="New Yorker Staats-Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778442" start="48729" end="48749" title="Anzeiger des Westens" label="Anzeiger des Westens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5999730" start="48784" end="48807" title="Illinois Staats-Zeitung" label="Illinois Staats-Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q65078309" start="49718" end="49741" title="Cincinnati Freie Presse" label="Cincinnati Freie Presse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092833" start="50313" end="50334" title="anti-German sentiment" label="anti-German sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118913" start="50366" end="50375" title="Espionage Act of 1917" label="Espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445331" start="50380" end="50393" title="Sedition Act of 1918" label="Sedition Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="50455" end="50466" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q574474" start="50741" end="50757" title="Hiwwe wie Driwwe" label="Hiwwe wie Driwwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q702220" start="50797" end="50816" title="Pennsylvania German" label="Pennsylvania German"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542364" start="51122" end="51128" title="Turners" label="Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002000" start="51357" end="51372" title="Buffalo Germans" label="Buffalo Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="51654" end="51663" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q357444" start="51668" end="51678" title="Lou Gehrig" label="Lou Gehrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="51991" end="52029" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q693844" start="52035" end="52065" title="Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod" label="Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379931" start="52075" end="52111" title="Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod" label="Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="52187" end="52196" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642736" start="52217" end="52253" title="Reformed Church in the United States" label="Reformed Church in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379743" start="52305" end="52339" title="Evangelical Synod of North America" label="Evangelical Synod of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q426316" start="52393" end="52416" title="United Church of Christ" label="United Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="52525" end="52534" title="United Methodist Church" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q76336" start="52557" end="52585" title="Nicolaus Ludwig Zinzendorf" label="Count Nicolas von Zinzendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="52728" end="52743" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="52888" end="52893" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="52895" end="52904" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q833158" start="52907" end="52927" title="Schwarzenau Brethren" label="Schwarzenau Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52932" end="52941" title="Moravian Church#Missions" label="Moravians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368013" start="53029" end="53048" title="Old Order Mennonite" label="Old Order Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q702220" start="53133" end="53151" title="Pennsylvania Dutch" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304424" start="53815" end="53826" title="the Dakotas" label="the Dakotas"/>
<link wikidata="Q33385" start="53909" end="53925" title="Hutterite German" label="Hutterite German"/>
<link wikidata="Q571942" start="54021" end="54051" title="Russian Mennonites" label="&amp;quot;Russian&amp;quot; Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q769585" start="54376" end="54384" title="Catholic Church in the United States" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q570555" start="54730" end="54746" title="Catholic Germans" label="Catholic Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q159879" start="54854" end="54865" title="Kulturkampf" label="Kulturkampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="56085" end="56091" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q315257" start="56338" end="56365" title="German in the United States" label="German in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q84054" start="56402" end="56419" title="Muhlenberg legend" label="Muhlenberg legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="56529" end="56546" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889713" start="56823" end="56834" title="Bennett Law" label="Bennett Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="59411" end="59423" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="59425" end="59435" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="59437" end="59446" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q49268" start="60174" end="60193" title="Fort Wayne, Indiana" label="Fort Wayne, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050470" start="61420" end="61446" title="Chicago Symphony Orchestra" label="Chicago Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="62359" end="62365" title="Martin Luther" label="Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="63859" end="63870" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="67366" end="67372" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903625" start="67915" end="67926" title="Martin Dies Jr." label="Martin Dies"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="68849" end="68883" title="Donald Trump" label="U.S. President Donald Trump&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847758" start="68943" end="68962" title="The Art of the Deal" label="The Art of the Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752663" start="69014" end="69024" title="Fred Trump" label="Fred Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="70600" end="70605" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="72355" end="72368" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="78990" end="78999" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q104574" start="79935" end="79943" title="Max Kade" label="Max Kade"/>
<link wikidata="Q980802" start="80955" end="80976" title="Hustisford, Wisconsin" label="Hustisford, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="81461" end="81471" title="Anabaptist" label="Anabaptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="81485" end="81500" title="Amish" label="Old Order Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368013" start="81510" end="81529" title="Old Order Mennonite" label="Old Order Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q22711" start="81537" end="81555" title="Pennsylvania Dutch language" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8077088" start="81560" end="81574" title="Bernese German" label="Bernese German"/>
<link wikidata="Q8786" start="81578" end="81586" title="Alsatian language" label="Alsatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q52040" start="81622" end="81633" title="High German" label="High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q258344" start="81704" end="81713" title="Hutterite" label="Hutterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q33385" start="81721" end="81737" title="Hutterite German" label="Hutterite German"/>
<link wikidata="Q571942" start="81747" end="81777" title="Russian Mennonite" label="&amp;quot;Russian&amp;quot; Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751432" start="81784" end="81796" title="Plautdietsch" label="Plautdietsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="81800" end="81810" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="81858" end="81864" title="Danzig" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q453554" start="82087" end="82101" title="Amana Colonies" label="Amana Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816637" start="82176" end="82186" title="East Amana, Iowa" label="East Amana"/>
<link wikidata="Q47629" start="82685" end="82699" title="German cuisine" label="German cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40578" start="82715" end="82743" title="cuisine of the United States" label="cuisine of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q181055" start="82840" end="82852" title="Hot dog" label="Frankfurters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="82895" end="82912" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt am Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="82917" end="82923" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663" start="82940" end="82949" title="hamburger" label="hamburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q899882" start="82952" end="82961" title="bratwurst" label="bratwurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q154166" start="82963" end="82973" title="sauerkraut" label="sauerkraut"/>
<link wikidata="Q59170" start="82979" end="82986" title="strudel" label="strudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q160525" start="83035" end="83042" title="pretzel" label="pretzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q253481" start="83117" end="83122" title="lager" label="lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q844073" start="83299" end="83324" title="Yuengling" label="D. G. Yuengling &amp;amp; Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027800" start="83328" end="83352" title="Pottsville, Pennsylvania" label="Pottsville, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q529710" start="83442" end="83450" title="Aldingen" label="Aldingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="83468" end="83485" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="83598" end="83607" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q125074" start="84013" end="84027" title="Anheuser-Busch" label="Anheuser-Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="84031" end="84040" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="84134" end="84145" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487333" start="84166" end="84175" title="microbrewery" label="microbrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q102400" start="84300" end="84311" title="Oktoberfest" label="Oktoberfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044124" start="84313" end="84329" title="Carnival in Germany, Switzerland and Austria" label="Rhenish Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q264784" start="84331" end="84350" title="German-American Day" label="German-American Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707612" start="84356" end="84371" title="Von Steuben Day" label="Von Steuben Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707612" start="84441" end="84471" title="German-American Steuben Parade" label="German-American Steuben Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q598857" start="84583" end="84597" title="Lincoln Square, Chicago" label="Lincoln Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="84676" end="84686" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084250" start="84711" end="84733" title="Oktoberfest Zinzinnati" label="Oktoberfest Zinzinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q102400" start="84755" end="84766" title="Oktoberfest" label="Oktoberfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551101" start="84856" end="84867" title="German Fest" label="German Fest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752800" start="84985" end="84999" title="Allegheny, Pennsylvania" label="Allegheny City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056740" start="85023" end="85033" title="North Side (Pittsburgh)" label="North Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="85049" end="85059" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327683" start="85126" end="85137" title="East Allegheny (Pittsburgh)" label="Deutschtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707095" start="85209" end="85232" title="Teutonia Maennerchor Hall" label="The Teutonia Männerchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q504577" start="85296" end="85300" title="Skat (card game)" label="Skat"/>
<link wikidata="Q142714" start="85319" end="85328" title="card game" label="card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203923" start="85616" end="85650" title="German International School Boston" label="German International School Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203940" start="85653" end="85675" title="German School New York" label="German School New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006783" start="85678" end="85712" title="German American School of Portland" label="German American School of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551131" start="85715" end="85760" title="German International School of Silicon Valley" label="German International School of Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203958" start="85763" end="85793" title="German School Washington, D.C." label="German School Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q213525" start="86048" end="86065" title="Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben" label="Baron von Steuben"/>
<link wikidata="Q188205" start="86067" end="86090" title="George Armstrong Custer" label="George Armstrong Custer"/>
<link wikidata="Q272383" start="86092" end="86105" title="John Pershing" label="John Pershing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="86107" end="86127" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q217645" start="86129" end="86146" title="Chester W. Nimitz" label="Chester W. Nimitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q579115" start="86148" end="86166" title="Carl Andrew Spaatz" label="Carl Andrew Spaatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q310188" start="86171" end="86189" title="Norman Schwarzkopf" label="Norman Schwarzkopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="86204" end="86222" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="86230" end="86256" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="86258" end="86276" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q849680" start="86278" end="86289" title="Indian Wars" label="Indian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="86291" end="86301" title="World War I" label="World WarI"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="86303" end="86314" title="World War II" label="World WarII"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="86324" end="86340" title="Persian Gulf War" label="Persian Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q127437" start="86418" end="86429" title="Carl Schurz" label="Carl Schurz"/>
<link wikidata="Q216025" start="86431" end="86447" title="Friedrich Hecker" label="Friedrich Hecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q724629" start="86449" end="86469" title="Frederick Muhlenberg" label="Frederick Muhlenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q47946" start="86471" end="86492" title="Henry Morgenthau, Sr." label="Henry Morgenthau, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q450751" start="86494" end="86514" title="Henry Morgenthau Jr." label="Henry Morgenthau Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11702" start="86516" end="86528" title="John Boehner" label="John Boehner"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="86534" end="86546" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="86548" end="86563" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q982831" start="86683" end="86697" title="Henry J. Heinz" label="Henry J. Heinz"/>
<link wikidata="Q850324" start="86699" end="86718" title="H. J. Heinz Company" label="H. J. Heinz Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985287" start="86721" end="86740" title="Harvey S. Firestone" label="Harvey S. Firestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q420837" start="86742" end="86775" title="Firestone Tire and Rubber Company" label="Firestone Tire and Rubber Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q420352" start="86778" end="86794" title="Frank Seiberling" label="Frank Seiberling"/>
<link wikidata="Q620875" start="86796" end="86828" title="Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company" label="Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="86831" end="86842" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="86844" end="86850" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="86853" end="86872" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="John D. Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="86874" end="86886" title="Standard Oil" label="Standard Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q214826" start="86889" end="86903" title="William Boeing" label="William Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="86905" end="86923" title="The Boeing Company" label="The Boeing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="86928" end="86943" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q318044" start="86946" end="86961" title="Walter Chrysler" label="Walter Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="86963" end="86983" title="Chrysler Corporation" label="Chrysler Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495025" start="86986" end="86995" title="Fred Duesenberg" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820687" start="87000" end="87017" title="August Duesenberg" label="August Duesenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q27582" start="87019" end="87052" title="Duesenberg" label="Duesenberg Automobile Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q938876" start="87055" end="87074" title="Studebaker" label="Studebaker brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q938876" start="87076" end="87109" title="Studebaker" label="Studebaker Automobile Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q262367" start="87112" end="87131" title="George Westinghouse" label="George Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="87133" end="87166" title="Westinghouse Electric Corporation" label="Westinghouse Electric Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36215" start="87169" end="87184" title="Mark Zuckerberg" label="Mark Zuckerburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q380" start="87186" end="87200" title="Meta Platforms" label="Meta Platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q156343" start="87203" end="87215" title="Levi Strauss" label="Levi Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q127962" start="87217" end="87239" title="Levi Strauss &amp;amp; Co." label="Levi Strauss &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q5078496" start="87242" end="87254" title="Charles Guth" label="Charles Guth"/>
<link wikidata="Q334800" start="87256" end="87268" title="PepsiCo Inc." label="PepsiCo Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="87271" end="87281" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="87283" end="87304" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76694" start="87307" end="87318" title="Jawed Karim" label="Jawed Karim"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="87320" end="87327" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q317521" start="87330" end="87339" title="Elon Musk" label="Elon Musk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555824" start="87341" end="87350" title="SolarCity" label="SolarCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193701" start="87352" end="87358" title="SpaceX" label="SpaceX"/>
<link wikidata="Q478214" start="87363" end="87375" title="Tesla Motors" label="Tesla Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680704" start="87378" end="87392" title="James L. Kraft" label="James L. Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q22121875" start="87394" end="87410" title="Kraft Foods Inc." label="Kraft Foods Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q215850" start="87413" end="87430" title="Henry E. Steinway" label="Henry E. Steinway"/>
<link wikidata="Q156391" start="87432" end="87451" title="Steinway &amp;amp; Sons" label="Steinway &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q71055" start="87454" end="87468" title="Charles Pfizer" label="Charles Pfizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q206921" start="87470" end="87482" title="Pfizer, Inc." label="Pfizer, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q57423" start="87485" end="87501" title="John Jacob Astor" label="John Jacob Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239392" start="87503" end="87537" title="Waldorf Astoria Hotels and Resorts" label="Waldorf Astoria Hotels and Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q324956" start="87540" end="87553" title="Conrad Hilton" label="Conrad Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q598884" start="87555" end="87582" title="Hilton Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts" label="Hilton Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032400" start="87585" end="87602" title="Guggenheim family" label="Guggenheim family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143822" start="87604" end="87636" title="Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation" label="Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615206" start="87640" end="87659" title="Guggenheim Partners" label="Guggenheim Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q214085" start="87662" end="87676" title="Marcus Goldman" label="Marcus Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q375988" start="87681" end="87693" title="Samuel Sachs" label="Samuel Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q193326" start="87695" end="87724" title="The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc." label="The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q212900" start="87727" end="87742" title="Lehman Brothers" label="Lehman Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q212900" start="87744" end="87773" title="Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc." label="Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q23855450" start="87776" end="87791" title="Charles Diebold" label="Charles Diebold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220078" start="87793" end="87808" title="Diebold Nixdorf" label="Diebold Nixdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893337" start="87811" end="87825" title="Bernard Kroger" label="Bernard Kroger"/>
<link wikidata="Q153417" start="87827" end="87833" title="Kroger" label="Kroger"/>
<link wikidata="Q61074" start="87836" end="87848" title="Carl Laemmle" label="Carl Laemmle"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="87850" end="87867" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373662" start="87870" end="87881" title="Marcus Loew" label="Marcus Loew"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="87883" end="87915" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios Inc." label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1586470" start="87918" end="87928" title="Harry Cohn" label="Harry Cohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="87930" end="87964" title="Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc." label="Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q192145" start="87967" end="87983" title="Herman Hollerith" label="Herman Hollerith"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="87985" end="88034" title="International Business Machines Corporation" label="International Business Machines Corporation (IBM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="88037" end="88047" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="88049" end="88059" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q218630" start="88062" end="88074" title="Michael Dell" label="Michael Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q30873" start="88076" end="88085" title="Dell Inc." label="Dell Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q92747" start="88088" end="88100" title="Eric Schmidt" label="Eric Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="88102" end="88113" title="Google Inc." label="Google Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q20800404" start="88118" end="88131" title="Alphabet Inc." label="Alphabet Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q705525" start="88134" end="88145" title="Peter Thiel" label="Peter Thiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q483959" start="88147" end="88158" title="PayPal" label="PayPal Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q365489" start="88161" end="88178" title="Adolph Simon Ochs" label="Adolph Simon Ochs"/>
<link wikidata="Q323342" start="88183" end="88205" title="Arthur Ochs Sulzberger" label="Arthur Ochs Sulzberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="88213" end="88231" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958536" start="88240" end="88260" title="Charles Bergstresser" label="Charles Bergstresser"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="88268" end="88291" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q320805" start="88300" end="88311" title="Al Neuharth" label="Al Neuharth"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="88319" end="88328" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q74283" start="88337" end="88349" title="Eugene Meyer (financier)" label="Eugene Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="88357" end="88376" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q869095" start="88435" end="88447" title="beer brewing" label="beer brewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q763762" start="88552" end="88565" title="August Schell" label="August Schell"/>
<link wikidata="Q763762" start="88567" end="88596" title="August Schell Brewing Company" label="August Schell Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109935" start="88599" end="88617" title="Christian Moerlein" label="Christian Moerlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109935" start="88619" end="88649" title="Christian Moerlein Brewing Co." label="Christian Moerlein Brewing Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q214076" start="88652" end="88669" title="Eberhard Anheuser" label="Eberhard Anheuser"/>
<link wikidata="Q214501" start="88674" end="88688" title="Adolphus Busch" label="Adolphus Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q125074" start="88690" end="88704" title="Anheuser-Busch" label="Anheuser-Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q128738" start="88724" end="88732" title="AB InBev" label="AB InBev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684324" start="88735" end="88747" title="Adolph Coors" label="Adolph Coors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319685" start="88749" end="88777" title="Molson Coors Brewing Company" label="Molson Coors Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q110419" start="88780" end="88796" title="Frederick Miller" label="Frederick Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q658637" start="88798" end="88820" title="Miller Brewing Company" label="Miller Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498505" start="88823" end="88838" title="Frederick Pabst" label="Frederick Pabst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360013" start="88840" end="88861" title="Pabst Brewing Company" label="Pabst Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624252" start="88864" end="88878" title="Stroh&amp;#x27;s" label="Bernhard Stroh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624252" start="88880" end="88901" title="Stroh Brewery Company" label="Stroh Brewery Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q214879" start="88907" end="88921" title="Joseph Schlitz" label="Joseph Schlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286885" start="88923" end="88953" title="Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company" label="Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q125006" start="88956" end="88971" title="Brooklyn Bridge" label="Brooklyn Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q77237" start="88981" end="88997" title="John A. Roebling" label="John A. Roebling"/>
<link wikidata="Q61071" start="89013" end="89027" title="Walter Gropius" label="Walter Gropius"/>
<link wikidata="Q41508" start="89032" end="89056" title="Ludwig Mies van der Rohe" label="Ludwig Mies van der Rohe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272304" start="89089" end="89109" title="Thomas Ustick Walter" label="Thomas Ustick Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889597" start="89130" end="89156" title="United States Capitol dome" label="United States Capitol dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q233762" start="89159" end="89178" title="American literature" label="American literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q526709" start="89241" end="89261" title="William Dean Howells" label="William Dean Howells"/>
<link wikidata="Q486096" start="89263" end="89279" title="Theodore Dreiser" label="Theodore Dreiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q166835" start="89281" end="89296" title="Wallace Stevens" label="Wallace Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q187765" start="89298" end="89310" title="Henry Miller" label="Henry Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q80900" start="89312" end="89325" title="Pearl S. Buck" label="Pearl S. Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q314256" start="89327" end="89339" title="Thomas Wolfe" label="Thomas Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q39212" start="89341" end="89355" title="John Steinbeck" label="John Steinbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q76409" start="89357" end="89373" title="Charles Bukowski" label="Charles Bukowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q270635" start="89375" end="89393" title="Patricia Highsmith" label="Patricia Highsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q49074" start="89395" end="89408" title="Kurt Vonnegut" label="Kurt Vonnegut"/>
<link wikidata="Q133054" start="89414" end="89426" title="Sylvia Plath" label="Sylvia Plath"/>
<link wikidata="Q207544" start="89428" end="89441" title="L. Frank Baum" label="L. Frank Baum"/>
<link wikidata="Q298685" start="89446" end="89455" title="Dr. Seuss" label="Dr. Seuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q439204" start="89500" end="89513" title="H. L. Mencken" label="H. L. Mencken"/>
<link wikidata="Q316568" start="89515" end="89530" title="Walter Lippmann" label="Walter Lippmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q265131" start="89536" end="89546" title="Lee Miller" label="Lee Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q902703" start="89572" end="89589" title="David Rittenhouse" label="David Rittenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475732" start="89645" end="89666" title="Province of Pennsylvania" label="colonial Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q276825" start="89679" end="89700" title="Benjamin Smith Barton" label="Benjamin Smith Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953586" start="89794" end="89803" title="Adam Kuhn" label="Adam Kuhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928420" start="89805" end="89817" title="Michael Leib" label="Michael Leib"/>
<link wikidata="Q347595" start="89823" end="89836" title="Caspar Wistar (physician)" label="Caspar Wistar"/>
<link wikidata="Q312011" start="89906" end="89918" title="Isaac Singer" label="Isaac Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330508" start="89920" end="89935" title="Singer Corporation" label="sewing machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q213701" start="89938" end="89957" title="Ottmar Mergenthaler" label="Ottmar Mergenthaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q694899" start="89959" end="89967" title="Linotype machine" label="Linotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q192145" start="89970" end="89986" title="Herman Hollerith" label="Herman Hollerith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413513" start="89988" end="90006" title="tabulating machine" label="tabulating machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q124361" start="90013" end="90026" title="John Froelich" label="John Froelich"/>
<link wikidata="Q39495" start="90028" end="90052" title="Tractor" label="gasoline-powered tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q299723" start="90055" end="90070" title="Howard H. Aiken" label="Howard H. Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q92839" start="90072" end="90086" title="George Stibitz" label="George Stibitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="90088" end="90102" title="Claude Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q75778" start="90104" end="90121" title="Joseph Weizenbaum" label="Joseph Weizenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q92614" start="90123" end="90140" title="Douglas Engelbart" label="Douglas Engelbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="90146" end="90158" title="Donald Knuth" label="Donald Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="90206" end="90215" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="90221" end="90236" title="Wright brothers" label="Wright brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q127234" start="90340" end="90359" title="Albert A. Michelson" label="Albert A. Michelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="90361" end="90376" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q243532" start="90378" end="90393" title="Joseph Erlanger" label="Joseph Erlanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q273201" start="90395" end="90417" title="Herbert Spencer Gasser" label="Herbert Spencer Gasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q57072" start="90419" end="90429" title="Otto Stern" label="Otto Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q83598" start="90431" end="90452" title="Hermann Joseph Muller" label="Hermann Joseph Muller"/>
<link wikidata="Q106399" start="90454" end="90470" title="John H. Northrop" label="John H. Northrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q127944" start="90472" end="90489" title="Arthur H. Compton" label="Arthur H. Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q179777" start="90491" end="90505" title="Harold C. Urey" label="Harold C. Urey"/>
<link wikidata="Q184014" start="90507" end="90522" title="Charles Richter" label="Charles Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q48983" start="90524" end="90537" title="Linus Pauling" label="Linus Pauling"/>
<link wikidata="Q132537" start="90539" end="90560" title="J. Robert Oppenheimer" label="J. Robert Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57100" start="90562" end="90582" title="Maria Goeppert-Mayer" label="Maria Goeppert-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q155794" start="90584" end="90594" title="Hans Bethe" label="Hans Bethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q176351" start="90596" end="90606" title="Paul Flory" label="Paul Flory"/>
<link wikidata="Q184571" start="90608" end="90622" title="Polykarp Kusch" label="Polykarp Kusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q107419" start="90628" end="90645" title="Norman Ramsey Jr." label="Norman Ramsey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q57384" start="90681" end="90698" title="Wernher von Braun" label="Wernher von Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q490398" start="90776" end="90786" title="Peenemünde" label="Peenemünde"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="90913" end="90917" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="90958" end="90972" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510651" start="91041" end="91059" title="Siegfried Knemeyer" label="Siegfried Knemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q698081" start="91109" end="91127" title="Reich Air Ministry" label="Reich Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="91259" end="91263" title="USAF" label="USAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="91287" end="91301" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q57618112" start="91372" end="91395" title="MrBeast" label="James Stephen Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="91424" end="91436" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q556883" start="91438" end="91450" title="George Eyser" label="George Eyser"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="91452" end="91461" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q357444" start="91463" end="91473" title="Lou Gehrig" label="Lou Gehrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175" start="91475" end="91486" title="Johnny Depp" label="Johnny Depp"/>
<link wikidata="Q9424" start="91488" end="91501" title="Jack Nicklaus" label="Jack Nicklaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q138005" start="91503" end="91517" title="Michael Keaton" label="Michael Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q355420" start="91519" end="91533" title="Dale Earnhardt" label="Dale Earnhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q104372" start="91535" end="91572" title="Doris Day" label="Doris Mary Ann Kappelhoff (Doris Day)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925" start="91574" end="91585" title="Grace Kelly" label="Grace Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q71243" start="91587" end="91598" title="Clark Gable" label="Clark Gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612" start="91600" end="91616" title="Marlene Dietrich" label="Marlene Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q232990" start="91618" end="91634" title="Deborah Ann Woll" label="Deborah Ann Woll"/>
<link wikidata="Q151284" start="91636" end="91654" title="Johnny Weissmuller" label="Johnny Weissmuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q51562" start="91656" end="91670" title="Ernst Lubitsch" label="Ernst Lubitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q725579" start="91672" end="91687" title="Walter Damrosch" label="Walter Damrosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q105460" start="91689" end="91727" title="John Denver" label="Henry John Deutschendorf (John Denver)"/>
<link wikidata="Q231726" start="91729" end="91745" title="Hailee Steinfeld" label="Hailee Steinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q63204" start="91747" end="91755" title="John Kay (musician)" label="John Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q60036" start="91757" end="91767" title="Heidi Klum" label="Heidi Klum"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="91769" end="91781" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="91783" end="91796" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q131380" start="91798" end="91810" title="Kim Basinger" label="Kim Basinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q11930" start="91812" end="91825" title="Kevin Costner" label="Kevin Costner"/>
<link wikidata="Q159778" start="91827" end="91844" title="Michelle Pfeiffer" label="Michelle Pfeiffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23547" start="91846" end="91860" title="Bryan Cranston" label="Bryan Cranston"/>
<link wikidata="Q40791" start="91862" end="91876" title="Sandra Bullock" label="Sandra Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q201927" start="91878" end="91894" title="David Hasselhoff" label="David Hasselhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="91896" end="91913" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q76478" start="91915" end="91928" title="Kirsten Dunst" label="Kirsten Dunst"/>
<link wikidata="Q785270" start="91930" end="91941" title="Evan Peters" label="Evan Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q213736" start="91943" end="91958" title="Bridgit Mendler" label="Bridgit Mendler"/>
<link wikidata="Q26997611" start="91960" end="91971" title="Zazie Beetz" label="Zazie Beetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q44561" start="91973" end="92008" title="Kevin James" label="Kevin George Knipfing (Kevin James)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396400" start="92013" end="92030" title="Sabrina Carpenter" label="Sabrina Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="92189" end="92209" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="92296" end="92310" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="92357" end="92369" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070387" start="92439" end="92454" title="Frederick Trump" label="Frederick Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q23600580" start="92459" end="92481" title="Elizabeth Christ Trump" label="Elizabeth Christ Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q22537" start="92498" end="92507" title="Kallstadt" label="Kallstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="92568" end="92580" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="92734" end="92755" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Milhous Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="92848" end="92860" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q61825" start="92957" end="92966" title="Besigheim" label="Besigheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q22431" start="92976" end="92987" title="Bischwiller" label="Bischwiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="93028" end="93034" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511776" start="93130" end="93150" title="Americans in Germany" label="Americans in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030929" start="93153" end="93169" title="German Canadians" label="German Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q561041" start="93172" end="93187" title="German diaspora" label="German diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371460" start="93190" end="93236" title="German-American Heritage Foundation of the USA" label="German-American Heritage Foundation of the USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q315257" start="93239" end="93275" title="German language in the United States" label="German language in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551415" start="93279" end="93298" title="German Puerto Rican" label="German Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q895688" start="93301" end="93332" title="Germany–United States relations" label="Germany–United States relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404066" start="93372" end="93391" title="Hyphenated American" label="Hyphenated American"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="93394" end="93446" title="Nativism (politics) in the United States#Anti-German" label="Nativism (politics) in the United States#Anti-German"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="93449" end="93507" title="Ellis County, Kansas#English and Russian-German immigrants" label="Ellis County, Kansas#English and Russian-German immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608177" start="95350" end="95369" title="Stephan Thernstrom" label="Thernstrom, Stephan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886419" start="95383" end="95397" title="Oscar Handlin" label="Handlin, Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744777" start="95975" end="95993" title="American Quarterly" label="American Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404190" start="96276" end="96301" title="Ethnic and Racial Studies" label="Ethnic and Racial Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q57423" start="96363" end="96379" title="John Jacob Astor" label="John Jacob Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q991937" start="96953" end="96980" title="German Historical Institute" label="German Historical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q104574" start="98418" end="98436" title="Max Kade Institute" label="Max Kade Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="98438" end="98469" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin–Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q15708638" start="99424" end="99451" title="Journal of Military History" label="Journal of Military History"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895937" start="101978" end="102003" title="U of North Carolina Press" label="U of North Carolina Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="102386" end="102411" title="The Catholic Encyclopedia" label="The Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="103490" end="103537" title="Kansas History: A Journal of the Central Plains" label="Kansas History: A Journal of the Central Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q59628216" start="104029" end="104052" title="Carl Frederick Wittke" label="Wittke, Carl Frederick."/>
<link wikidata="Q59628216" start="104113" end="104136" title="Carl Frederick Wittke" label="Wittke, Carl Frederick."/>
<link wikidata="Q59628216" start="104221" end="104244" title="Carl Frederick Wittke" label="Wittke, Carl Frederick."/>
<link wikidata="Q321717" start="104452" end="104480" title="Wisconsin Historical Society" label="Wisconsin Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q991937" start="110485" end="110512" title="German Historical Institute" label="German Historical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="111108" end="111139" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin–Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433199" start="111177" end="111228" title="Indiana University – Purdue University Indianapolis" label="Indiana University – Purdue University Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340908" start="111437" end="111456" title="Kutztown University" label="Kutztown University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290328" wikidata="Q32131" url="?curid=290328" title=".org">
<text>The domain name .org is a generic top-level domain (gTLD) of the Domain Name System (DNS) used on the Internet. The name is truncated from &#x27;organization&#x27;. It was one of the original domains established in 1985, and has been operated by the Public Interest Registry since 2003. The domain was originally &quot;intended as the miscellaneous TLD for organizations that didn&#x27;t fit anywhere else&quot;. It is commonly used by non-profit organizations, open-source projects, and communities, but is an open domain that can be used by anyone. The number of registered domains in .org has increased from fewer than one million in the 1990s, to ten million in 2012, and held steady between ten and eleven million since then.

== History ==

The domain &quot;.org&quot; was one of the original top-level domains and was established in January 1985. The other early top-level domains were .com, .us, .edu, .gov, .mil and .net. It was originally intended for non-profit organizations or organizations of a non-commercial character that did not meet the requirements for other gTLDs. The MITRE Corporation was the first group to register an .org domain with &quot;mitre.org&quot; in July 1985. The TLD has been operated since January 1, 2003, by Public Interest Registry, who assumed the task from VeriSign Global Registry Services, a division of Verisign.

In November 2019, the Public Interest Registry (PIR) was to be sold by the Internet Society to shell company Ethos Capital for US$1.135 billion. The PIR also announced it would abandon its non-profit status to become a B Corporation. However, this move was criticized by non-profits and various digital rights groups on concerns that Ethos Capital, a private equity firm, would raise fees or censor the domain. The sale was blocked by Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) in April 2020 on the basis that the transfer of control of the domain to the private equity firm would create &quot;unacceptable uncertainty&quot; for non-profits that relied on the .org domain.

== Registrations ==
Registrations of subdomains are processed via accredited registrars worldwide. Anyone can register a second-level domain within org, without restrictions. In some instances subdomains are being used also by commercial sites, such as craigslist.org. According to the ICANN Dashboard (Domain Name) report, the composition of the TLD is diverse, including cultural institutions, associations, sports teams, religious, and civic organizations, open-source software projects, schools, environmental initiatives, social, and fraternal organizations, health organizations, legal services, as well as clubs, and community-volunteer groups. In some cases subdomains have been created for crisis management.

Although organizations anywhere in the world may register subdomains, many countries, such as Australia (au), Canada (ca), Japan (jp), Argentina (ar), Bolivia (bo), Uruguay (uy), Turkey (tr), Somalia (so), Sierra Leone (sl), Russia (ru), Bangladesh (bd), India (in) and the United Kingdom (uk), have established a second-level domain with a similar purpose under their ccTLD. Such second-level domains are usually named &quot;org&quot; or &quot;or&quot;.

In 2009, the .org domain consisted of more than 8 million registered domain names, 8.8 million in 2010, and 9.6 million in 2011. The Public Interest Registry registered the ten millionth .ORG domain in June, 2012. When the 9.5-millionth second-level domain was registered in December 2011, &quot;org&quot; became the third largest gTLD.

As of November 2019, according to the Tranco ranking of the top 1M global domains, domains under .org were about 6 % of the top 1000 and 7 % of the top 100 thousand and 1 million domains.

=== Internationalized domain names ===
The .org domain registry allows the registration of selected internationalized domain names (IDNs) as second-level domains. For German, Danish, Hungarian, Icelandic, Korean, Latvian, Lithuanian, Polish, and Swedish IDNs this has been possible since 2005. Spanish IDN registrations have been possible since 2007.

== Domain name security ==
On June 2, 2009, The Public Interest Registry announced that the domain is the first open generic top-level domain and the largest registry overall that has signed its DNS zone with Domain Name System Security Extensions (DNSSEC). This allows the verification of the origin authenticity and integrity of DNS data by conforming DNS clients.

As of June 23, 2010, DNSSEC was enabled for individual second-level domains, starting with 13 registrars.

== Cost of registration ==
Since 2003, the Public Interest Registry (PIR) charged its accredited registrars a capped price of US$9.05 per year for each domain name. The registrars may set their charges to end users without restrictions.

In April 2019, ICANN proposed an end to the price cap of .org domains and effectively removed it in July in spite of having received 3,252 opposing comments and only six in favor. A few months later, the owner of the domain, the Public Interest Registry, proposed to sell the domain to investment firm Ethos Capital. After intense criticism from nonprofit groups and significant figures in Internet history, the proposal was scrapped.

== Regulatory positions ==
In March 2001, the Ethics Committee of the State Bar of Arizona issued Ethics Opinion 01-05, which discussed the limitations to which a law firm is subject when creating or using a website address for its law firm website. Among other conclusions, the Committee opined that a for-profit law firm may not use a domain name that contains the suffix &quot;.org&quot;, on the ground that such use &quot;creates a false impression that the firm either is a non-profit or is in some way specifically affiliated with a non-profit&quot;.

In light of the widespread use of the &quot;.org&quot; suffix by for-profit organizations in the years since Ariz. Ethics Op. 01-05 was issued, the Committee, reconsidering the matter in December 2011, concluded that the possibility that the public will be misled by a for-profit law firm&#x27;s use of &quot;.org&quot; in its website address is remote, as a reasonable person, desiring to verify whether an entity is non-profit, would not rely solely on the entity&#x27;s website address.

Therefore, the mere use of &quot;.org&quot; by a for-profit law firm was declared not to be a violation of the Arizona Rules of Professional Conduct, and Opinion 01-05 was modified accordingly. Arizona lawyers were cautioned, however, that a lawyer or law firm may not use a domain name that falsely implies that the lawyer or law firm is affiliated with a particular non-profit organization or with a governmental entity or that otherwise is false or misleading.

== References ==
== External links ==
* .ORG site
* Save DotOrg</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q32131" start="16" end="20" title=".org" label=".org"/>
<link wikidata="Q29469" start="26" end="50" title="generic top-level domain" label="generic top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="65" end="83" title="Domain Name System" label="Domain Name System"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="102" end="110" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q476770" start="250" end="274" title="Public Interest Registry" label="Public Interest Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q159371" start="893" end="897" title=".com" label=".com"/>
<link wikidata="Q37861" start="899" end="902" title=".us" label=".us"/>
<link wikidata="Q216625" start="904" end="908" title=".edu" label=".edu"/>
<link wikidata="Q31643" start="910" end="914" title=".gov" label=".gov"/>
<link wikidata="Q31635" start="916" end="920" title=".mil" label=".mil"/>
<link wikidata="Q31835" start="925" end="929" title=".net" label=".net"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="962" end="986" title="non-profit organizations" label="non-profit organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q627039" start="1086" end="1107" title="MITRE" label="The MITRE Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q476770" start="1248" end="1272" title="Public Interest Registry" label="Public Interest Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q734338" start="1349" end="1357" title="Verisign" label="Verisign"/>
<link wikidata="Q749257" start="1435" end="1451" title="Internet Society" label="Internet Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q290000" start="1455" end="1468" title="Shell corporation" label="shell company"/>
<link wikidata="Q75112321" start="1469" end="1482" title="Ethos Capital" label="Ethos Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243343" start="1579" end="1592" title="B_Corporation_(certification)" label="B Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q485750" start="1795" end="1854" title="ICANN" label="Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)"/>
<link wikidata="Q903444" start="2172" end="2191" title="second-level domain" label="second-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q485750" start="2337" end="2342" title="ICANN" label="ICANN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="2511" end="2531" title="open-source software" label="open-source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q37420" start="2875" end="2877" title=".au" label="au"/>
<link wikidata="Q39582" start="2888" end="2890" title=".ca" label="ca"/>
<link wikidata="Q39132" start="2900" end="2902" title=".jp" label="jp"/>
<link wikidata="Q38300" start="2916" end="2918" title=".ar" label="ar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40510" start="2930" end="2932" title=".bo" label="bo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41848" start="2944" end="2946" title=".uy" label="uy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41104" start="2957" end="2959" title=".tr" label="tr"/>
<link wikidata="Q126480" start="2971" end="2973" title=".so" label="so"/>
<link wikidata="Q43767" start="2990" end="2992" title=".sl" label="sl"/>
<link wikidata="Q36541" start="3003" end="3005" title=".ru" label="ru"/>
<link wikidata="Q39144" start="3020" end="3022" title=".bd" label="bd"/>
<link wikidata="Q39218" start="3032" end="3034" title=".in" label="in"/>
<link wikidata="Q37913" start="3060" end="3062" title=".uk" label="uk"/>
<link wikidata="Q42032" start="3139" end="3144" title="country code top-level domain" label="ccTLD"/>
<link wikidata="Q756903" start="3853" end="3882" title="internationalized domain name" label="internationalized domain name"/>
<link wikidata="Q219872" start="4300" end="4308" title="DNS zone" label="DNS zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41609" start="4314" end="4352" title="Domain Name System Security Extensions" label="Domain Name System Security Extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q476770" start="4623" end="4647" title="Public Interest Registry" label="Public Interest Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q485750" start="4833" end="4838" title="ICANN" label="ICANN"/>
<link wikidata="Q75112321" start="5120" end="5133" title="Ethos Capital" label="Ethos Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013102" start="5324" end="5344" title="State Bar of Arizona" label="State Bar of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q613142" start="5417" end="5425" title="law firm" label="law firm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290330" wikidata="Q897842" url="?curid=290330" title="Incendiary device">
<text>Incendiary weapons, incendiary devices, incendiary munitions, or incendiary bombs are weapons designed to start fires. They may destroy structures or sensitive equipment using fire, and sometimes operate as anti-personnel weaponry. Incendiaries utilize materials such as napalm, thermite, magnesium powder, chlorine trifluoride, or white phosphorus. Though colloquially often called &quot;bombs&quot;, they are not explosives but in fact operate to slow the process of chemical reactions and use ignition rather than detonation to start or maintain the reaction. Napalm, for example, is petroleum especially thickened with certain chemicals into a gel to slow, but not stop, combustion, releasing energy over a longer time than an explosive device. In the case of napalm, the gel adheres to surfaces and resists suppression.

==Pre-modern history==

A range of early thermal weapons were utilized by ancient, medieval/post-classical and early modern armies, including hot pitch, oil, resin, animal fat and other similar compounds. Substances such as quicklime and sulfur could be toxic and blinding. Incendiary mixtures, such as the petroleum-based Greek fire, were launched by throwing machines or administered through a siphon. Sulfur- and oil-soaked materials were sometimes ignited and thrown at the enemy, or attached to spears, arrows or bolts, and fired by hand or machine. Some siege techniques—such as mining and boring—relied on combustibles and fire to complete the collapse of walls and structures.

Towards the latter part of the period, gunpowder was invented, which increased the sophistication of the weapons, starting with fire lances.

==Development and use in World War I==

The first incendiary devices to be dropped during World War I fell on coastal towns in the east of England on the night of 18–19 January 1915. The small number of German bombs, also known as firebombs, were finned containers filled with kerosene and oil and wrapped with tar-covered rope. They were dropped from Zeppelin airships. On 8 September 1915, Zeppelin L-13 dropped a large number of firebombs, but even then the results were poor and they were generally ineffective in terms of the damage inflicted. They did have a considerable effect on the morale of the civilian population of the United Kingdom.

After further experiments with 5-litre barrels of benzol, in 1918, the B-1E Elektron fire bomb (German: &quot;Elektronbrandbombe&quot;) was developed by scientists and engineers at the Griesheim-Elektron chemical works. The bomb was ignited by a thermite charge, but the main incendiary effect was from the magnesium and aluminium alloy casing, which ignited at 650 °C, burned at 1,100 °C and emitted vapour that burned at 1,800 °C. A further advantage of the alloy casing was its lightness, being a quarter of the density of steel, which meant that each bomber could carry a considerable number. The German High Command devised an operation called &quot;The Fire Plan&quot; (German: &quot;Der Feuerplan&quot;), which involved the use of the whole German heavy bomber fleet, flying in waves over London and Paris and dropping all the incendiary bombs that they could carry, until they were either all shot down or the crews were too exhausted to fly. The hope was that the two capitals would be engulfed in an inextinguishable blaze, causing the Allies to sue for peace. Thousands of Elektron bombs were stockpiled at forward bomber bases and the operation was scheduled for August and again in early September 1918, but on both occasions, the order to take off was countermanded at the last moment, perhaps because of the fear of Allied reprisals against German cities. The Royal Air Force had already used their own &quot;Baby&quot; incendiary bomb (BIB) which also contained a thermite charge. A plan to fire bomb New York with new long range Zeppelins of the L70 class was proposed by the naval airship fleet commander Peter Strasser in July 1918, but it was vetoed by Admiral Reinhard Scheer.

==Development and use in World War II==

Incendiary bombs were used extensively in World War II as an effective bombing weapon, often in a conjunction with high-explosive bombs. Probably the most famous incendiary attacks are the bombing of Dresden and the bombing of Tokyo on 10 March 1945. Many different configurations of incendiary bombs and a wide range of filling materials such as isobutyl methacrylate (IM) polymer, napalm, and similar jellied-petroleum formulas were used, many of them developed by the US Chemical Warfare Service. Different methods of delivery, e.g. small bombs, bomblet clusters and large bombs, were tested and implemented. For example, a large bomb casing was filled with small sticks of incendiary (bomblets); the casing was designed to open at altitude, scattering the bomblets in order to cover a wide area. An explosive charge would then ignite the incendiary material, often starting a raging fire. The fire would burn at extreme temperatures that could destroy most buildings made of wood or other combustible materials (buildings constructed of stone tend to resist incendiary destruction unless they are first blown open by high explosives).
The German &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; started the war using the 1918-designed one-kilogram magnesium alloy B-1E &quot;Elektronbrandbombe&quot;; later modifications included the addition of a small explosive charge intended to penetrate the roof of any building which it landed on. Racks holding 36 of these bombs were developed, four of which could, in turn, be fitted to an electrically triggered dispenser so that a single He 111 bomber could carry 1,152 incendiary bombs, or more usually a mixed load. Less successful was the &quot;Flammenbombe&quot;, a 250 kg or 500 kg high explosive bomb case filled with an inflammable oil mixture, which often failed to detonate and was withdrawn in January 1941.

In World War II, incendiaries were principally developed in order to destroy the many small, decentralised war industries located (often intentionally) throughout vast tracts of city land in an effort to escape destruction by conventionally aimed high-explosive bombs. Nevertheless, the civilian destruction caused by such weapons quickly earned them a reputation as terror weapons with the targeted populations. Nazi Germany began the campaign of incendiary bombings at the start of World War II with the bombing of Warsaw, and continued with the London Blitz and the bombing of Moscow, among other cities. Later, an extensive reprisal was enacted by the Allies in the strategic bombing campaign that led to the near-annihilation of many German cities. In the Pacific War, during the last seven months of strategic bombing by B-29 Superfortresses in the air war against Japan, a change to firebombing tactics resulted in the death of 500,000 Japanese and the homelessness of five million more. Sixty-seven Japanese cities lost significant areas to incendiary attacks. The most deadly single bombing raid in history was Operation Meetinghouse, an incendiary attack that killed some 100,000 Tokyo residents in one night.

The incendiary bomb, developed by ICI, was the standard light incendiary bomb used by RAF Bomber Command in very large numbers, declining slightly in 1944 to 35.8 million bombs produced (the decline being due to more bombs arriving from the United States). It was the weapon of choice for the British &quot;dehousing&quot; plan. The bomb consisted of a hollow body made from aluminium-magnesium alloy with a cast iron/steel nose, and filled with thermite incendiary pellets. It was capable of burning for up to ten minutes. There was also a high explosive version and delayed high explosive versions (2–4 minutes) which were designed to kill rescuers and firefighters. It was normal for a proportion of high explosive bombs to be dropped during incendiary attacks in order to expose combustible material and to fill the streets with craters and rubble, hindering rescue services.

Towards the end of World War Two, the British introduced a much improved incendiary bomb, whose fall was retarded by a small parachute and on impact sent out an extremely hot flame for ; This, the &quot;Incendiary Bomb, 30-lb., Type J, Mk I&quot;, burned for approximately two minutes. Articles in late 1944 claimed that the flame was so hot it could crumble a brick wall. For propaganda purposes the RAF dubbed the new incendiary bomb the &quot;Superflamer&quot;.
Around fifty-five million incendiary bombs were dropped on Germany by Avro Lancasters alone.

Many incendiary weapons developed and deployed during World War II were in the form of bombs and shells whose main incendiary component is white phosphorus (WP), and can be used in an offensive anti-personnel role against enemy troop concentrations, but WP is also used for signalling, smoke screens, and target-marking purposes. The U.S. Army and marines used WP extensively in World War II and Korea for all three purposes, frequently using WP shells in large 4.2-inch chemical mortars. WP was widely credited by many Allied soldiers for breaking up numerous German infantry attacks and creating havoc among enemy troop concentrations during the latter part of World War II. In both World War II and Korea, WP was found particularly useful in overcoming enemy human wave attacks.

==Incendiary weapons after World War II==
Napalm was widely used by the United States during the Korean War, most notably during the battle &quot;Outpost Harry&quot; in South Korea during the night of June 10–11, 1953. Eighth Army chemical officer Donald Bode reported that on an &quot;average good day&quot; UN pilots used of napalm, with approximately of this thrown by US forces. British prime minister Winston Churchill privately criticized the use of napalm in Korea, writing that it was &quot;very cruel&quot;, as US and UN forces, he wrote, were &quot;splashing it all over the civilian population&quot;, &quot;tortur[ing] great masses of people&quot;. He conveyed these sentiments to US Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Omar Bradley, who &quot;never published the statement&quot;. Publicly, Churchill allowed Bradley &quot;to issue a statement that confirmed U.K. support for U.S. napalm attacks&quot;.

During the Vietnam War, the U.S. Air Force developed the CBU-55, a cluster bomb incendiary fuelled by propane, a weapon that was used only once in warfare. Napalm however, became an intrinsic element of US military action during the Vietnam War as forces made increasing use of it for its tactical and psychological effects. Reportedly about 388,000 tons of US napalm bombs were dropped in the region between 1963 and 1973, compared to 32,357 tons used over three years in the Korean War, and 16,500 tons dropped on Japan in 1945.

Incendiary bombs used in the late 20th century sometimes contained thermite, made from aluminium and ferric oxide. It takes very high temperatures to ignite, but when alight, it can burn through solid steel. In World War II, such devices were employed in incendiary grenades to burn through heavy armour plate, or as a quick welding mechanism to destroy artillery and other complex machined weapons.

A variety of pyrophoric materials can also be used: selected organometallic compounds, most often triethylaluminium, trimethylaluminium, and some other alkyl and aryl derivatives of aluminium, magnesium, boron, zinc, sodium, and lithium, can be used. Thickened triethylaluminium, a napalm-like substance that ignites in contact with air, is known as thickened pyrophoric agent, or TPA.

Napalm proper is no longer used by the United States, although the kerosene-fuelled Mark 77 MOD 5 firebomb is currently in use. The United States has confirmed the use of Mark 77s in Operation Iraqi Freedom in 2003.

==Incendiary weapons and laws of warfare==
Signatory states are bound by Protocol III of the UN Convention on Conventional Weapons which governs the use of incendiary weapons:

* prohibits the use of incendiary weapons against civilians (effectively a reaffirmation of the general prohibition on attacks against civilians in Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions)
* prohibits the use of air-delivered incendiary weapons against military targets located within concentrations of civilians and loosely regulates the use of other types of incendiary weapons in such circumstances.

Protocol III states though that incendiary weapons do not include:

* Munitions which may have incidental incendiary effects, such as illuminates, tracers, smoke or signaling systems;
* Munitions designed to combine penetration, blast or fragmentation effects with an additional incendiary effect, such as armor-piercing projectiles, fragmentation shells, explosive bombs and similar combined-effects munitions in which the incendiary effect is not specifically designed to cause burn injury to persons, but to be used against military objectives, such as armoured vehicles, aircraft and installations or facilities.
==See also==

*Arson
*Bat bomb
*Driptorch
*Early thermal weapons
*Fire accelerant
*Fire balloon
*Firestorm
*Fire bombing
*Flame fougasse
*Flamethrower
*Greek fire (Historic Byzantine incendiary weapon)
*High explosive incendiary (HEI)
*Incendiary ammunition
*Meng Huo You (Historic Chinese incendiary weapon)
*Molotov cocktail
*Napalm
*Pen Huo Qi (Historic Chinese flamethrower)
*Stinkpot (Historic Chinese incendiary weapon)
==References==
==External links==

*Protocol III to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons which may be deemed to be Excessively Injurious or to have Indiscriminate Effects
*United States Strategic Bombing Survey (Pacific War) 1946
*&quot;Fire From The Sky&quot; 1944 article on the production of incendiary bombs
* AN-M50-series incendiary bombs (German)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q897842" start="0" end="18" title="Incendiary device" label="Incendiary weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q897842" start="20" end="38" title="Incendiary device" label="incendiary devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q897842" start="40" end="60" title="Incendiary device" label="incendiary munitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q897842" start="65" end="81" title="Incendiary device" label="incendiary bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272823" start="207" end="230" title="anti-personnel weapon" label="anti-personnel weaponry"/>
<link wikidata="Q181822" start="271" end="277" title="napalm" label="napalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q337192" start="279" end="287" title="thermite" label="thermite"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="289" end="305" title="magnesium" label="magnesium powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q411305" start="307" end="327" title="chlorine trifluoride" label="chlorine trifluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q24629374" start="332" end="348" title="white phosphorus munitions" label="white phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q127197" start="389" end="393" title="bomb" label="bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="415" end="425" title="explosives" label="explosives"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="496" end="504" title="Combustion" label="ignition"/>
<link wikidata="Q786054" start="517" end="527" title="detonation" label="detonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181822" start="563" end="569" title="Napalm" label="Napalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="900" end="907" title="Ancient history" label="ancient"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="909" end="917" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234117" start="918" end="932" title="Post-classical history" label="post-classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="937" end="949" title="Early modern period" label="early modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q840692" start="972" end="977" title="pitch (resin)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="984" end="989" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185006" start="1050" end="1059" title="quicklime" label="quicklime"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="1064" end="1070" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q179537" start="1149" end="1159" title="Greek fire" label="Greek fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q426656" start="1222" end="1228" title="siphon" label="siphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q891691" start="1344" end="1349" title="Crossbow bolt" label="bolts"/>
<link wikidata="Q88222" start="1411" end="1417" title="Mining (military)" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="1551" end="1560" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826688" start="1640" end="1650" title="fire lance" label="fire lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="1931" end="1939" title="kerosene" label="kerosene"/>
<link wikidata="Q191413" start="2006" end="2014" title="Zeppelin" label="Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133585" start="2015" end="2023" title="airships" label="airships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896797" start="2354" end="2360" title="Benzole" label="benzol"/>
<link wikidata="Q129261" start="2380" end="2388" title="Elektron (alloy)" label="Elektron"/>
<link wikidata="Q566334" start="2489" end="2498" title="Griesheim (Frankfurt am Main)" label="Griesheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q337192" start="2550" end="2558" title="thermite" label="thermite"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="2611" end="2620" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q641853" start="2905" end="2924" title="Oberste Heeresleitung" label="German High Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="3679" end="3694" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q67825" start="3927" end="3941" title="Peter Strasser" label="Peter Strasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q57612" start="3985" end="4000" title="Reinhard Scheer" label="Reinhard Scheer"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4086" end="4098" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q152142" start="4233" end="4251" title="bombing of Dresden" label="bombing of Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q51881408" start="4260" end="4293" title="Bombing of Tokyo (10 March 1945)" label="bombing of Tokyo on 10 March 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q181822" start="4427" end="4433" title="napalm" label="napalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093909" start="4518" end="4542" title="Chemical Warfare Service" label="Chemical Warfare Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q184158" start="4733" end="4740" title="bomblet" label="bomblet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="5200" end="5209" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q154532" start="5603" end="5609" title="Heinkel He 111" label="He 111"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="6297" end="6309" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353049" start="6332" end="6351" title="firebombing" label="incendiary bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q656397" start="6390" end="6407" title="bombing of Warsaw in World War II" label="bombing of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="6432" end="6444" title="London Blitz" label="London Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365756" start="6512" end="6520" title="reprisal" label="reprisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="6540" end="6546" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q715695" start="6554" end="6580" title="Strategic bombing during World War II" label="strategic bombing campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="6645" end="6656" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q184870" start="6711" end="6729" title="B-29 Superfortress" label="B-29 Superfortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q590545" start="6735" end="6760" title="air raids on Japan" label="the air war against Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59886" start="7004" end="7026" title="Bombing of Tokyo in World War II" label="Operation Meetinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q899151" start="7139" end="7142" title="Imperial Chemical Industries" label="ICI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="7191" end="7209" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="RAF Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183061" start="7398" end="7432" title="Dehousing" label="British &amp;quot;dehousing&amp;quot; plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="7490" end="7499" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="7500" end="7505" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q337192" start="7551" end="7559" title="thermite" label="thermite"/>
<link wikidata="Q203622" start="8521" end="8535" title="Avro Lancaster" label="Avro Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q24629374" start="8684" end="8700" title="White phosphorus (weapon)" label="white phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q909879" start="8831" end="8843" title="smoke screen" label="smoke screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="8941" end="8946" title="Korean War" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448030" start="9307" end="9324" title="human wave attack" label="human wave attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="9425" end="9435" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112847" start="9474" end="9487" title="Outpost Harry" label="Outpost Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="9711" end="9733" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="British prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="9734" end="9751" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763459" start="10023" end="10060" title="Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q207955" start="10061" end="10073" title="Omar Bradley" label="Omar Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="10256" end="10267" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="10273" end="10287" title="U.S. Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009307" start="10302" end="10308" title="CBU-55" label="CBU-55"/>
<link wikidata="Q184158" start="10312" end="10324" title="cluster bomb" label="cluster bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q131189" start="10347" end="10354" title="propane" label="propane"/>
<link wikidata="Q337192" start="10844" end="10852" title="thermite" label="thermite"/>
<link wikidata="Q419170" start="10878" end="10890" title="Iron(III) oxide" label="ferric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11886611" start="11074" end="11080" title="armour" label="armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="11102" end="11109" title="welding" label="welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="11131" end="11140" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q912400" start="11191" end="11201" title="pyrophoric" label="pyrophoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q237200" start="11239" end="11253" title="organometallic" label="organometallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q416298" start="11276" end="11293" title="triethylaluminium" label="triethylaluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q416321" start="11295" end="11313" title="trimethylaluminium" label="trimethylaluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q335268" start="11330" end="11335" title="alkyl" label="alkyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q718074" start="11340" end="11344" title="aryl" label="aryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="11371" end="11380" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="11382" end="11387" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="11389" end="11393" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="11395" end="11401" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q568" start="11407" end="11414" title="lithium" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q416298" start="11528" end="11554" title="thickened pyrophoric agent" label="thickened pyrophoric agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="11632" end="11640" title="kerosene" label="kerosene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789860" start="11649" end="11671" title="Mark 77 bomb" label="Mark 77 MOD 5 firebomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="11748" end="11771" title="Operation Iraqi Freedom" label="Operation Iraqi Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q925836" start="11875" end="11912" title="UN Convention on Conventional Weapons" label="UN Convention on Conventional Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2229133" start="12107" end="12128" title="Additional Protocol I" label="Additional Protocol I"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="12136" end="12154" title="Geneva Conventions" label="Geneva Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518482" start="12220" end="12236" title="legitimate military target" label="military targets"/>
<link wikidata="Q518184" start="12518" end="12525" title="Tracer ammunition" label="tracers"/>
<link wikidata="Q327541" start="13003" end="13008" title="Arson" label="Arson"/>
<link wikidata="Q665328" start="13010" end="13018" title="Bat bomb" label="Bat bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307791" start="13020" end="13029" title="Driptorch" label="Driptorch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609860" start="13031" end="13052" title="Early thermal weapons" label="Early thermal weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q897829" start="13054" end="13069" title="Fire accelerant" label="Fire accelerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q55554851" start="13071" end="13083" title="Fire balloon" label="Fire balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q918145" start="13085" end="13094" title="Firestorm" label="Firestorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353049" start="13096" end="13108" title="Fire bombing" label="Fire bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079866" start="13110" end="13124" title="Flame fougasse" label="Flame fougasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q45183" start="13126" end="13138" title="Flamethrower" label="Flamethrower"/>
<link wikidata="Q179537" start="13140" end="13150" title="Greek fire" label="Greek fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337998" start="13191" end="13216" title="High explosive incendiary" label="High explosive incendiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670272" start="13224" end="13245" title="Incendiary ammunition" label="Incendiary ammunition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816948" start="13247" end="13259" title="Meng Huo You" label="Meng Huo You"/>
<link wikidata="Q167096" start="13298" end="13314" title="Molotov cocktail" label="Molotov cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q181822" start="13316" end="13322" title="Napalm" label="Napalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899013" start="13324" end="13334" title="Pen Huo Qi" label="Pen Huo Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350224" start="13368" end="13376" title="Stinkpot (weapon)" label="Stinkpot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290338" wikidata="Q25112" url="?curid=290338" title="Kachelotplate">
<text>The Kachelotplate is a sandbar in the North Sea. It lies near the German coast, west of the island of Juist. Since 2003, enough stays above high tide that it can be called an island. Grass and dunes are settling there.

The new island is 2.5 kilometres long and up to 1.3 kilometres wide.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28337" start="23" end="30" title="bar (landform)" label="sandbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="38" end="47" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="66" end="72" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q24846" start="102" end="107" title="Juist" label="Juist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="175" end="181" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="193" end="197" title="dune" label="dune"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290339" wikidata="Q118145884" url="?curid=290339" title="List of racket sports">
<text>Racket sports (or racquet sports) are games in which players use a racket or paddle to hit a ball or other object. Rackets consist of a handled frame with an open hoop that supports a network of tightly stretched strings. Paddles have a solid face rather than a network of strings, but may be perforated with a pattern of holes, or be covered with a textured surface.


==Sports that use a netted racket==
* Badminton
* Ball badminton
* Battledore and shuttlecock
* Crossminton (previously &quot;Speedminton&quot;)
* Frontenis
* Qianball
* Racketlon (a series of other racket and paddle sports)
* Rackets
* Racquetball
* Real tennis
* Soft tennis
* Speed-ball
* Squash
** Hardball squash
* Squash tennis
* Stické
* Tennis
* Tennis polo
* Touchtennis

==Sports that use a non-netted racket, or paddle==
* Basque pelota
* Beach tennis
* Downside ball game
* Four wall paddleball
* Frescobol
* Frescotennis
* Jokari
* Jombola
* Matkot
* Miniten
* One wall paddleball
* Paddle ball
* Paddle tennis
* Padel
* Paleta Frontón
* Pan Pong
* Pelota mixteca
* Pickleball
* Pitton
* Platform tennis
* Road tennis
* Sphairee
* Stoolball
* Table squash
* Table tennis (Ping Pong)
* Tamburello
* Tambourelli
* Totem tennis

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q118145884" start="0" end="13" title="List of racket sports" label="Racket sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q118145884" start="18" end="32" title="List of racket sports" label="racquet sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q11410" start="38" end="42" title="game" label="game"/>
<link wikidata="Q240502" start="67" end="73" title="Racket (sports equipment)" label="racket"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545" start="93" end="97" title="ball" label="ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291" start="408" end="417" title="Badminton" label="Badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q805170" start="420" end="434" title="Ball badminton" label="Ball badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q354176" start="437" end="463" title="Battledore and shuttlecock" label="Battledore and shuttlecock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074830" start="466" end="477" title="Crossminton" label="Crossminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q265863" start="517" end="526" title="Frontenis" label="Frontenis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154913" start="529" end="537" title="Qianball" label="Qianball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186732" start="540" end="549" title="Racketlon" label="Racketlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457676" start="597" end="604" title="Rackets (sport)" label="Rackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q754586" start="607" end="618" title="Racquetball" label="Racquetball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360406" start="621" end="632" title="Real tennis" label="Real tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515947" start="635" end="646" title="Soft tennis" label="Soft tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117866" start="649" end="659" title="Speed-ball" label="Speed-ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q133201" start="662" end="668" title="Squash (sport)" label="Squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655706" start="672" end="687" title="Hardball squash" label="Hardball squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3967457" start="690" end="703" title="Squash tennis" label="Squash tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616338" start="706" end="712" title="Stické" label="Stické"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="715" end="721" title="Tennis" label="Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983734" start="724" end="735" title="Tennis polo" label="Tennis polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828738" start="738" end="749" title="Touchtennis" label="Touchtennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q212845" start="804" end="817" title="Basque pelota" label="Basque pelota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618467" start="820" end="832" title="Beach tennis" label="Beach tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974136" start="835" end="853" title="Downside ball game" label="Downside ball game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475744" start="856" end="876" title="Four wall paddleball" label="Four wall paddleball"/>
<link wikidata="Q113144108" start="879" end="888" title="Frescobol" label="Frescobol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="891" end="903" title="Frescotennis" label="Frescotennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q389567" start="906" end="912" title="Jokari" label="Jokari"/>
<link wikidata="Q112623173" start="915" end="922" title="Jombola" label="Jombola"/>
<link wikidata="Q934756" start="925" end="931" title="Matkot" label="Matkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867720" start="934" end="941" title="Miniten" label="Miniten"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888712" start="944" end="963" title="One wall paddleball" label="One wall paddleball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123342" start="966" end="977" title="Paddle ball (sport)" label="Paddle ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805008" start="980" end="993" title="Paddle tennis" label="Paddle tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582389" start="996" end="1001" title="Padel (sport)" label="Padel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135299" start="1004" end="1018" title="Paleta Frontón" label="Paleta Frontón"/>
<link wikidata="Q11329749" start="1021" end="1029" title="Pan Pong" label="Pan Pong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161705" start="1032" end="1046" title="Pelota mixteca" label="Pelota mixteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q866224" start="1049" end="1059" title="Pickleball" label="Pickleball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199135" start="1062" end="1068" title="Pitton (sport)" label="Pitton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906408" start="1071" end="1086" title="Platform tennis" label="Platform tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938107" start="1089" end="1100" title="Road tennis" label="Road tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073853" start="1103" end="1111" title="Sphairee" label="Sphairee"/>
<link wikidata="Q734568" start="1114" end="1123" title="Stoolball" label="Stoolball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673169" start="1126" end="1138" title="Table squash" label="Table squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="1141" end="1153" title="Table tennis" label="Table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q685697" start="1168" end="1178" title="Tamburello" label="Tamburello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755980" start="1181" end="1192" title="Tambourelli" label="Tambourelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999333" start="1195" end="1207" title="Totem tennis" label="Totem tennis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290351" wikidata="Q7457420" url="?curid=290351" title="Seven Sisters, England">
<text>Seven Sisters, England may refer to:

* Seven Sisters, Sussex: a group of chalk cliffs
* Seven Sisters, London: an area of north London in the London Borough of Haringey, served by Seven Sisters station

==See also==
* Seven Sisters (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7457420" start="0" end="22" title="Seven Sisters, England" label="Seven Sisters, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754640" start="40" end="61" title="Seven Sisters, Sussex" label="Seven Sisters, Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639390" start="89" end="110" title="Seven Sisters, London" label="Seven Sisters, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q109037583" start="181" end="202" title="Seven Sisters station" label="Seven Sisters station"/>
<link wikidata="Q229335" start="219" end="249" title="Seven Sisters (disambiguation)" label="Seven Sisters (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290353" wikidata="Q10583784" url="?curid=290353" title="Michael McKevitt">
<text>Michael McKevitt () (4 September 1949 – 2 January 2021) was an Irish republican and paramilitary leader. He was the Provisional Irish Republican Army&#x27;s Quartermaster General. Due to the Provisional IRA&#x27;s involvement in the Northern Ireland peace process, he formed the Real IRA in protest. His role in the Real IRA led to him being convicted of directing terrorism as the leader of the paramilitary organisation.

==Background==
=== Provisional Irish Republican Army ===
McKevitt was a native of County Louth. He joined the Provisional IRA during the outbreak of the Troubles. In February 1975, he was shot in the knees by the Official IRA during a feud between the two organisations. He was a longtime senior member of the Provisional IRA and served as the organisation&#x27;s Quartermaster General, with oversight of their arms caches. He quit the organisation in protest at the movement&#x27;s ceasefires and its participation through Sinn Féin in the Northern Ireland peace process, which led to the Good Friday Agreement in 1998.

===Real Irish Republican Army===
McKevitt launched a dissident offshoot of the Provisional IRA called the Real IRA, using seized Provisional IRA weaponry, and is believed to have been the group&#x27;s first Chief of Staff.

McKevitt was expelled from the Real IRA after a disagreement between a group of Real IRA prisoners in Portlaoise Prison and the outside leadership. The prisoners issued a statement urging the leadership to stand down, claiming a criminal element had taken over. McKevitt and his supporters went on to form a group called the New Republican Forum.

==== Omagh bombing ====

In June 2009, McKevitt was one of four men found by a civil court to be liable for the 1998 Omagh bombing in a case taken by relatives of the victims. In April 2014, &quot;The Telegraph&quot; revealed that McKevitt and Liam Campbell were appealing against the ruling in the European Court of Human Rights, citing their inability to cross-examine testimony of FBI source David Rupert as a violation of their right to a fair trial.

== Arrests, convictions, and appeals ==
McKevitt was convicted by the Republic of Ireland&#x27;s non-jury Special Criminal Court on 6 August 2003 of two offences: &quot;membership of an illegal organisation&quot; (the Real IRA) and &quot;directing terrorism&quot; between 29 August 1999 and 23 October 2000. On 7 August 2003 he was sentenced to twenty years in prison. During his trial Mr Justice Richard Johnson said of McKevitt, &quot;The accused played a leading role in the organisation which he directed and induced others to join.&quot; Given all possible reductions and remission, it means that the earliest he could have been released was 2016. The prosecution&#x27;s case was based largely on the testimony of an American FBI informant, David Rupert. According to information revealed in his trial, among his plans was to attempt the assassination of the then British Prime Minister Tony Blair.

McKevitt appealed against his convictions to the Court of Criminal Appeal, arguing that Rupert&#x27;s testimony was unreliable since he had been paid large sums of money for his role as an informant (a total of £750,000 from the FBI and MI5), and because of Rupert&#x27;s long criminal record. In December 2005, the court rejected these arguments and said that Rupert was a credible witness. Both of McKevitt&#x27;s convictions were upheld. In July 2006, McKevitt was given leave to appeal to the Supreme Court. The appeal was rejected on 30 July 2008.

In February 2014, The Court of Criminal Appeal heard a petition from McKevitt arguing that he should receive a new appeal based on a Supreme Court decision in 2012 which ruled an unrelated Garda search of a suspect&#x27;s home illegal. On 20 May 2014, the Court of Criminal Appeal rejected McKevitt&#x27;s bid to have his new appeal heard by the Supreme Court.

In August 2014, McKevitt petitioned for release on the grounds that, per Rule 59 (2) of prison rules, McKevitt has not been given proper consideration by prison authorities for a one third remission of sentence taking into account model inmate behavior, due to his conviction being under the Offences Against the State Act. On 1 September 2014, McKevitt withdrew his appeal and was granted release to prepare a new challenge based on judicial review. On 9 December 2014 his challenge was struck down by Dublin&#x27;s High Court.

== Release ==
In March 2015, McKevitt was granted temporary release in order to treat a cancerous growth on his kidney. Subsequently, McKevitt underwent surgery to have the affected kidney surgically removed in May of the same year.

On Easter Sunday 2016, McKevitt was formally released from prison upon the completion of his sentence.

== Personal life==
McKevitt was married to Bernadette Sands McKevitt, a sister of 1981 Provisional IRA hunger striker and Member of Parliament (MP), Bobby Sands, who died during his hunger strike. Sands McKevitt was a leading member of the 32 County Sovereignty Movement and had been described in media reports as the third highest ranking Real IRA officer. She left the 32 County Sovereignty Movement following the imprisonment of her husband.

Michael McKevitt died on 2 January 2021, at the age of 71, of cancer.

==References==
==External links==
*Omagh families&#x27; relief at McKevitt verdict BBC News, 6 August 2003
*Kevin Connolly Body blow to the Real IRA BBC News, 6 August 2003
*McKevitt loses appeal over terrorism sentence RTÉ News, 9 December 2005</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10583784" start="0" end="16" title="Michael McKevitt" label="Michael McKevitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="63" end="79" title="Irish republicanism" label="Irish republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="116" end="149" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="Provisional Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q636055" start="157" end="178" title="IRA Quartermaster General" label="Quartermaster General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058587" start="233" end="263" title="Northern Ireland peace process" label="Northern Ireland peace process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122988" start="279" end="287" title="Real IRA" label="Real IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="365" end="374" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="396" end="408" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q183539" start="506" end="518" title="County Louth" label="County Louth"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="534" end="549" title="Provisional IRA" label="Provisional IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="573" end="585" title="the Troubles" label="the Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013671" start="612" end="629" title="Kneecapping" label="shot in the knees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548637" start="637" end="649" title="Official IRA" label="Official IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q636055" start="788" end="809" title="IRA Quartermaster General" label="Quartermaster General"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="948" end="957" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058587" start="965" end="995" title="Northern Ireland peace process" label="Northern Ireland peace process"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="1014" end="1035" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122988" start="1152" end="1160" title="Real IRA" label="Real IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654367" start="1253" end="1267" title="Chief of Staff of the Irish Republican Army" label="Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q14466340" start="1372" end="1389" title="Portlaoise Prison" label="Portlaoise Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="1815" end="1828" title="The Telegraph (UK)" label="The Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q17489869" start="1862" end="1875" title="Liam Campbell" label="Liam Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="1917" end="1947" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239298" start="2013" end="2025" title="David Rupert" label="David Rupert"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="2144" end="2163" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q467572" start="2180" end="2202" title="Special Criminal Court" label="Special Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326902" start="2471" end="2486" title="Richard Johnson (judge)" label="Richard Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="2805" end="2808" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239298" start="2820" end="2832" title="David Rupert" label="David Rupert"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="2943" end="2965" title="British Prime Minister" label="British Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="2966" end="2976" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q388576" start="3028" end="3052" title="Court of Criminal Appeal (Ireland)" label="Court of Criminal Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="3216" end="3219" title="MI5" label="MI5"/>
<link wikidata="Q153617" start="3476" end="3489" title="Supreme Court (Ireland)" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349516" start="4187" end="4217" title="Offences against the State Acts 1939–1998" label="Offences Against the State Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303026" start="4329" end="4344" title="Judicial review in the Republic of Ireland" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q671721" start="4412" end="4422" title="High Court (Ireland)" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="4662" end="4675" title="Easter Sunday" label="Easter Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892813" start="4806" end="4831" title="Bernadette Sands McKevitt" label="Bernadette Sands McKevitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q191355" start="4866" end="4879" title="hunger strike" label="hunger strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="4885" end="4905" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q121615" start="4912" end="4923" title="Bobby Sands" label="Bobby Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641332" start="5003" end="5033" title="32 County Sovereignty Movement" label="32 County Sovereignty Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="5271" end="5277" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290356" wikidata="Q1424733" url="?curid=290356" title="Accidental death and dismemberment insurance">
<text>In insurance, an accidental death and dismemberment (AD&amp;D) policy provides financial benefits to the insured or their beneficiaries in the event of accidental death, serious injury, or dismemberment resulting from an accident.

Unlike traditional life insurance, which only pays out in the event of death, AD&amp;D insurance provides additional coverage in case the insured experiences a serious injury or loses a limb or other body part due to an accident.

The benefits paid out by an AD&amp;D policy can help cover medical expenses, rehabilitation costs, and other expenses associated with an accidental injury. They can also provide financial assistance to the insured&#x27;s family in the event of accidental death.

==Accidental death==
In the event of an accidental death, this insurance will pay benefits in addition to any life insurance but only up to a set amount total regardless of any other insurance held by same insurer, held by the client. This is called &quot;double indemnity coverage&quot; and is often available even when accidental death insurance is merely an add-on to a regular life insurance plan. Some of the covered accidents include traffic accidents, exposure, homicide, falls, heavy equipment accidents and drowning. Accidental deaths are the fifth leading cause of death in the U.S. as well as in Canada.

Accidental death insurance is not an investment vehicle and thus clients are paying only for sustained protection. Most policies have to be renewed periodically (with revised terms), although the client&#x27;s consent with renewal is often implicitly assumed.

===Common exclusions===
Every insurer maintains a list of events and circumstances that void the insured&#x27;s entitlement to his or her accidental death benefit. Death by illness, suicide, non-commercial aviation, war injury, and natural causes are generally not covered by AD&amp;D. Similarly, death while under the influence of any non-prescribed drugs or alcohol is most likely exempt from coverage. Overdose with toxic or poisonous substances and injury of an athlete during a professional sporting event may void the right to claim too.

Some insurance carriers will tailor their clients&#x27; coverage to include some of the above risks, but every such extension will be accompanied by increased premiums.

Due to these restrictions, the process of claiming the benefit may be relatively lengthy; the deceased client may have to undergo autopsy and the accident may have to be officially investigated before a claim is approved by the insurer.

==Dismemberment==
Fractional amounts of the policy will be paid out if the covered employee loses a bodily appendage or sight because of an accident. Additionally, AD&amp;D generally pays benefits for the loss of limbs, fingers, toes, sight and permanent paralysis. The types of injuries covered and the amount paid vary by insurer and package, and are explicitly enumerated in the insurance policy.

==Coverage types==
There are four common types of group AD&amp;D plans offered in the United States:

# Group Life Supplement – the AD&amp;D benefit is included as part of a group life insurance contract, and the benefit amount is usually the same as that of the group life benefit.
# Voluntary – the AD&amp;D benefit is offered to members of a group. An example is an AD&amp;D policy provided in an initial nominal amount with premiums paid by another party (such as a small $1,000 AD&amp;D policy offered to credit union members, with the premium paid for by the credit union itself), with higher elective benefits offered to members where the member must pay the additional premiums separately.
# Travel Accident (Business Trip) – the AD&amp;D benefit is provided through an employee benefit plan and provides supplemental accident protection to workers while they are traveling on company business (the entire premium is usually paid by the employer).
# Dependents – Some group AD&amp;D plans also provide coverage for dependents.

==See also==
* Bureau of Labor Statistics
* Life insurance
* Term life insurance
* Permanent life insurance
* Health insurance
* Health care

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="3" end="12" title="insurance" label="insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424733" start="17" end="62" title="Accidental death and dismemberment insurance" label="accidental death and dismemberment (AD&amp;amp;D)"/>
<link wikidata="Q977871" start="63" end="69" title="Insurance policy" label="policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171558" start="221" end="229" title="accident" label="accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q626608" start="251" end="265" title="life insurance" label="life insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q626608" start="836" end="850" title="life insurance" label="life insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q708399" start="989" end="998" title="indemnity" label="indemnity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9687" start="1166" end="1183" title="Traffic collision" label="traffic accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q149086" start="1195" end="1203" title="homicide" label="homicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q506616" start="1242" end="1250" title="drowning" label="drowning"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1314" end="1318" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1333" end="1339" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290" start="1379" end="1389" title="investment" label="investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="1785" end="1792" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q765633" start="1809" end="1817" title="aviation" label="aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="1819" end="1822" title="war" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438541" start="1835" end="1849" title="Death by natural causes" label="natural causes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643563" start="1939" end="1953" title="Prescription medication" label="non-prescribed"/>
<link wikidata="Q8386" start="1954" end="1958" title="drug" label="drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="1963" end="1970" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="2022" end="2027" title="Toxicity" label="toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="2031" end="2051" title="Poison" label="poisonous substances"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="2069" end="2076" title="Athletics (sport)" label="athlete"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="2099" end="2104" title="sport" label="sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768566" start="2349" end="2380" title="Cause of action" label="process of claiming the benefit"/>
<link wikidata="Q41482" start="2448" end="2455" title="autopsy" label="autopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q495304" start="2488" end="2511" title="Forensic science" label="officially investigated"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="2811" end="2820" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q745877" start="3467" end="3479" title="credit union" label="credit union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928428" start="4008" end="4034" title="Bureau of Labor Statistics" label="Bureau of Labor Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q626608" start="4037" end="4051" title="Life insurance" label="Life insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630407" start="4054" end="4073" title="Term life insurance" label="Term life insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q626608" start="4076" end="4100" title="Permanent life insurance" label="Permanent life insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="4103" end="4119" title="Health insurance" label="Health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="4122" end="4133" title="Health care" label="Health care"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290357" wikidata="Q2966556" url="?curid=290357" title="Christopher Bram">
<text>Christopher Bram (born February 22, 1952) is an American author.

== Biography ==
Bram grew up in Virginia Beach, Virginia (outside Norfolk), where he was a paperboy and an Eagle Scout. He graduated from the College of William and Mary in 1974 (B.A. in English). He moved to New York City in 1978.

His nine novels range in subject matter from gay life in the 1970s to the career of a Victorian musical clairvoyant to the frantic world of theater people in contemporary New York. Fellow novelist Philip Gambone wrote of his work, &quot;What is most impressive in Bram&#x27;s fiction is the psychological and emotional accuracy with which he portrays his characters ... His novels are about ordinary gay people trying to be decent and good in a morally compromised world. He focuses on the often conflicting claims of friendship, family, love and desire; the ways good intentions can become confused and thwarted; and the ways we learn to be vulnerable and human.&quot; Bram has written numerous articles and essays (a selection is included in &quot;Mapping the Territory&quot;). He has also written or co-written several screenplays, including feature documentary and short narrative films directed by his partner, Draper Shreeve.

His 1995 novel &quot;Father of Frankenstein&quot;, about film director James Whale, was made into the 1998 movie &quot;Gods and Monsters&quot; starring Ian McKellen, Lynn Redgrave, and Brendan Fraser. The film was written and directed by Bill Condon who won an Academy Award for the adapted screenplay.

Bram was made a Guggenheim Fellow in 2001, and is a multiple nominee for the Lambda Literary Award for Gay Fiction, winning for &quot;Lives of the Circus Animals&quot;. In May 2003, he received the Bill Whitehead Award for Lifetime Achievement from Publishing Triangle, and in 2013 his book &quot;Eminent Outlaws: The Gay Writers Who Changed America&quot; won the organization&#x27;s Randy Shilts Award. He lives in Greenwich Village and teaches at New York University.

==Bibliography==

===Novels===
*&quot;Surprising Myself&quot; (1987)
*&quot;Hold Tight&quot; (1988)
*&quot;In Memory of Angel Clare&quot; (1989)
*&quot;Almost History&quot; (1992)
*&quot;Father of Frankenstein&quot; (1995)
*&quot;Gossip&quot; (1997)
*&quot;The Notorious Dr. August: His Real Life and Crimes&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Lives of the Circus Animals&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Exiles in America&quot; (2006)

===Non-fiction===
*&quot;Mapping the Territory&quot; (2009)
*&quot;Eminent Outlaws: The Gay Writers Who Changed America&quot; (2012)
*&quot;The Art of History: Unlocking the Past in Fiction and Nonfiction&quot; (2016)

===Essays===
*&quot;Perry Street, West Greenwich Village&quot; in &quot;Hometowns: Gay Men Write About Where They Belong&quot; edited by John Preston, 1990
*&quot;Slow Learners&quot; in &quot;Boys Like Us: Gay Writers Tell Their Coming Out Stories&quot; edited by Patrick Merla, 1996
*&quot;A Queer Monster: Henry James and the Sex Question&quot; in &quot;James White Review,&quot; 2003
*&quot;Delicate Monsters&quot; in &quot;I Do, I Don&#x27;t: Queers on Marriage&quot; edited by Greg Wharton and Ian Phillips, 2004
*&quot;Homage to Mr. Jimmy&quot; in &quot;Gods and Monsters&quot; (new edition of &quot;Father of Frankenstein&quot;), 2005
*&quot;The Zen of Tolstoy,&quot; &quot;Commonweal Magazine&quot;, March 2016
*&quot;Mr. Smith Goes to Heaven: Remembering Bob Smith,&quot; &quot;Sessums Magazine&quot;, January 2018
*&quot;Pauline at the Buggy Whip Factory: Our Day with Pauline Kael,&quot; &quot;Sessums Magazine&quot;, February 2019
*&quot;A Fan&#x27;s Notes,&quot; introduction to &quot;Isherwood in Transit&quot;, University of Minnesota Press, 2020

== References ==
==Further reading==
;Archival sources
*George Stambolian Papers, 1955–1992 (5.8 linear feet) are housed at the New York Public Library. Contains correspondence with Christopher Bram</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2966556" start="0" end="16" title="Christopher Bram" label="Christopher Bram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046356" start="173" end="184" title="Eagle Scout (Boy Scouts of America)" label="Eagle Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="208" end="235" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183594" start="496" end="510" title="Philip Gambone" label="Philip Gambone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966556" start="1215" end="1229" title="Draper Shreeve" label="Draper Shreeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437677" start="1253" end="1275" title="Father of Frankenstein" label="Father of Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q381831" start="1303" end="1314" title="James Whale" label="James Whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q686533" start="1351" end="1368" title="Gods and Monsters (film)" label="Gods and Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q170510" start="1384" end="1396" title="Ian McKellen" label="Ian McKellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q156552" start="1398" end="1411" title="Lynn Redgrave" label="Lynn Redgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q193555" start="1417" end="1431" title="Brendan Fraser" label="Brendan Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q361336" start="1470" end="1481" title="Bill Condon" label="Bill Condon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002330" start="1613" end="1650" title="Lambda Literary Award for Gay Fiction" label="Lambda Literary Award for Gay Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16275128" start="1734" end="1754" title="Bill Whitehead Award" label="Bill Whitehead Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258114" start="1785" end="1804" title="Publishing Triangle" label="Publishing Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010098" start="1920" end="1938" title="Randy Shilts Award" label="Randy Shilts Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="1985" end="2004" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="3825" end="3848" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290358" wikidata="Q732371" url="?curid=290358" title="Lodoicea">
<text>Lodoicea, commonly known as the sea coconut, coco de mer, or double coconut, is a monotypic genus in the palm family. The sole species, Lodoicea maldivica, is endemic to the islands of Praslin and Curieuse in the Seychelles. It has the largest seed in the plant kingdom. It was also formerly found on the small islets of St Pierre, Chauve-Souris, and Ile Ronde (Round Island), all located near Praslin, but had become extinct there for a time until recently reintroduced.

==Taxonomy==
The name of the genus &quot;Lodoicea&quot; is given by Philibert Commerson, it may be derived from &quot;Lodoicus&quot;, a Latinised form of &quot;Louis&quot; (typically &quot;Ludovicus&quot;), in honour of King Louis XV of France. Other sources say that &quot;Lodoicea&quot; is from Laodice, the daughter of Priam and Hecuba.

&quot;Lodoicea&quot; belongs to the Coryphoideae subfamily and tribe Borasseae. Borasseae is represented by four genera in Madagascar and one in Seychelles out of the seven worldwide. They are distributed on the coastlands surrounding the Indian Ocean and the existing islands within. &quot;Borassus&quot;, the genus closest to &quot;Lodoicea&quot;, has about five species in the &quot;old world,&quot; one species in Africa, one in India, South-East Asia and Malaysia, one in New Guinea and two species in Madagascar.

==Description==

The tree generally grows to 25–34 m (82–111.5 ft) tall. The tallest on record, measured on the ground after felling, was in total height. The leaves are fan-shaped, 7–10 m long and 4.5 m wide with a 4 m petiole in mature plants. However juveniles produce much longer petioles; up to or even . It is dioecious, with separate male and female plants. The male flowers are arranged in a catkin-like inflorescence up to 2 m (6.5 ft) long which continues to produce pollen over a ten-year period; one of the longest-living inflorescences known. The mature fruit is 40–50 cm in diameter and weighs 15–30 kg, and contains the largest seed in the plant kingdom. The fruit, which requires 6–7 years to mature and a further two years to germinate, is sometimes also referred to as the sea coconut, love nut, double coconut, coco fesse, or Seychelles nut.

While the functional characteristics of &quot;Lodoicea&quot; are similar to other trees of monodominant forests in the humid tropics, its unique features include a huge seed, effective funnelling mechanism and diverse community of closely associated animals. These attributes suggest a long evolutionary history under relatively stable conditions. Of the six monospecific endemic palms in Seychelles, &quot;Lodoicea&quot; is the &quot;only true case of island gigantism among Seychelles flowering plants, a unique feature of Seychelles vegetation&quot;. It holds eleven botanical records:

* It produces the largest wild fruit so far recorded, weighing up to 36 kg (79.2 lbs), and perhaps as much as 99 pounds (45 kilograms). (although domesticated pumpkins and watermelons can be much heavier)
* The fruit is composed of three carpels which are the largest of any flowering plant (although the carpels of &quot;Entada&quot; spp. are longer).
* These fruit are the slowest to mature, requiring 8 to 10 years.
* The mature seeds weighing up to 17.6 kg (29 lbs) are the world&#x27;s heaviest 
* The seed upon germinating, produces the longest known cotyledon, up to four meters (13 feet). and on occasion as long as ten meters (33 feet).
* It is the slowest growing of all large trees, although some small to medium-sized desert trees are slower. At the Peradenaya Royal Botanic Gardens, it grew an average of 1.29 inches (33 millimeters) per year over a period of 140 years.
* The female flowers are the largest of any palm, up to four inches (ten centimeters) in diameter. 
* The male catkins, up to two meters (6.5 feet) in length, are the longest known.
* The sepals, which grow with the fruit, are the largest known; up to 9 inches (23 centimeters) long by six inches (15 centimeters) wide. 
* The leaves of &quot;Lodoicea&quot; have the longest lifespan of any monocot, nine years to develop in the terminal spike, and then nine more years as a fully functioning leaf. However, adult &quot;Lodoicea&quot; can have as many as twenty leaves with a potential lifespan of 24 years. 
* Finally, &quot;Lodoicea&quot; is the most efficient plant known at recovering nutrients from moribund leaves.

Of the six endemic palms in Seychelles, it is the only dioecious species, with male and female flowers on different plants.

===Habit===
&quot;L. maldivica&quot; is robust, solitary, up to 30 m tall with an erect, spineless, stem which is ringed with leaf scars (Calstrom, unpublished). The base of the trunk is of a bulbous form and this bulb fits into a natural bowl, or socket, about in diameter and in depth, narrowing towards the bottom. This bowl is pierced with hundreds of small oval holes about the size of a thimble with hollow tubes corresponding on the outside through which the roots penetrate the ground on all sides, never, however, becoming attached to the bowl; they are partially elastic, affording an almost imperceptible but very necessary &quot;play&quot; to the parent stem when struggling against the force of violent gales.

===Leaves===
The crown is a rather dense head of foliage with leaves that are stiff, palmate up to 10 m in diameter and petioles of two to four metres in length. The leaf is plicate at the base, cut one third or more into segments 4–10 cm broad with bifid end which are often drooping. A triangular cleft develops at the petiole base. The palm leaves form a huge funnel that intercepts particulate material, especially pollen, which is flushed to the base of the trunk when it rains. In this way, &quot;L. maldivica&quot; improves its nutrient supply and that of its dispersal-limited offspring.

===Flowers===

The clusters of staminate flowers are arranged spirally and are flanked by very tough leathery bracts. Each has a small bracteole, three sepals forming a cylindrical tube, and a three-lobed corolla. There are 17 to 22 stamens. The pistillate flowers are solitary and borne at the angles of the rachis and are partially sunken in it in the form of a cup. They are ovoid with three petals as well as three sepals. It has been suggested that they may be pollinated by animals such as the endemic lizards that inhabit the forest where they occur. Pollination by wind and rain are also thought to be important. Only when &quot;L. maldivica&quot; begins to produce flowers, which can vary from 11 years to 45 or more, is it possible to visually determine the sex of the plant. The nectar and pollen are also food for several endemic animals e.g. bright green geckos (&quot;Phelsuma&quot; sp.), white slugs (&quot;Vaginula seychellensis&quot;) and insects.

===Inflorescence===

Inflorescences are interfoliar, lacking a covering spathe and shorter than the leaves. The staminate inflorescence is catkin-like, one to two metres long by about three inches (8 centimeters) in width and produces pollen over a period of 8 to ten years. These catkins are generally terminal and solitary, but sometimes two or three catkins may be present. The pistillate inflorescences are also one to two metres long, unbranched, and the flowers are borne on a zig-zagging rachilla.

===Fruit===
The fruit is bilobed, flattened, 40 to 50 cm long ovoid and pointed, and contains usually one but occasionally two to four seeds. The epicarp is smooth and the mesocarp is fibrous. The endosperm is thick, relatively hard, hollow and homogenous. The embryo sits in the sinus between the two lobes. During germination, a tubular cotyledonary petiole develops that connects the young plant to the seed. The length of the tube is reported to reach about four metres. In the Vallée de Mai, the tube may be up to 10 m long.

&quot;L. maldivica&quot; was once believed to be a sea-bean or drift seed, a seed evolved to be dispersed by the sea. However, it is now known that the viable nut is too dense to float, and only rotted out nuts can be found on the sea surface, thus explaining why the trees are limited in range to just two islands.

==Habitat==
&quot;Lodoicea maldivica&quot; inhabits rainforests where there are deep, well-drained soils and open exposed slopes; although growth is reduced on such eroded soils.

== Phylogeny ==
Despite the Seychelles’ proximity to Africa, the broader diversity of palm life on the islands are considered to be slightly closer phylogenetically to that of south Asia; with members of the palm subtribe Oncospermatinae occurring both in the Seychelles group and in the Mascarene Islands, Sri Lanka, Borneo, the Malay Peninsula, and the Philippines. A genetic sequencing study of the Lodoicea and its palm showed similarity between south Asiatic palms and Lodoicea. Lodoicea are one of four genera in the Lataniieae subtribe of the Borrassae tribe, and sequencing found them to be very closely related to the Borassus and Borassodendron genera (although notably the phylogenetic placement of Lodoicea was among the least confident). The Borassus and Borassodendron genera together include species in Southeast Asia, Malaysia, India, New Guinea, and Madagascar; thus this study provided genetic evidence for the suspected close relationships between Lodoicea and south Asian palms.

== Dispersal ==
Genetic similarity between Lodoicea and south-asian palms despite their geographical distance raises questions about ancestral Lodoicea’s historical dispersal to the Seychelles; and this natural history of Lodoicea is further obscured by the geology of the Seychelles, as the entirety of the archipelago (excluding certain Pleistocene and coral reef formations) is composed of non-fossiliferous rock. As such, the prehistoric origins of Seychelles flora is inferred using circumstantial geological and botanical evidence.

=== Geologic drift-dispersal hypothesis ===
Coco de mer’s ancestral dispersal to the Seychelles may have occurred as Tertiary palm relatives native to Gondwonaland rode the Indian subcontinent during its northward continental drift, whereupon populations were deposited on the modern day Seychelles. This hypothesis derives from the geologic formation of the Seychelles themselves, and offers a strong explanation of Lodoicea’s modern day close relation to Asiatic palms. The granite which forms the majority of the Seychelles archipelago was formed within the Indian subcontinent, and was deposited in its modern day location in the Indian ocean following the detachment and northern drift of the subcontinent from Gondwana, before colliding with modern day south-Asia ~50 mya. Divergence between the palm populations would then follow from the isolation of the archipelago from the rest of Gondwonaland. Evidence suggests at least a proportion of the diversity of Flora on the islands are of “very ancient origin”, perhaps being evidence of the persistence of some aboriginal Indian subcontinental species, of which the ancestors to the Lodoicea may have been a member. The plausibility of this hypothesis is dependent on whether the Seychelles remained at least in part above sea-level for the duration of their formation, as a complete inundation with sea water at any point during the formation of the islands would have killed any aboriginal flora. Whether such an inundation ever occurred during the formation of the Seychelles is unknown.

=== Oceanic dispersal hypothesis ===
A 2020 genetic-sequencing study of palm species found genetic evidence for an oceanic dispersal of the ancestors to modern Lataniieae palms, from south Asia to the Mascarene and Seychelle islands. Though modern viable coco de mer fruits are too heavy to float and thus would be unable to disperse oceanically, genetic evidence suggests that ancestors to Lataniieae palms underwent evolutionary periods of relatively rapid increases in seed size, with the Lodoicea serving as the most extreme example. Thus, Lodoicea ancestors may have possessed small-enough seeds for oceanic dispersal to be viable, with an evolutionary increase in seed size occurring in the Seychelles after Lodoicea’s ancestral dispersal. Furthermore, it is likely that at certain points during the geologic formation of the Seychelles, the oceanic gaps between landmasses were much smaller, making oceanic dispersal more viable still. As such, a combination of the two hypotheses, wherein ancestral palms native to the Indian subcontinent rode the subcontinent during continental drift, and then dispersed oceanically to the Seychelles after their formation, but while the rest of the Indian subcontinent was relatively nearby.

== Evolution of the coco de mer fruit’s size ==
Despite their relative recency of this divergence from the common ancestor shared with other palms, Lodoicea are unique across a variety of traits. Though Lodoicea is not the only palm in its tribe that produces very large fruits, the syncarpous clade of palms exhibit wide variation in seed sizes, ranging from the seeds of the Caryoteae palms of only several millimeters, to the seeds of Borasseae which are often several centimeters in length (The Lodoicea is the most extreme example of this group). For this reason, the ecological and genetic factors explaining the large size of Lodoicea’s fruit to such an extreme are of particular interest to evolutionary biologists. The divergence of size in Lodoicea’s fruit subsequent to its isolation from ancestors has been cited as an example of island gigantism, which describes the tendency for traits or organisms to increase in size over evolutionary time subsequent to isolation from a primary population on an island (see also island biogeography). One hypothesis for the ecological driver of the development of Lodoicea’s large seed is the historic lack of ground dwelling mammalian predators on the Seychelles, allowing for large fruits on the ground to avoid predation for long enough for their large energy stores to be effectively utilized by growing offspring. Agricultural surveys of the Seychelles tend to categorize the islands as having very shallow, nutrient-poor soils, and the life-cycle of the coco de mer often involves a very long period of subterranean transversal of the primary apical shoot after fertilization and excision from the parent tree, wherein the growing plant cannot use solar radiation to undergo photosynthesis . These facts may jointly act as evolutionary incentives for the development of large, nutrient rich fruits, to feed the growing plant and increase likelihood of successful reproduction. 

Competition may also be the driving factor in the evolution of the size of &quot;Lodoicea&quot;’s fruit. One hypothesis asserts that competition between parent tree and its progeny, as well as competition between sibling offspring, drove the large size of the coco de mer’s fruit. The hypothesis suggests that because coco de mer fruits fall directly at the base of their parental tree, there is strong competition between parent and offspring for resources, within which the already-established parent tree has a large asymmetric advantage. Furthermore, as the number of offspring produced by a specific parent increases, the number of individuals growing its immediate surroundings increases, and thus the competition for resources between its offspring worsens. Therefore, there exists a selective pressure favoring the production of fewer offspring, each with a maximal chance of successfully reaching adulthood conferred by large energy reserves in the fruit. A related hypothesis states that low light availability in the rainforest understory favored juveniles which could quickly produce tall and wide initial leaves, to maximize photosynthetic area as quickly as possible; which would be made possible by a large, nutrient-rich seed. This is perhaps corroborated by the coco de mer’s noted ability to quickly produce a very large first stem and leaf, perhaps suggesting that fast and robust initial growth is indeed heavily selected towards. It is also noteworthy that many of the hypotheses presented to explain the size of Lodoicea’s fruit are not mutually exclusive, and could act jointly.

==History and mythology==
The species was formerly known as the Maldive coconut. Its scientific name, &quot;Lodoicea maldivica&quot;, originated before the 18th century when the Seychelles were uninhabited. In centuries past, the fruits that fell from the trees and ended up in the sea would be carried away eastwards by the prevailing sea currents. The nuts can only float after the germination process, when they are hollow. In this way many drifted to the Maldives where they were gathered from the beaches and valued as an important trade and medicinal item.

Until the true source of the nut was discovered in 1768 by Dufresne, it was believed by many to grow on a mythical tree at the bottom of the sea. European nobles in the sixteenth century would often have the shells of these nuts polished and decorated with valuable jewels as collectibles for their private galleries. The coco de mer tree is now a rare and protected species.

==Uses==

The species is grown as an ornamental tree in many areas in the tropics (including, for example, botanical gardens in Sri Lanka and Thailand), and subsidiary populations have been established on Mahé and Silhouette Islands in the Seychelles to help conserve the species.

The seeds of &quot;Lodoicea&quot; have been highly prized over the centuries; their rarity caused great interest and high prices in royal courts, and the tough outer seed coat has been used to make bowls such as for Sufi/Dervish beggar-alms &quot;kashkul&quot; bowls and other instruments.

==Threats==
&quot;Lodoicea maldivica&quot; is officially classified as an endangered species by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), with only approximately 8,000 wild mature trees left as of 2019. The history of exploitation continues today, and the collection of nuts has virtually stopped all natural regeneration of populations with the exception of the introduced population on Silhouette. This palm has been lost from the wild from three Seychelles islands within its former range. Habitat loss is one of the major threats to the survival of remaining populations, there have been numerous fires on the islands of Praslin and Curieuse, and only immature trees remain over large parts of these islands.

==Conservation==
The Seychelles is a World Heritage Site, and a third of the area is now protected. The main populations of &quot;Lodoicea maldivica&quot; are found within the Praslin and Curieuse National Parks, and the trade in nuts is controlled by the Coco-de-mer (Management) Decree of 1995. Firebreaks also exist at key sites in an effort to prevent devastating fires from sweeping through populations. Cultivated palms are grown on a number of other islands and are widely present in botanic gardens; although the collection of seeds in order to recruit these populations may be a further threat to the remaining natural stands. Conservation priorities are the continued protection of populations, enforcement of regulations and effective fire control.

A single cultivated plant at the Botanical Garden of Kolkata, maintained by the Botanical Survey of India, was successfully artificially pollinated in 2015.

==Gallery==
==References==

==Further reading==
*Arkive: &quot;Lodoicea maldivica&quot;
*Palm Society of Australia: &quot;Lodoicea maldivica&quot; description and photo gallery
* Hutchinson, 1959, &quot;The Families of Flowering Plants&quot; (2nd ed.)
* Fleischer-Dogley, F. (2006). &quot;Towards sustainable management of Lodoicea maldivica (Gmelin) Persoon,&quot; PhD thesis, University of Reading, UK.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q732371" start="32" end="43" title="Lodoicea" label="sea coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q732371" start="45" end="56" title="Lodoicea" label="coco de mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q732371" start="61" end="75" title="Lodoicea" label="double coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="82" end="91" title="monotypic taxon" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="105" end="116" title="Arecaceae" label="palm family"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="159" end="166" title="endemic (ecology)" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q581819" start="185" end="192" title="Praslin" label="Praslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q581191" start="197" end="205" title="Curieuse" label="Curieuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="213" end="223" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q595066" start="541" end="560" title="Philibert Commerson" label="Philibert Commerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="609" end="614" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612648" start="662" end="671" title="Ludovicus" label="Ludovicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="698" end="716" title="Louis XV of France" label="Louis XV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178583" start="770" end="777" title="Laodice (daughter of Priam)" label="Laodice"/>
<link wikidata="Q170473" start="795" end="800" title="Priam" label="Priam"/>
<link wikidata="Q193433" start="805" end="811" title="Hecuba" label="Hecuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q142846" start="850" end="862" title="Coryphoideae" label="Coryphoideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q893320" start="883" end="892" title="Borasseae" label="Borasseae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="937" end="947" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="1053" end="1065" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q310912" start="1105" end="1113" title="Borassus" label="Borassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="1232" end="1238" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1247" end="1252" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="1254" end="1269" title="South-East Asia" label="South-East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="1274" end="1282" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="1291" end="1301" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="1493" end="1499" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289985" start="1554" end="1561" title="Petiole (botany)" label="petiole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608538" start="1650" end="1659" title="plant sexuality" label="dioecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="1708" end="1714" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q217753" start="1734" end="1740" title="catkin" label="catkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="1746" end="1759" title="inflorescence" label="inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="1901" end="1906" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="1977" end="1981" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="1989" end="1994" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36732" start="1995" end="2002" title="kingdom (biology)" label="kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417877" start="2649" end="2665" title="island gigantism" label="island gigantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q165308" start="2945" end="2952" title="pumpkin" label="pumpkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507129" start="2958" end="2968" title="watermelon" label="watermelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="3024" end="3030" title="carpel" label="carpel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717267" start="3108" end="3114" title="Entada" label="Entada"/>
<link wikidata="Q193026" start="3343" end="3352" title="cotyledon" label="cotyledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119056" start="3548" end="3580" title="Royal Botanic Gardens, Peradeniya" label="Peradenaya Royal Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="3858" end="3863" title="sepal" label="sepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q78961" start="4061" end="4068" title="monocot" label="monocot"/>
<link wikidata="Q148681" start="4447" end="4456" title="dioecy" label="dioecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q694432" start="6693" end="6739" title="Phelsuma grandis" label="bright green geckos (&amp;quot;Phelsuma&amp;quot; sp.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908513" start="6760" end="6768" title="Vaginula" label="Vaginula"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="6825" end="6838" title="Inflorescence" label="Inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="6849" end="6855" title="foliar" label="foliar"/>
<link wikidata="Q729496" start="6876" end="6882" title="spathe" label="spathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="6916" end="6925" title="staminate" label="staminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q149316" start="7299" end="7307" title="Rachilla (floral axis)" label="rachilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364" start="7456" end="7463" title="epicarp" label="epicarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364" start="7482" end="7490" title="mesocarp" label="mesocarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q25624" start="7507" end="7516" title="endosperm" label="endosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q193026" start="7649" end="7658" title="cotyledon" label="cotyledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289985" start="7662" end="7669" title="Petiole (botany)" label="petiole"/>
<link wikidata="Q573558" start="7792" end="7805" title="Vallée de Mai" label="Vallée de Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q108324872" start="8861" end="8871" title="Lataniieae" label="Lataniieae"/>
<link wikidata="Q108324872" start="11585" end="11595" title="Lataniieae" label="Lataniieae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664460" start="13691" end="13710" title="Insular biogeography" label="island biogeography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="16378" end="16388" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="16659" end="16667" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q440136" start="16823" end="16831" title="Marc-Joseph Marion Dufresne" label="Dufresne"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="17178" end="17193" title="ornamental tree" label="ornamental tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="17269" end="17278" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="17283" end="17291" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q219642" start="17346" end="17350" title="Mahé, Seychelles" label="Mahé"/>
<link wikidata="Q40413" start="17355" end="17372" title="Silhouette Island" label="Silhouette Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537820" start="17670" end="17677" title="kashkul" label="kashkul"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="17788" end="17806" title="endangered species" label="endangered species"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="17814" end="17860" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="18482" end="18501" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="19259" end="19266" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633941" start="19286" end="19311" title="Botanical Survey of India" label="Botanical Survey of India"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290372" wikidata="Q262727" url="?curid=290372" title="Mo Mowlam">
<text>Marjorie &quot;Mo&quot; Mowlam (18 September 1949 – 19 August 2005) was a British Labour Party politician. She was the Member of Parliament (MP) for Redcar from 1987 to 2001 and served in the Cabinet of Tony Blair as Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Minister for the Cabinet Office and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.

Mowlam&#x27;s time as Northern Ireland Secretary saw the signing of the historic Good Friday Agreement in 1998. Her personal charisma and reputation for plain speaking led her to be perceived by many as one of the most popular &quot;New Labour&quot; politicians in the UK. When Tony Blair mentioned her in his speech at the 1998 Labour Party Conference, she received a standing ovation.

==Early life==
Mowlam was born at 43 King Street, Watford, Hertfordshire, England, the middle of three children of Tina and Frank, but grew up in Coventry, where her father progressed to become Coventry&#x27;s assistant postmaster. She would later be awarded the Freedom of the City in 1999. She was the only one of the family&#x27;s three children to pass the 11-plus exam. She started at Chiswick Girls&#x27; grammar school in West London, then moved to Coundon Court School in Coventry, one of the first comprehensive schools in the country. She then studied at Trevelyan College, Durham University, reading sociology and anthropology. She joined the Labour Party in her first year. She became the Secretary of the Durham Union Society in 1969 and later went on to become the vice-president of the Durham Students&#x27; Union. She worked for then-MP (Labour) Tony Benn in London and American writer Alvin Toffler in New York, moving to the United States with her then-boyfriend and studying for a PhD in political science at the University of Iowa on the effects of the Swiss system of referendums.

Mowlam was a lecturer in the Political Science Department at the University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee in 1977 and at Florida State University in Tallahassee from 1977 to 1979. During her time in Tallahassee, her apartment was broken into by someone; she suspected that it was Ted Bundy, a serial killer and rapist who is thought to have murdered at least thirty-five young women and attacked several others.

Mowlam returned to England in 1979 to take up an appointment at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne. She also worked in adult education at Northern College, Barnsley, with students who had fewer opportunities than traditional university students. In 1981, she organised a series of alternative lectures to the Reith lectures being given that year by Laurence Martin, the university&#x27;s vice chancellor. These were published as &quot;Debate on Disarmament&quot;, with their proceeds going to the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament.

== Personal life ==
Mowlam married Jonathan Norton, a City of London banker, in County Durham on 24 June 1995; Norton died on 3 February 2009. Mowlam had two step-children from Norton&#x27;s first marriage to Geraldine Bedell.

==Member of Parliament==
Having failed to win selection for the 1983 general election, Mowlam was selected as Labour candidate for the safe seat of Redcar after James Tinn stood down. She took the seat in the 1987 general election, becoming the Labour spokesperson on Northern Ireland later that year. Together with Shadow Chancellor John Smith, Mowlam was one of the architects of Labour&#x27;s &quot;Prawn Cocktail Offensive&quot; dedicated to reassuring the UK&#x27;s financial sector about Labour&#x27;s financial rectitude.

Mowlam joined the Shadow Cabinet when John Smith became leader of the Labour Party in 1992, holding the title of Shadow Secretary of State for National Heritage. During this time, she antagonised both monarchists and republicans by calling for Buckingham Palace to be demolished and replaced by a &quot;modern&quot; palace built at public expense. Later, her willingness to speak her mind, often without regard to the consequences, was seen as her greatest strength by her supporters.

Following Smith&#x27;s death in 1994, Mowlam, alongside Peter Kilfoyle, became a principal organiser of Tony Blair&#x27;s campaign for the Labour leadership. After his victory, Blair made her Shadow Secretary of State for Northern Ireland. She initially resisted being appointed to the position, preferring an economic portfolio, but, after accepting it, she threw her weight into the job.

===In government===

In 1997, Mowlam was once again re-elected as MP for Redcar with an increased majority of 21,667. With the Labour Party election win in May 1997, she was made Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, the first woman to have held the post. A reflection of her personal approach was the organisation of a walk about in Belfast city centre.

===Good Friday Agreement===

Mowlam &quot;oversaw the negotiations which led to the 1998 Good Friday Agreement&quot;. On 6 August 1997 she met with the Sinn Féin leader Gerry Adams to have &quot;their first face to face discussions since the breakdown of the IRA ceasefire in February 1996&quot;. She was successful in helping to restore the second IRA ceasefire which eventually led to Sinn Féin being included in the multi-party peace talks. The talks led to the Good Friday/Belfast Agreement achieved on 10 April 1998, bringing an end to conflict in Northern Ireland known as the Troubles.

On 4 January the Ulster Loyalist UDA/UFF prisoners in the Maze prison voted not to continue supporting the peace process. Led by Gary McMichael of the Ulster Democratic Party, their political representatives quickly flew to London requesting the Secretary of State meet with the prisoners. After consulting with her advisers and the UK Prime Minister Tony Blair on Friday 9 January 1998 she visited the Ulster Defence Association (UDA) and Ulster Freedom Fighters (UFF) prisoners represented politically by Gary McMichael. The visit was unprecedented for a Secretary of State for Northern Ireland. &quot;The Maze was a focal point of a troubled peace process today as Mo Mowlam arrived for a visit that had been variously described as mad or brave.&quot; The same day she also visited the Irish Republican Army (IRA) and Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) H-block wings of the prison.

The visit was unprecedented and a political gamble, and was potentially dangerous when she met with prisoners, some of whom had been convicted of murder, face-to-face.

She went on to oversee the Good Friday Agreement signing in 1998, which led to the temporary establishment of a devolved power-sharing Northern Ireland Assembly. However, an increasingly difficult relationship with Unionist parties meant her role in the talks was ultimately taken over by Tony Blair and his staff, prompting Mowlam to remark to then-US President Bill Clinton: &quot;Didn&#x27;t you know? I&#x27;m the new tea lady around here&quot;. In 1999, Mowlam referred to paramilitary punishment attacks in Northern Ireland as &quot;internal housekeeping&quot; and maintained that the violence did not count as breaking the ceasefire.

===Cabinet Office Minister===

Whilst her deteriorating relationship with Unionists was the key reason Mowlam was replaced by Peter Mandelson as Northern Ireland Secretary in October 1999, her move to the relatively lowly position of Cabinet Office Minister may have involved other factors, notably her health and her popularity. Mowlam resented being appointed to the post, having previously disparaged it as &quot;Minister for the &quot;Today&quot; programme&quot;. As Cabinet Office Minister, she was reportedly intended to be Tony Blair&#x27;s &quot;enforcer&quot;.

As head of the Government&#x27;s anti-drugs campaign, in 2002, she called for international legalisation. She caused some controversy when she admitted in 2000 to having used cannabis as a student: &quot;I tried dope. I didn&#x27;t particularly like it. But unlike President Clinton, I did inhale&quot;.

===Retirement===
On 4 September 2000, Mowlam announced her intention to retire from Parliament and relinquished her seat at the 2001 general election.

After retirement from the House of Commons, she became a critic of government policy on various issues, especially the 2003 invasion of Iraq. She took part in the anti-Iraq War protests alongside Vanessa Redgrave, Tony Benn, Tariq Ali, Ken Livingstone and Bianca Jagger.

Following her retirement, Mowlam became agony aunt for the men&#x27;s magazine &quot;Zoo&quot;. She said she missed her constituency work as an MP. She also set up a charity, MoMo Helps, to help drug users who are successfully completing their rehabilitation and provide support for the parents or carers of disabled children.

Her political memoirs, entitled &quot;Momentum: The Struggle for Peace, Politics and the People&quot;, were published in 2002.

She was the subject of &quot;This Is Your Life&quot; in January 2003 when she was surprised by Michael Aspel.

==Illness and death==
Five months before the 1997 general election which took Labour to office, Mowlam was diagnosed with a brain tumour, which she tried to keep private until the tabloid press started to print jibes about her appearance. Although she claimed to have made a full recovery, the various treatments caused her to lose most of her hair. She often wore a wig, which she would sometimes casually remove in public stating that it was &quot;such a bother&quot;.

On 3 August 2005, the BBC reported that she was critically ill at King&#x27;s College Hospital in London. She appeared to have suffered from balance problems as a result of her radiotherapy. According to her husband, she had fallen over on 30 July 2005, receiving head injuries and never regaining consciousness. Her living will, in which she had asked not to be resuscitated, was honoured.

On 12 August 2005, she was moved to Pilgrims Hospice in Canterbury, Kent, where she died at 8:10 am on 19 August, aged 55. She was survived by her husband Jon Norton and two stepchildren. Her death came just 13 days after the death of Robin Cook, another cabinet minister of the 1997 government.

In January 2010, it was revealed by her ex-doctor that her tumour had been malignant and was the cause of her death. Despite recommendations, she had withheld the true nature of her condition from Tony Blair and the electorate.

Mowlam was an atheist and was cremated in Sittingbourne on 1 September 2005 at a non-religious service conducted by Richard Coles, formerly of the 1980s band The Communards. Half of her ashes were scattered at Hillsborough Castle (the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland&#x27;s official residence) and the other half in her former parliamentary constituency of Redcar.

== Memorials and tributes==

A memorial service was held for Mowlam at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, on 20 November 2005, another at Hillsborough Castle on 1 December 2005 and another in Redcar on 3 December 2005.

To honour Mowlam, Redcar and Cleveland Unitary Authority commissioned an official memorial mosaic which was unveiled at Redcar&#x27;s newly refurbished boating lake on 23 October 2009. An intricate 800-tile mosaic, set in a three-metre raised circle, was created by local artist John Todd to illustrate her life and interests. The mosaic has her portrait as the centrepiece, surrounded by images including the beach where she loved to walk, racehorses at Redcar Racecourse (where she celebrated her wedding), the Redcar steelworks, the Zetland Lifeboat, clasped hands and doves (to symbolise the Northern Ireland peace process) and the Houses of Parliament.

Her archive of personal papers, which was donated in 2006, is held by Teesside Archives.

The postgraduate common room of Trevelyan College, Durham (Mowlam&#x27;s alma mater) was renamed &quot;The Mowlam Room&quot; in her honour. The room houses a small bust of Mowlam.

A children&#x27;s play park named after her is on the Stormont Estate.

==Docudrama==
In 2009, Channel 4 commissioned a docudramatic film, &quot;Mo&quot;, portraying Mo Mowlam&#x27;s life from the Labour election victory of 1997 to her death in 2005. The film starred Julie Walters as Mowlam. &quot;Mo&quot; was broadcast on 31 January 2010 and attracted over 3.5 million viewers, making it Channel 4&#x27;s highest-rated drama since 2001. The film was also a critical success, with MP Adam Ingram claiming that it &quot;brought home the essence of Mo&quot;. &quot;Mo&quot; was nominated for a BAFTA award for Best Single Drama with Julie Walters and Gary Lewis receiving nominations for, respectively, Best Actress and Best Supporting Actor. The Best Actress award was given to Walters.

==References==
== External links ==
*





|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q262727" start="0" end="8" title="Mo Mowlam" label="Marjorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q262727" start="15" end="17" title="Mo Mowlam" label="Mo"/>
<link wikidata="Q262727" start="24" end="30" title="Mo Mowlam" label="Mowlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="82" end="94" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="119" end="139" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032098" start="149" end="155" title="Redcar (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Redcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25416711" start="192" end="213" title="First Blair ministry" label="Cabinet of Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369302" start="217" end="256" title="Secretary of State for Northern Ireland" label="Secretary of State for Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865995" start="258" end="289" title="Minister for the Cabinet Office" label="Minister for the Cabinet Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q162754" start="294" end="330" title="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="414" end="435" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396591" start="566" end="576" title="New Labour" label="New Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="611" end="621" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467451" start="657" end="685" title="Labour Party Conference" label="1998 Labour Party Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610932" start="702" end="718" title="standing ovation" label="standing ovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598" start="771" end="778" title="Watford" label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="780" end="793" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="867" end="875" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416611" start="941" end="951" title="postmaster" label="postmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="984" end="1003" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359785" start="1082" end="1089" title="11-plus" label="11-plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q845015" start="1111" end="1119" title="Chiswick" label="Chiswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176599" start="1177" end="1197" title="Coundon Court School" label="Coundon Court School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241241" start="1228" end="1248" title="Comprehensive school (England and Wales)" label="comprehensive school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838943" start="1286" end="1303" title="Trevelyan College" label="Trevelyan College"/>
<link wikidata="Q458393" start="1305" end="1322" title="Durham University" label="Durham University"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="1332" end="1341" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="1346" end="1358" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q124054223" start="1439" end="1459" title="Durham Union Society" label="Durham Union Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316566" start="1522" end="1549" title="Durham Students&amp;#x27; Union" label="Durham Students&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="1583" end="1592" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q297425" start="1623" end="1636" title="Alvin Toffler" label="Alvin Toffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1664" end="1677" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="1721" end="1724" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="1728" end="1745" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q182973" start="1753" end="1771" title="University of Iowa" label="University of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942192" start="1794" end="1821" title="Voting in Switzerland" label="Swiss system of referendums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755318" start="1889" end="1922" title="University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee" label="University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q861548" start="1938" end="1962" title="Florida State University" label="Florida State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q37043" start="1966" end="1977" title="Tallahassee" label="Tallahassee"/>
<link wikidata="Q192218" start="2097" end="2106" title="Ted Bundy" label="Ted Bundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q837164" start="2298" end="2331" title="University of Newcastle upon Tyne" label="University of Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482202" start="2542" end="2555" title="Reith lecture" label="Reith lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500720" start="2582" end="2597" title="Laurence Martin" label="Laurence Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q61061" start="2621" end="2636" title="vice chancellor" label="vice chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178511" start="2730" end="2762" title="Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament" label="Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q23082" start="2845" end="2858" title="County Durham" label="County Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549725" start="2974" end="2990" title="Geraldine Bedell" label="Geraldine Bedell"/>
<link wikidata="Q918466" start="3057" end="3078" title="1983 United Kingdom general election" label="1983 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032098" start="3141" end="3147" title="Redcar (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Redcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144307" start="3154" end="3164" title="James Tinn" label="James Tinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q918472" start="3202" end="3223" title="1987 United Kingdom general election" label="1987 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="3261" end="3277" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q332377" start="3327" end="3337" title="John Smith (Labour Party leader)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238911" start="3395" end="3419" title="Prawn Cocktail Offensive" label="Prawn Cocktail Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q303329" start="3541" end="3555" title="Shadow Cabinet" label="Shadow Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q332377" start="3561" end="3571" title="John Smith (Labour Party leader)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460591" start="3636" end="3683" title="Shadow Secretary of State for National Heritage" label="Shadow Secretary of State for National Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="3767" end="3784" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175184" start="4065" end="4079" title="Peter Kilfoyle" label="Peter Kilfoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="4113" end="4123" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460599" start="4201" end="4247" title="Shadow Secretary of State for Northern Ireland" label="Shadow Secretary of State for Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369302" start="4579" end="4618" title="Secretary of State for Northern Ireland" label="Secretary of State for Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q76139" start="4928" end="4939" title="Gerry Adams" label="Gerry Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="5108" end="5111" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="5146" end="5155" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="5342" end="5350" title="Troubles" label="Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394819" start="5370" end="5385" title="Ulster Loyalist" label="Ulster Loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478908" start="5411" end="5422" title="Maze prison" label="Maze prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525575" start="5482" end="5496" title="Gary McMichael" label="Gary McMichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781051" start="5504" end="5527" title="Ulster Democratic Party" label="Ulster Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330968" start="5756" end="5782" title="Ulster Defence Association" label="Ulster Defence Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330968" start="5793" end="5816" title="Ulster Freedom Fighters" label="Ulster Freedom Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q175284" start="6142" end="6163" title="Irish Republican Army" label="Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127576" start="6174" end="6196" title="Ulster Volunteer Force" label="Ulster Volunteer Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478908" start="6203" end="6210" title="HM Prison Maze" label="H-block"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="6429" end="6450" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="6537" end="6562" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="6617" end="6625" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="6691" end="6701" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="6765" end="6777" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q77778275" start="6880" end="6931" title="paramilitary punishment attacks in Northern Ireland" label="paramilitary punishment attacks in Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q310046" start="7170" end="7185" title="Peter Mandelson" label="Peter Mandelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865995" start="7278" end="7301" title="Cabinet Office Minister" label="Cabinet Office Minister"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7477" end="7504" title="Today (BBC Radio 4)" label="&amp;quot;Today&amp;quot; programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="7790" end="7798" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="8004" end="8014" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="8048" end="8069" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="8191" end="8212" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580246" start="8235" end="8257" title="15 February 2003 anti-war protests" label="anti-Iraq War protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q347879" start="8268" end="8284" title="Vanessa Redgrave" label="Vanessa Redgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="8286" end="8295" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q314787" start="8297" end="8306" title="Tariq Ali" label="Tariq Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q220723" start="8308" end="8323" title="Ken Livingstone" label="Ken Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q285549" start="8328" end="8341" title="Bianca Jagger" label="Bianca Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q914229" start="8384" end="8394" title="agony aunt" label="agony aunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2730204" start="8429" end="8432" title="Zoo (magazine)" label="Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q262727" start="8519" end="8529" title="MoMo Helps" label="MoMo Helps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249607" start="8829" end="8846" title="This Is Your Life (British TV series)" label="This Is Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020213" start="8895" end="8908" title="Michael Aspel" label="Michael Aspel"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="9035" end="9047" title="brain tumour" label="brain tumour"/>
<link wikidata="Q895089" start="9091" end="9104" title="tabloid press" label="tabloid press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742181" start="9449" end="9477" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital" label="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="9560" end="9572" title="radiotherapy" label="radiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q555118" start="9700" end="9711" title="living will" label="living will"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535129" start="9736" end="9758" title="Do not resuscitate" label="not to be resuscitated"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="9831" end="9841" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="9843" end="9847" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q311214" start="10010" end="10020" title="Robin Cook" label="Robin Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="10315" end="10322" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626044" start="10343" end="10356" title="Sittingbourne" label="Sittingbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q944563" start="10417" end="10430" title="Richard Coles" label="Richard Coles"/>
<link wikidata="Q502058" start="10459" end="10473" title="The Communards" label="The Communards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275686" start="10511" end="10530" title="Hillsborough Castle" label="Hillsborough Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756626" start="10750" end="10775" title="Theatre Royal, Drury Lane" label="Theatre Royal, Drury Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434448" start="10909" end="10947" title="Redcar and Cleveland" label="Redcar and Cleveland Unitary Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="10982" end="10988" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305538" start="11346" end="11363" title="Redcar Racecourse" label="Redcar Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069760" start="11427" end="11443" title="Zetland Lifeboat" label="Zetland Lifeboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058587" start="11487" end="11517" title="Northern Ireland peace process" label="Northern Ireland peace process"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="11527" end="11547" title="Houses of Parliament" label="Houses of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q23463548" start="11620" end="11637" title="Teesside Archives" label="Teesside Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838943" start="11672" end="11697" title="Trevelyan College, Durham" label="Trevelyan College, Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620254" start="11875" end="11890" title="Stormont Estate" label="Stormont Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="11916" end="11925" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q622370" start="11941" end="11950" title="docudrama" label="docudrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997985" start="11966" end="11968" title="Mo (2010 film)" label="Mo"/>
<link wikidata="Q228747" start="12089" end="12102" title="Julie Walters" label="Julie Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q350602" start="12307" end="12318" title="Adam Ingram (Labour politician)" label="Adam Ingram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369077" start="12415" end="12426" title="British Academy Television Awards" label="BAFTA award"/>
<link wikidata="Q113949" start="12472" end="12482" title="Gary Lewis (actor)" label="Gary Lewis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290373" wikidata="Q637869" url="?curid=290373" title="Arcosanti">
<text>Arcosanti is a projected experimental town with a molten bronze bell casting business in Yavapai County, central Arizona, United States, north of Phoenix, at an elevation of . Its arcology concept was proposed by the Italian-American architect Paolo Soleri (1919–2013). He began construction in 1970, to demonstrate how urban conditions could be improved while minimizing the destructive impact on the Earth. He taught and influenced generations of architects and urban designers who studied and worked with him there to build the proposed town.

== Overview ==
The goal of Arcosanti is to explore the concept of arcology, which combines architecture and ecology. The project has the goals of combining the social interaction and accessibility of an urban environment with sound environmental principles, such as minimal resource use and access to the natural environment. The project has been building an experimental town on of a land preserve, of which are owned by the Cosanti Foundation, with the remainder leased from the state.

Ground was broken in 1970 to begin construction on the site and has continued at a varying pace through the present. The most recently completed building was finished in 1989. The population has tended to vary between 50 and 150 people, many of them students and volunteers. The goal was for Arcosanti to house a population of 5,000 people. Thirteen major structures were built on the site, some several stories tall. One master plan, designed in 2001, envisioned a massive complex, called &quot;Arcosanti 5000&quot;, that would dwarf the current buildings.

Many features are particular to the design and construction of Arcosanti. For example, tilt-up concrete panels are cast in a bed of silt acquired from the surrounding area, giving the concrete a unique texture and color that helps it blend with the landscape. Many panels were cast with embedded art. Most buildings are oriented southward to capture the sun&#x27;s light and heat – roof designs admit the maximal amount of sunlight in the winter and a minimal amount during the summer. The structure built to shelter bronze-casting is built in the form of an apse, a quarter-sphere or semi-dome. The layout of all the buildings is intricate and organic, rather than the grid typical of most US cities, with the goals of maximal accessibility to all elements, a combination of increased social interaction and bonds, together with privacy for the residents.. Not all of the grounds are wheelchair accessible.

Existing structures at Arcosanti are meant to begin to provide for the complete needs of a community. They include: a five-story visitors&#x27; center/cafe/gift shop; a bronze-casting apse; a ceramics apse; two large barrel vaults; a ring of apartment residences and quasi-public spaces around an outdoor amphitheater; a community swimming pool; an office complex, above which is an apartment that was originally Soleri&#x27;s suite. A two-bedroom &quot;Sky Suite&quot; occupies the highest point in the complex; it, as well as a set of rooms below the pool, is available for overnight guests. Most of the buildings have accessible roofs.

Arcosanti has a Camp area, built by and for the original construction crew. It is used today as housing for approximately one fourth of the Arcosanti population. Camp has a small greenhouse, with easy access to gardens and large agricultural fields that, as of March 2017, were not being cultivated. Terraced greenhouses are planned along the slope of the main building site for winter plant and garden space, and to collect heat to distribute through the buildings.

Arcosanti was conceived of and remains primarily an education center, with students from around the world visiting to attend workshops, classes, and to assist with the continuing construction. Forty thousand tourists visit yearly. Tourists can take a guided tour of the site or stay overnight in guest accommodations.

Some Arcosanti funding comes from sales of bells made and cast from clay and bronze on site. Additional funding comes from donations and fees for workshops. Much of the present construction at Arcosanti has been done by workshop participants and volunteers. The average salary at Arcosanti for much of its history was barely above minimum wage.

==Workshops==

Starting in 1970, participants have come to help build Arcosanti by enrolling in workshops. During the traditional five- or six-week workshop, they attend lectures about Paolo Soleri and the principles of Arcology design while gaining hands-on learning experience by aiding construction. Although the program attracts many who are interested in art, crafts, architecture and urban planning, it is also pertinent to those interested in philosophy, sociology, science, and agriculture. Today, workshops are shorter in duration, one week or less, and focus on learning, including experiential learning. Workshops are offered in glass blowing, siltcasting, photography and other hands-on activities.

==History==
* 1956: Paolo and Colly Soleri purchased the land in Paradise Valley, Arizona, upon which the Cosanti studios were built. Their first official activities began there in 1959.
* 1969: Arcosanti – Soleri coined the term &quot;Arcology&quot; to describe his designs for ecologically sound human habitats, as elaborated in &quot;The City in the Image of Man,&quot; published by MIT Press to accompany a 1970 exhibition of the same name at the Corcoran Gallery in Washington, DC. The book develops the concept of Arcology and its design variations for different settings. Arcosanti, introduced as the last (30th) example of this exercise, was originally planned to house a relatively small population of 1,500 people. The physical construction of Arcosanti began in 1970.
* 1975–1977: Two Suns Arcosanti – The Xerox Corporation sponsored a major Soleri exhibition, featuring a series of new arcology designs that suggested a sustainable urban habitat employing alternative energy sources. The project was called &quot;Two Suns Arcology: The Cities Energized by the Sun.&quot; The Arcosanti master plan went through a major overhaul reflecting this methodology. In the following year, Plant Show venues gave Soleri additional funding to update the Arcosanti design. The projected population was increased to 5,000.
* 1978: During a festival held at the site on 7 October, a grass fire ignited in the area being used as a parking lot and over 180 cars were damaged or destroyed. This had the practical effect of ending the possibility of future music festivals at the site, due to the massive cost in damage payouts.
* 1980: Critical Mass – Ten years into the construction of the first prototype arcology, a developmental adjustment was made to gain momentum for the project. The Critical Mass concept was introduced as an incremental phase to house 10 percent of the projected population of 5,000. A series of small-scale structures, providing various amenities, were designed to support a viable community. This was intended to support the next major step, the completion of Arcosanti.
* 1988: Nightfall – The science fiction film &quot;Nightfall&quot; was filmed at Arcosanti. Residents served as extras.
* 2001: Arcosanti 5000 – Developed from the Super Critical Mass in &quot;Arcosanti 2000&quot;, with the design elements of &quot;Nudging Space Arcology&quot; added, Arcosanti 5000 features seven phases of truncated super-apse structures. It re-establishes the macro nature of this prototype arcology for 5,000 people. This design is in development, awaiting architectural and structural resolutions.
* 2009: Paolo Soleri&#x27;s 90th Birthday Celebration and Alumni Reunion – Paolo Soleri celebrated his 90th birthday at Arcosanti, joined by 300 alumni and guests for the occasion. The official schedule started on June 19; this first day was devoted to alumni. Ongoing events included Kundalini yoga, a morning bell-carving workshop, a silent auction, and an exhibition with the newest renderings of Critical Mass. The festivities continued into the night with a bronze pour in the Foundry, followed by a techno party in the Vaults, and performances on a stage in the Ceramics Apse.The birthday celebration for Soleri resumed on Saturday with attendees partaking in a gargantuan &quot;frugal soup&quot; gathering in the Vaults. Documentary film maker Geoffrey Madeja presented a short video. Tomiaki Tamura followed with a visual presentation of Paolo&#x27;s life and work and a pictograph especially choreographed for Soleri. The final performance of the night was hosted by Flam Chen, in a series of acrobatics involving dazzling fire, lights, and extreme heights.
* 2011: On July 14, 2011, the Cosanti Foundation announced that its founder Soleri had retired as its President and CEO. &quot;There are other things that I want to accomplish,&quot; said the 92-year-old Soleri. &quot;I am ready to leave the management of the Foundation and its primary project – the urban laboratory Arcosanti – to the next generation.&quot; That generation was to be led by Boston architect Jeff Stein, AIA. Stein&#x27;s proposals for Arcosanti began with: a half-dozen new apartment buildings; a canopy for the amphitheater; a renovated commercial bakery; and a storage unit for Paolo Soleri&#x27;s collection of architectural models.

Arcosanti operates under aegis of the Cosanti Foundation, a non-profit 501(c)(3) organization. The Foundation runs workshops to teach Paolo Soleri&#x27;s ideas. As of 2012, more than 7,000 participants had aided in the construction through participation in five-week workshops. Each workshop includes a Seminar Week, which covers Soleri&#x27;s background and history, as well as his concepts about arcology design. They hear lectures from different departments at Arcosanti to see how Arcosanti operates, and then spend the following weeks working at the priority project of the site.

Arcosanti is the home of the bell-making enterprise of Cosanti Originals, which sells Soleri&#x27;s sculptural wind bells to support the greater architectural project.

==In popular culture==
*Over six years in the making, the (2013) feature-length documentary film on the life of Paolo Soleri and the birth of Arcosanti, &quot;The Vision of Paolo Soleri: Prophet in the Desert&quot; (2012) features on-camera interviews with journalist Morley Safer, Will Wright, architectural critic Paul Goldberger, Catherine Hardwicke, Will Bruder, Jean-Michel Cousteau, architect Steven Holl, and Eric Lloyd Wright.
*In February 2022, Arizona hip-hop group Injury Reserve released a music video for their song &quot;Outside,&quot; shot on location at Arcosanti.

== See also ==
* Paolo Soleri Amphitheater
* Sustainable city
* Biosphere 2

== References ==
== External links ==

* Official Arcosanti website
* Arcosanti alumni address book
* Lonely Planet Travel Guide Description of Arcosanti
* The Arcosanti Work Song (c)1972
* Andrea Sachs, &quot;Arcosanti: A &#x27;City&#x27; Grows Green in the Arizona Desert&quot;, &quot;Washington Post&quot;, April 20, 2008
* Bishop, Snowden, &quot;The Genius of Arcology: The Sustainable Theories of Paolo Soleri, &quot;AZ Green Magazine&quot;, February 6, 2011
* Chris Colin, &quot;Sipping From a Utopian Well in the Desert&quot;, &quot;New York Times&quot;, September 16, 2007
* Duncan Geere, &quot;Five real-world arcologies under construction&quot;, Wired.co.uk, June 21, 2011
* Tortorello, Michael, &quot;An Early Eco-City Faces the Future&quot;, &quot;New York Times&quot;, February 15, 2012</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q637869" start="0" end="9" title="Arcosanti" label="Arcosanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="25" end="42" title="Planned community" label="experimental town"/>
<link wikidata="Q17308314" start="64" end="76" title="Bellfounding" label="bell casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q58711" start="89" end="103" title="Yavapai County, Arizona" label="Yavapai County"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="113" end="120" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="146" end="153" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q673699" start="180" end="188" title="arcology" label="arcology"/>
<link wikidata="Q447351" start="244" end="256" title="Paolo Soleri" label="Paolo Soleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q673699" start="613" end="621" title="arcology" label="arcology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="638" end="650" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="655" end="662" title="ecology" label="ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="1727" end="1731" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955008" start="2180" end="2189" title="semi-dome" label="semi-dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="2673" end="2679" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268371" start="2680" end="2687" title="casting (metalworking)" label="casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="2688" end="2692" title="apse" label="apse"/>
<link wikidata="Q917098" start="2721" end="2733" title="barrel vault" label="barrel vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q54831" start="2809" end="2821" title="amphitheater" label="amphitheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501" start="2835" end="2848" title="swimming pool" label="swimming pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="3323" end="3333" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173837" start="5095" end="5102" title="Cosanti" label="Cosanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q768446" start="5440" end="5456" title="Corcoran Gallery" label="Corcoran Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q152433" start="5806" end="5823" title="Xerox Corporation" label="Xerox Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210856" start="7133" end="7142" title="Nightfall (1988 film)" label="Nightfall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8353" end="8368" title="Geoffrey Madeja" label="Geoffrey Madeja"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8394" end="8408" title="Tomiaki Tamura" label="Tomiaki Tamura"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8578" end="8587" title="Flam Chen" label="Flam Chen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9079" end="9089" title="Jeff Stein (architect)" label="Jeff Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="9091" end="9094" title="American Institute of Architects" label="AIA"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10239" end="10288" title="The Vision of Paolo Soleri: Prophet in the Desert" label="The Vision of Paolo Soleri: Prophet in the Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q920637" start="10348" end="10360" title="Morley Safer" label="Morley Safer"/>
<link wikidata="Q309493" start="10362" end="10373" title="Will Wright (game designer)" label="Will Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150934" start="10396" end="10411" title="Paul Goldberger" label="Paul Goldberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q229598" start="10413" end="10432" title="Catherine Hardwicke" label="Catherine Hardwicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002724" start="10434" end="10445" title="Will Bruder" label="Will Bruder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374493" start="10447" end="10467" title="Jean-Michel Cousteau" label="Jean-Michel Cousteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q451141" start="10479" end="10490" title="Steven Holl" label="Steven Holl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386983" start="10496" end="10513" title="Eric Lloyd Wright" label="Eric Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q24075128" start="10556" end="10570" title="Injury Reserve" label="Injury Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132249" start="10679" end="10704" title="Paolo Soleri Amphitheater" label="Paolo Soleri Amphitheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q652360" start="10707" end="10723" title="Sustainable city" label="Sustainable city"/>
<link wikidata="Q68139" start="10726" end="10737" title="Biosphere 2" label="Biosphere 2"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290374" wikidata="Q899567" url="?curid=290374" title="Duke of Cumberland">
<text>Duke of Cumberland is a peerage title that was conferred upon junior members of the British royal family, named after the historic county of Cumberland.

==History==
The Earldom of Cumberland, created in 1525, became extinct in 1643. The dukedom was created in the Peerage of England in 1644 for Prince Rupert of the Rhine, nephew of King Charles I. When he died without male heirs, the title was created again in the Peerage of England in 1689 for Prince George of Denmark, husband of Princess Anne, younger daughter of King James II. He also died without heirs, in 1708. Neither of these men, however, was usually known by his peerage title.

The third creation, in the Peerage of Great Britain, was for Prince William, the third son of King George II. Other titles granted to Prince William were &quot;Marquess of Berkhampstead&quot;, &quot;Earl of Kennington&quot;, &quot;Viscount Trematon&quot; and &quot;Baron Alderney&quot;. Since the Prince died unmarried and without children, his titles became extinct at his death.

The titles Duke of Cumberland and Strathearn and Duke of Cumberland and Teviotdale were later created in the Peerage of Great Britain.

==List of titleholders==

===Dukes of Cumberland, first creation (1644)===

| Prince RupertHouse of Wittelsbach1644–1682&quot;&quot;
| 17 December 1619Pragueson of Frederick V, Elector Palatine and Elizabeth Stuart, Queen of Bohemia
| Never married
| 29 November 1682Westminsteraged 62
| colspan=&quot;5&quot; |Nephew of Charles I, died without legitimate issue.
|}

===Dukes of Cumberland, second creation (1689)===

| Prince GeorgeHouse of Oldenburg1689–1708&quot;&quot;
| 2 June 1653Copenhagen Castleson of Frederick III of Denmark and Sophie Amalie of Brunswick-Lüneburg
| Anne28 July 16835 children
| 28 October 1708Kensington Palaceaged 55
| colspan=&quot;5&quot; |Husband of Queen Anne, died without surviving issue.
|}

===Dukes of Cumberland, third creation (1726)===

|Prince William 
|26 April 1721Leicester House, London son of George II of Great Britain and Caroline of Ansbach
|Never married
|31 October 1765 London aged 44
| colspan=&quot;5&quot;|Also known as &quot;&quot;Butcher&quot; Cumberland&quot; and &quot;Sweet William&quot;.

===Dukes of Cumberland and Strathearn (1766)===

The sole title-holder was Prince Henry (1745–1790), third son of Frederick, Prince of Wales. He died without legitimate issue, when the dukedom again became extinct.

===Dukes of Cumberland and Teviotdale (1799)===

This double dukedom, in the Peerage of Great Britain, was bestowed on Prince Ernest Augustus (1771–1851) (later King of Hanover), the fifth son and eighth child of King George III of the United Kingdom and King of Hanover. In 1919, it was suspended under the Titles Deprivation Act 1917 and, , has not been restored to its titular heir.

== Family trees ==

==Contract bridge==
An historic fixed bridge hand is known as the Duke of Cumberland hand. The hand also appeared in Ian Fleming&#x27;s James Bond thriller, &quot;Moonraker&quot;.

==References==
==See also==
*Royal dukedoms in the United Kingdom</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q899567" start="0" end="18" title="Duke of Cumberland" label="Duke of Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21488839" start="24" end="31" title="British peerage" label="peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="84" end="104" title="British royal family" label="British royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138494" start="122" end="137" title="Historic counties of England" label="historic county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23360" start="141" end="151" title="Cumberland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991010" start="170" end="191" title="Earl of Cumberland" label="Earldom of Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11009654" start="265" end="283" title="Peerage of England" label="Peerage of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q76930" start="296" end="322" title="Prince Rupert of the Rhine" label="Prince Rupert of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="339" end="348" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q317499" start="449" end="473" title="Prince George of Denmark" label="Prince George of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="486" end="499" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Princess Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="526" end="534" title="James II of England" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375309" start="672" end="696" title="Peerage of Great Britain" label="Peerage of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q378088" start="706" end="720" title="Prince William, Duke of Cumberland" label="Prince William"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="744" end="753" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514851" start="1038" end="1071" title="Duke of Cumberland and Strathearn" label="Duke of Cumberland and Strathearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514858" start="1076" end="1109" title="Duke of Cumberland and Teviotdale" label="Duke of Cumberland and Teviotdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q76930" start="1241" end="1254" title="Prince Rupert of the Rhine" label="Prince Rupert"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621" start="1254" end="1274" title="House of Wittelsbach" label="House of Wittelsbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="1314" end="1320" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q57195" start="1327" end="1356" title="Frederick V, Elector Palatine" label="Frederick V, Elector Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q158252" start="1361" end="1395" title="Elizabeth Stuart, Queen of Bohemia" label="Elizabeth Stuart, Queen of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="1430" end="1441" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="1484" end="1493" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q317499" start="1583" end="1596" title="Prince George of Denmark" label="Prince George"/>
<link wikidata="Q155594" start="1596" end="1614" title="House of Oldenburg" label="House of Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306889" start="1649" end="1666" title="Copenhagen Castle" label="Copenhagen Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q157812" start="1673" end="1697" title="Frederick III of Denmark" label="Frederick III of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q231764" start="1702" end="1737" title="Sophie Amalie of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Sophie Amalie of Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="1740" end="1744" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q207385" start="1784" end="1801" title="Kensington Palace" label="Kensington Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="1845" end="1855" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q378088" start="1942" end="1956" title="Prince William, Duke of Cumberland" label="Prince William"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="2003" end="2029" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q76961" start="2034" end="2053" title="Caroline of Ansbach" label="Caroline of Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q699738" start="2289" end="2301" title="Prince Henry, Duke of Cumberland and Strathearn" label="Prince Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q165349" start="2328" end="2354" title="Frederick, Prince of Wales" label="Frederick, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375309" start="2507" end="2531" title="Peerage of Great Britain" label="Peerage of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q162302" start="2556" end="2571" title="Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover" label="Ernest Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16852400" start="2591" end="2606" title="King of Hanover" label="King of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="2648" end="2680" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="George III of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16852400" start="2685" end="2700" title="King of Hanover" label="King of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757778" start="2738" end="2765" title="Titles Deprivation Act 1917" label="Titles Deprivation Act 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q188966" start="2875" end="2881" title="Contract bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q82104" start="2954" end="2965" title="Ian Fleming" label="Ian Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="2973" end="2983" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q603310" start="3000" end="3009" title="Moonraker (novel)" label="Moonraker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375055" start="3047" end="3083" title="Royal dukedoms in the United Kingdom" label="Royal dukedoms in the United Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290378" wikidata="Q772304" url="?curid=290378" title="Duke of Sussex">
<text>Duke of Sussex is a substantive title, one of several royal dukedoms in the Peerage of the United Kingdom. It is a hereditary title of a specific rank of nobility in the British royal family. It has been created twice and takes its name from the historic county of Sussex in England.

First created in 1801, the title lapsed in 1843 but was revived when Queen Elizabeth II bestowed it on her grandson Prince Harry on 19 May 2018 just before his marriage to Meghan Markle, who then became the Duchess of Sussex.

==History==
A title associated with Sussex first appeared with the Kingdom of Sussex, an Anglo-Saxon kingdom that was annexed by the Kingdom of Wessex around 827, that later became part of the Kingdom of England. In charters, Sussex&#x27;s monarchs were sometimes referred to as ealdormen, or &quot;duces&quot; in Latin, which is sometimes translated as &quot;dukes&quot;.

===First creation, 1801===
The title of Duke of Sussex was first conferred on 24 November 1801 upon Prince Augustus Frederick, the sixth son of King George III. He was made Baron Arklow and Earl of Inverness at the same time, also in the Peerage of the United Kingdom. The title became extinct upon the Prince&#x27;s death in 1843.

Although the Prince was survived by a son and daughter by Lady Augusta Murray, their marriage (purportedly solemnized at St George&#x27;s Hanover Square Church, Westminster, in 1793) had been annulled for lack of royal permission under the Royal Marriages Act 1772, rendering the children illegitimate under English law and unable to inherit titles from their father. Both children by the annulled marriage died childless, rendering the issue of their inheritance moot.

On 2 May 1831, the Prince married a second time (and again in contravention of the Royal Marriages Act 1772) to Lady Cecilia Gore at Great Cumberland Place, London. Not being the Prince&#x27;s legitimate wife, Lady Cecilia could not be received at court. On 30 March 1840, she was given the title of Duchess of Inverness in her own right by Queen Victoria.

===Second creation, 2018===
In 2018, the dukedom of Sussex was recreated and granted to Prince Harry, the grandson of Queen Elizabeth II and 5th great-grandnephew of the previous duke, to mark the occasion of his wedding to Meghan Markle on 19 May 2018, who thereby became the first ever Duchess of Sussex. On his wedding day, it was announced that he would become Duke of Sussex in England, with the subsidiary titles of Earl of Dumbarton in Scotland and Baron Kilkeel in Northern Ireland. In 2019, an heir to the dukedom and the other titles, Prince Archie of Sussex, was born.

==Dukes of Sussex==

===1801 creation===

===2018 creation===

==Line of succession==

* Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex (born 1984)
** (1) Prince Archie of Sussex (born 2019)
== Family trees ==

==See also==
* Earl of Sussex

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q772304" start="0" end="14" title="Duke of Sussex" label="Duke of Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671787" start="20" end="37" title="substantive title" label="substantive title"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375055" start="54" end="68" title="Royal dukedoms in the United Kingdom" label="royal dukedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q863009" start="76" end="105" title="Peerage of the United Kingdom" label="Peerage of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737899" start="115" end="131" title="hereditary title" label="hereditary title"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="170" end="190" title="British royal family" label="British royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="265" end="271" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="360" end="372" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q152316" start="401" end="413" title="Prince Harry" label="Prince Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43890449" start="445" end="453" title="Wedding of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle" label="marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304418" start="457" end="470" title="Meghan Markle" label="Meghan Markle"/>
<link wikidata="Q676184" start="579" end="596" title="Kingdom of Sussex" label="Kingdom of Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="645" end="662" title="Kingdom of Wessex" label="Kingdom of Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="705" end="723" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q750171" start="738" end="760" title="List of monarchs of Sussex" label="Sussex&amp;#x27;s monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114438" start="791" end="800" title="ealdormen" label="ealdormen"/>
<link wikidata="Q375467" start="986" end="1011" title="Prince Augustus Frederick, Duke of Sussex" label="Prince Augustus Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="1030" end="1045" title="King George III" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862111" start="1059" end="1071" title="Baron Arklow" label="Baron Arklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326299" start="1076" end="1093" title="Earl of Inverness" label="Earl of Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q434358" start="1277" end="1296" title="Lady Augusta Murray" label="Lady Augusta Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495317" start="1340" end="1378" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Hanover Square Church" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Hanover Square Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="1380" end="1391" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q377769" start="1459" end="1483" title="Royal Marriages Act 1772" label="Royal Marriages Act 1772"/>
<link wikidata="Q377769" start="1773" end="1797" title="Royal Marriages Act 1772" label="Royal Marriages Act 1772"/>
<link wikidata="Q457644" start="1802" end="1819" title="Cecilia Underwood, 1st Duchess of Inverness" label="Lady Cecilia Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q20870265" start="1823" end="1845" title="Great Cumberland Place" label="Great Cumberland Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q457644" start="1990" end="2010" title="Duchess of Inverness" label="Duchess of Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="2031" end="2045" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q152316" start="2136" end="2148" title="Prince Harry" label="Prince Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="2172" end="2184" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43890449" start="2257" end="2268" title="Wedding of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle" label="his wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304418" start="2272" end="2285" title="Meghan Markle" label="Meghan Markle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326263" start="2470" end="2487" title="Earl of Dumbarton" label="Earl of Dumbarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q53776567" start="2504" end="2517" title="Baron Kilkeel" label="Baron Kilkeel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="2521" end="2537" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q62938826" start="2593" end="2616" title="Prince Archie of Sussex" label="Prince Archie of Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q152316" start="2718" end="2746" title="Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex" label="Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q62938826" start="2766" end="2789" title="Prince Archie of Sussex" label="Prince Archie of Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232864" start="2837" end="2851" title="Earl of Sussex" label="Earl of Sussex"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290379" wikidata="Q3776174" url="?curid=290379" title="Michael Cowpland">
<text>Michael Cowpland (born April 23, 1943 in Bexhill-on-Sea) is a British-born Canadian businessman. He is the founder and one-time president, chairman and CEO of Corel, a Canadian software company.

==Career==
===Mitel===
Cowpland worked for Bell Northern Research (later part of Nortel Networks), then MicroSystems International. In 1973, Cowpland and Terry Matthews founded Mitel Corporation, a company that developed and sold electronic PBX systems. Initial success made both founders millionaires. Sales peaked at $250 million, but over-expansion and development problems saw the company bought by British Telecom. Both Cowpland and Matthews left the company in 1984 amid disagreements with the owners.

===Corel===
Matthews went on to found Newbridge Networks, while Cowpland launched Cowpland Research Laboratory (soon Corel) in Ottawa in 1985. At first, the company sold DTP workstations, but success did not arrive until the launch of the graphics software CorelDRAW in 1989.

In 1996, he offered a challenge to Microsoft with a move into productivity software, acquiring WordPerfect from Novell for $158 million. However this was unsuccessful as Microsoft managed to get many new computers loaded with Microsoft Word along with Windows. The company also made unsuccessful forays into CAD, videoconferencing, Java, Linux and other developments.

He was investigated by the Ontario Securities Commission (OSC) in 1999–2000 regarding allegations that he had used insider information to sell $20 million in Corel shares at $8/share shortly before the company posted disappointing results. The two sides settled the case in 2003, with Cowpland agreeing to pay $575,000.
Subsequent to Cowpland&#x27;s alleged insider sale at $8, Corel shares hit a peak of $60/share around November 1999, during the height of the Linux boom when Corel&#x27;s Desktop Linux was seen to be a potential rival to Microsoft Windows.

Michael resigned as Corel&#x27;s CEO in August 2000.

After an unsuccessful attempt to buy Borland with a view to creating a critical mass for Linux, Cowpland left Corel in August 2000, and moved on to buy control of ZIM corporation, a database and mobile content company which is listed on the NASDAQ bulletin board (ZIMCF).

==Personal life==

He was married to his first wife Darlene until 1991 when they divorced. They have two daughters, Paula and Christine. In 1992, he married his second wife, Marlen Cowpland. The couple live in a $14-million 1,800-square-metre mansion in Rockcliffe Park, Ontario.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3776174" start="0" end="16" title="Michael Cowpland" label="Michael Cowpland"/>
<link wikidata="Q853012" start="41" end="55" title="Bexhill-on-Sea" label="Bexhill-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q835702" start="159" end="164" title="Corel" label="Corel"/>
<link wikidata="Q464996" start="277" end="292" title="Nortel Networks" label="Nortel Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839135" start="300" end="326" title="MicroSystems International" label="MicroSystems International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704747" start="350" end="364" title="Terry Matthews" label="Terry Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957521" start="373" end="390" title="Mitel" label="Mitel Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q204896" start="437" end="440" title="Private branch exchange" label="PBX"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="599" end="614" title="British Telecom" label="British Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017098" start="743" end="761" title="Newbridge Networks" label="Newbridge Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q835702" start="822" end="827" title="Corel" label="Corel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188610" start="875" end="878" title="Desktop publishing" label="DTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q142371" start="962" end="971" title="CorelDRAW" label="CorelDRAW"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="1017" end="1026" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247856" start="1044" end="1065" title="productivity software" label="productivity software"/>
<link wikidata="Q174757" start="1077" end="1088" title="WordPerfect" label="WordPerfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q223407" start="1094" end="1100" title="Novell" label="Novell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11261" start="1208" end="1222" title="Microsoft Word" label="Microsoft Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="1234" end="1241" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="1290" end="1293" title="Computer-aided design" label="CAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="1295" end="1312" title="Video teleconference" label="videoconferencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="1314" end="1318" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="1320" end="1325" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986586" start="1378" end="1407" title="Ontario Securities Commission" label="Ontario Securities Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132520" start="1829" end="1855" title="Corel Linux" label="Corel&amp;#x27;s Desktop Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q210075" start="2003" end="2010" title="Borland" label="Borland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4396877" start="2493" end="2517" title="Rockcliffe Park, Ontario" label="Rockcliffe Park, Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290381" wikidata="Q328071" url="?curid=290381" title="Youth for Christ">
<text>Youth For Christ (YFC) is a worldwide Christian movement working with young people, whose main purpose is evangelism among teenagers. It began informally in New York City in 1940, when Jack Wyrtzen held evangelical Protestant rallies for teenagers. Rallies were held in other U.S. cities during World War II, attracting particularly large crowds in Chicago led by Torrey Johnson, who became YFC’s first president in 1944. Johnson hired Billy Graham as YFC’s first employee. Former YFC staff have launched over 100 related Christian organizations, including the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association and World Vision.

In 1962, the original Youth For Christ International organization was renamed Youth For Christ USA; as the group launched a new, international federation of YFC ministries based in Switzerland. Today, YFC International issues a charter to over 100 nationally-led YFC organizations, each autonomous in their strategy and operations but united under a common mission to reach young people everywhere. The U.S. organization reaches young people in over 1,300 locations nationwide. The international delegation meets every three years for a General Assembly.

==History==
===Early years, 1940s–1950s===

Youth for Christ rallies were first held in New York City in 1940, organized by Jack Wyrtzen, a young ex-insurance salesman who had also played the trombone in a cavalry band. The Youth for Christ campaign idea spread to Washington, D.C., Detroit, Indianapolis and St. Louis. In 1944 Torrey Johnson, a Baptist minister and pastor of Chicago&#x27;s Midwest Bible Church, staged &quot;Chicagoland for Christ&quot; and became the most successful advocate of this type of campaign. Johnson was elected Youth for Christ&#x27;s first president, with Billy Graham as its first full-time evangelist.

Following the end of World War II, the movement expanded to other countries after Charles Templeton of Toronto, Ontario, Canada, and Torrey Johnson met with a number of youth leaders from around the United States at Winona Lake, Indiana, in 1945 to form a working group that would become an international organization. The name &quot;Youth for Christ International&quot; was adopted in 1946. By then, Youth for Christ International had approximately 300 units in the United States and over 200 overseas. The average attendance at rallies in 1946 was 350. The largest attendance at that time was 70,000 at Soldier&#x27;s Field in Chicago. Popular youth events such as Bible quizzing, which is now embraced by many Christian denominations, were originally begun as Youth for Christ activities.

Evangelist Billy Graham was the first full-time evangelist of YFCI. Graham took over Johnson&#x27;s local radio program called &quot;Songs in the Night&quot; which was broadcast over a local station in Illinois and predated YFCI. The movement also benefited by promotional publicity in the newspapers and magazines owned or influenced by William Randolph Hearst. Large rallies were held at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles, California, organized by Wilbur Nelson in 1949-1950.

===The 1960s–1980s===
In 1968, in a little publicized conference in Jamaica, representatives from different countries created the International Council of Youth for Christ with Dr. Sam Wolgemuth as the first International President. The number of nations with Youth for Christ ministry had grown to over 100. Youth for Christ continued its growth throughout the 1970s and 1980s. Different ministry models and ministry emphases were developed and refined to reach young people around the world. During this time the current Youth for Christ logo was launched and adopted by the global organization.

===The 1990s–2000s===
In 1996 a report was presented to the Youth for Christ movement in Taiwan, with recommendations for a restructuring of the organisation. In March, 2000, the Youth for Christ organisation met in Muhltal, Germany. Most of the leadership, including the International Board, attended the gathering. The Youth for Christ worldwide Staff and Leadership Conference (General Assembly) was held in Denver, Colorado later that year.

==Leadership==
Dave Brereton is the current International Director of Youth for Christ. Jacob Bland is the 10th President/CEO of Youth For Christ USA.

==References==
===Book references===
*Billy Graham, a biography, by Roger Bruns. Greenwood Press, Connecticut. 2004. (See pages 23–34 for details of Billy Graham&#x27;s involvement with YFCI.)
*Charles Templeton, Farewell to God, by Charles Templeton. McClelland &amp; Stewart, Toronto. 1996. See page 4: &quot;Youth for Christ was a North American phenomenon in the 1940s. The atmosphere was informal and upbeat - more like show business than church - and young people flocked to the meetings in their thousands in various American cities. ... When a few months later a group of us formed Youth for Christ International, I was named as one of three vice-presidents and, at our first meeting, moved that we appoint Graham our evangelist-at-large.&quot;
*Young Man on Fire: The Story of Torrey Johnson and Youth for Christ, by Mel Larson. Youth Publications, Chicago. 1943. Reprinted by Kessinger Publishing. 

==External links==
* Youth for Christ International
* Youth For Christ USA
* Youth For Christ Military Youth Ministry
* Youth For Christ around the world</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q328071" start="0" end="22" title="Youth for Christ" label="Youth For Christ (YFC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="38" end="47" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="157" end="170" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442161" start="185" end="197" title="Jack Wyrtzen" label="Jack Wyrtzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="203" end="214" title="Evangelicalism" label="evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="215" end="225" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="295" end="307" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="349" end="356" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827089" start="364" end="378" title="Torrey Johnson" label="Torrey Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q213550" start="436" end="448" title="Billy Graham" label="Billy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307630" start="561" end="598" title="Billy Graham Evangelistic Association" label="Billy Graham Evangelistic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594001" start="603" end="615" title="World Vision" label="World Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1262" end="1275" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442161" start="1298" end="1310" title="Jack Wyrtzen" label="Jack Wyrtzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827089" start="1502" end="1516" title="Torrey Johnson" label="Torrey Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q213550" start="1762" end="1774" title="Billy Graham" label="Billy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1832" end="1844" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960301" start="1893" end="1910" title="Charles Templeton" label="Charles Templeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="1914" end="1921" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590154" start="2027" end="2047" title="Winona Lake, Indiana" label="Winona Lake, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132413" start="2416" end="2436" title="Soldier&amp;#x27;s Field" label="Soldier&amp;#x27;s Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q213550" start="2615" end="2627" title="Billy Graham" label="Billy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="2942" end="2965" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q976218" start="2998" end="3012" title="Hollywood Bowl" label="Hollywood Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q105582794" start="3054" end="3067" title="Wilbur Nelson" label="Wilbur Nelson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290382" wikidata="Q882153" url="?curid=290382" title="Rheinwiesenlager">
<text>The Rheinwiesenlager (, &quot;Rhine meadow camps&quot;) were a group of 19 concentration camps built in the Allied-occupied part of Germany by the U.S. Army to hold captured German soldiers at the close of the Second World War. Officially named Prisoner of War Temporary Enclosures (PWTE), they held between one and almost two million surrendered &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; personnel from April until September 1945.

Prisoners held in the camps were designated &quot;disarmed enemy forces&quot;, not &quot;prisoners of war&quot;. This decision was made in March 1945 by SHAEF commander in chief Dwight D. Eisenhower: by not classifying the hundreds of thousands of captured troops as POWs, the logistical problems associated with accommodating so many prisoners of war mandated by the Geneva Convention governing their treatment were negated.

==Background==
By early 1945 half of almost all German soldiers taken prisoner in the West were held by U.S. forces, while the other half were taken by the British. But in late March 1945, as Allied forces struck into the heart of Germany after crossing the Rhine at Remagen, the number of German prisoners being processed caused the British to stop accepting any more prisoners into their camps. This forced the U.S. Army to take immediate action and establish the &quot;Rheinwiesenlager&quot; in the western part of Germany.

The creation of the camps was made easier because prisoners would be deemed Disarmed Enemy Forces (DEFs), a decision that had been made in March 1945 by Eisenhower. Furthermore, all captured soldiers would no longer have the rights of prisoners of war guaranteed to them under the Geneva Convention because they belonged to Nazi Germany, a state that had ceased to exist.

The camps were also established to stop any German insurgency following the surrender of Nazi Germany on 8 May 1945. The Allied leadership were worried that die-hard Nazi units might try to mount an effective guerrilla campaign against the occupation. Historian Perry Biddiscombe believed the decision to keep hundreds of thousands of men in poor conditions of the &quot;Rheinwiesenlager&quot; camps was &quot;mainly to prevent &quot;Werwolf&quot; activity&quot; in post-war Germany.

== Location of &quot;Rheinwiesenlager&quot; ==

Listings are from north to south with official number

*A4 Büderich
*A1 Rheinberg
*A9 Wickrathberg
*A2 Remagen (the Golden Mile)
*A5 Sinzig
*Siershahn
*A11 A14 Andernach
*Diez
*A13 Urmitz
*A10 Koblenz
*A8 Dietersheim
*A12 Heidesheim
*A6 Winzenheim-Bretzenheim
*A16 A17 Hechtsheim
*A7 A15 Biebelsheim
*A3 Bad Kreuznach
*C1 Ludwigshafen
*C2 Böhl-Iggelheim
*C3 C4 Heilbronn

== Camp construction ==
In the beginning, there were plans to transport the prisoners of war to Britain, where they would remain until capitulation, because there they could be better provided for. After the failure of the Ardennes offensive, 250,000 German soldiers surrendered. After the breakdown of the Ruhr pocket another 325,000 were taken prisoner. After capitulation there were 3.4 million German soldiers in the custody of the Western Allies. With such large numbers of prisoners, it seemed more logical to keep them in Germany.

The camps were founded in April 1945 and remained in existence until September. There was a similar plan for the construction of all the camps. Open farmland close to a village with a railroad line was enclosed with barbed wire and divided into 10 to 20 camps, each housing 5,000 to 10,000 men. Existing field paths were used as streets of the camp and surrounding buildings as the administration, kitchen and hospital. The prisoners of war, forced to surrender their equipment, had to dig holes in the earth by hand in which to sleep.
Soon the camps were grossly overcrowded; e.g., Camp Remagen, intended for 100,000, grew to 184,000 prisoners.

== Operations and management ==

To circumvent international laws that dealt with the handling of POWs, the surrendered forces were termed &quot;Disarmed Enemy Forces&quot; (DEF) and the term &quot;Prisoners of war&quot; (POW) was not applied. The 106th US Infantry Division became responsible for guarding the prisoners. For this task, the 106th was reinforced to a strength of 40,000 men. Due to the numbers of prisoners, the Americans transferred internal control of the camps over to the Germans. All administration such as doctors, cooks and work forces was undertaken by the prisoners. Even some armed guards were former troops from the &quot;Wehrmacht&#x27;s&quot; &quot;Feldgendarmerie&quot; and &quot;Feldjägerkorps&quot;. Known as &quot;Wehrmachtordnungstruppe&quot; (&quot;Armed Forces Order Troop&quot;), they received extra rations for preventing escapes and keeping order in the camps. In June 1946, these military police would be the last German soldiers to officially surrender their arms.

Within weeks of the camps being established, some prisoner releases were started. First to be allowed to leave were members of the Hitlerjugend and female personnel who were deemed to have no affiliation with the Nazi Party. Professional groups, such as farmers, drivers and miners, soon followed because they were urgently required to assist in the reconstruction of German infrastructure. By the end of June 1945, the camps at Remagen, Böhl-Iggelheim and Büderich had been emptied.

On 12 June 1945, the British forces took control of the two &quot;Rheinwiesenlager&quot; camps designated to be in the British Zone. On 10 July 1945, all releases were halted after SHAEF handed control of the camps over to the French. The deal was struck because the government of Charles de Gaulle wanted 1.75 million prisoners of war for forced labor in France. In total roughly 182,400 prisoners from Sinzig, Andernach, Siershahn, Bretzenheim, Dietersheim, Koblenz, Hechtzheim and Dietz were given to France. 
The British handed over those fit for work from the two camps they controlled at Büderich and Rheinberg, and released the remainder.

By the end of September 1945 nearly all the &quot;Rheinwiesenlager&quot; camps had been closed. Only a camp at Bretzenheim near Bad Kreuznach remained open until 1948, serving as a transit camp for German prisoners released from France.

== Conditions and death rates ==

Throughout the summer of 1945, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was prevented from visiting prisoners in any of the Allies&#x27; &quot;Rheinwiesenlager&quot;. Visits were started only in the autumn of 1945, at a time when most camps had closed or were closing. The Red Cross was granted permission to send delegations to visit camps in the French and UK occupation zones. On 4 February 1946 the Red Cross was allowed to send relief to those in the U.S. run occupation zone. The International Red Cross website states &quot;The quantities received by the ICRC for these captives remained very small, however. During their visits, the delegates observed that German prisoners of war were often detained in appalling conditions. They drew the attention of the authorities to this fact, and gradually succeeded in getting some improvements made.&quot; According to a report by the Army Medical Department, &quot;Some of the enclosures resembled Andersonville Prison in 1864&quot;.

Official United States statistics conclude there were just over 3,000 deaths in the &quot;Rheinwiesenlager&quot; while German figures state them to be 4,537. American academic R. J. Rummel believes the figure is around 6,000. Canadian writer James Bacque claimed in his 1989 book &quot;Other Losses&quot; that the number is likely in the hundreds of thousands, and may be as high as 1,000,000. But historians including Stephen Ambrose, Albert E. Cowdrey and Rüdiger Overmans have examined and rejected Bacque&#x27;s claims, arguing that they were the result of faulty research practices. More recently, writing in the &quot;Encyclopedia of Prisoners of War and Internment&quot;, military historian S.P. MacKenzie stated: &quot;That German prisoners were treated very badly in the months immediately after the war […] is beyond dispute. All in all, however, Bacque&#x27;s thesis and mortality figures cannot be taken as accurate&quot;.

In 1972, the official German inquiry into the numbers of deaths was published by the Maschke committee (named after its chairman, Erich Maschke). It had conducted detailed research of the camp histories on behalf of the &quot;Bundesministerium für Vertriebene, Flüchtlinge und Kriegsgeschädigte&quot; (&quot;German Federal Ministry of Displaced persons, Refugees, and War Victims&quot;). According to their results, the camps with the highest mortality were:
# Bad Kreuznach (Lager Galgenberg und Bretzenheim)
# Sinzig near Remagen
# Rheinberg
# Heidesheim
# Wickrathberg
# Büderich
An analysis of the documents of the local administrations around the camps of Remagen yields similar results.

The official death rate for Germans held by the American military was among the lowest experienced by surrendered combatants during and after the war, which is not surprising as the prisoners were held for only a few months.

==Postwar conclusions==
In 1969, Lieutenant General Leonard D. Heaton prepared and published an exhaustive report for the United States Army Medical Department that examined preventive medicine and the problems associated with housing such a large number of German prisoners after World War II. The report found a number of problems, including:

*The army had lost track of some of the locations where POWs were held.
*The number of prisoners greatly exceeded expectations.
*Organization of the camps was left to prisoners.
*Food and water supplies were insufficient during April and May 1945, though they later improved.
*The 1200 to 1500 calories ration that the Disarmed Enemy Forces were receiving in August 1945 was inadequate.
*The lack of food led in some cases to &quot;extensive malnutrition.&quot;

In 2003, historian Richard Dominic Wiggers argued that the Allies violated international law regarding the feeding of enemy civilians, and that they both directly and indirectly caused the unnecessary suffering and death of large numbers of civilians and prisoners in occupied Germany, guided partly by a spirit of postwar vengeance when creating the circumstances that contributed to their deaths.

==See also==
* List of POW camps in occupied Germany
* Bad Nenndorf interrogation centre

==References==

===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* James Bacque: Other Losses: An Investigation into the Mass Deaths of German Prisoners at the Hands of the French and Americans After World War II, Toronto: Stoddard, 1989.
* Brigitte Bailer-Galanda: Eisenhower und die deutschen Kriegsgefangenen. Jahrbuch 1997. Dokumentationsarchiv des österreichischen Widerstandes, Wien 1997.
* Rüdiger Overmans: Die Rheinwiesenlager 1945. In: Hans-Erich Volkmann (Hrsg.): Ende des Dritten Reiches – Ende des Zweiten Weltkrieges. Eine perspektivische Rückschau. herausgegeben im Auftrag des Militärgeschichtlichen Forschungsamtes, München 1995, .

==External links==
*Peace Museum Bridge at Remagen: Prisoners of War Temporary Enclosures in 1945
*Enemy Prisoners of War, Stanhope Bayne-Jones, M.D.
*International Committee of the Red Cross in WW II: German prisoners of war in Allied hands</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="108" end="123" title="Allied-occupied Germany" label="Allied-occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="132" end="139" title="West Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="147" end="156" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981889" start="165" end="189" title="German prisoners of war in northwest Europe" label="captured German soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="210" end="226" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q882153" start="245" end="281" title="Rheinwiesenlager" label="Prisoner of War Temporary Enclosures"/>
<link wikidata="Q882153" start="283" end="287" title="Rheinwiesenlager" label="PWTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="353" end="362" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q834225" start="463" end="484" title="Disarmed Enemy Forces" label="disarmed enemy forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="502" end="518" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q647033" start="566" end="590" title="Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force" label="SHAEF commander in chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="591" end="611" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594768" start="781" end="798" title="Geneva Convention on Prisoners of War (1929)" label="Geneva Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q677754" start="1085" end="1093" title="Ludendorff Bridge" label="crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="1098" end="1103" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2694984" start="1107" end="1114" title="Battle of Remagen" label="Remagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q834225" start="1444" end="1465" title="Disarmed Enemy Forces" label="Disarmed Enemy Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="1603" end="1619" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594768" start="1649" end="1666" title="Geneva Convention on Prisoners of War (1929)" label="Geneva Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1692" end="1704" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q316545" start="2169" end="2197" title="Werwolf" label="&amp;quot;Werwolf&amp;quot; activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011" start="2333" end="2341" title="Büderich (Wesel)" label="Büderich"/>
<link wikidata="Q16086" start="2346" end="2355" title="Rheinberg" label="Rheinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674301" start="2360" end="2372" title="Wickrathberg" label="Wickrathberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q486548" start="2377" end="2384" title="Remagen" label="Remagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300470" start="2390" end="2401" title="Golden Mile (POW camp)" label="Golden Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q548989" start="2407" end="2413" title="Sinzig" label="Sinzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q601446" start="2415" end="2424" title="Siershahn" label="Siershahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q490058" start="2434" end="2443" title="Andernach" label="Andernach"/>
<link wikidata="Q504031" start="2445" end="2449" title="Diez, Germany" label="Diez"/>
<link wikidata="Q555328" start="2455" end="2461" title="Urmitz" label="Urmitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104" start="2467" end="2474" title="Koblenz" label="Koblenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q285879" start="2479" end="2490" title="Bingen am Rhein" label="Dietersheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q175746" start="2496" end="2506" title="Heidesheim" label="Heidesheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q567288" start="2511" end="2533" title="Field of Misery" label="Winzenheim-Bretzenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560735" start="2543" end="2553" title="Hechtsheim" label="Hechtsheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q629005" start="2562" end="2573" title="Biebelsheim" label="Biebelsheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047" start="2578" end="2591" title="Bad Kreuznach" label="Bad Kreuznach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910" start="2596" end="2608" title="Ludwigshafen" label="Ludwigshafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22972" start="2613" end="2627" title="Böhl-Iggelheim" label="Böhl-Iggelheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q715" start="2635" end="2644" title="Heilbronn" label="Heilbronn"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="2869" end="2887" title="Ardennes offensive" label="Ardennes offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q834225" start="3977" end="3998" title="Disarmed Enemy Forces" label="Disarmed Enemy Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="4030" end="4046" title="Prisoners of war" label="Prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662633" start="4080" end="4106" title="106th Infantry Division (United States)" label="106th US Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448192" start="4510" end="4525" title="Feldgendarmerie" label="Feldgendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q938450" start="4542" end="4556" title="Feldjägerkorps" label="Feldjägerkorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q38791" start="4970" end="4982" title="Hitlerjugend" label="Hitlerjugend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="5052" end="5062" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q647033" start="5505" end="5510" title="Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force" label="SHAEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="5605" end="5622" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q727603" start="5664" end="5686" title="Forced labor of Germans after World War II" label="forced labor in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q567288" start="6082" end="6093" title="Bretzenheim" label="Bretzenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047" start="6099" end="6112" title="Bad Kreuznach" label="Bad Kreuznach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987345" start="6278" end="6325" title="International Committee of the Red Cross" label="International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="6616" end="6632" title="Allied Occupation Zones in Germany" label="occupation zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q491712" start="7203" end="7223" title="Andersonville Prison" label="Andersonville Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q334918" start="7416" end="7428" title="R. J. Rummel" label="R. J. Rummel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679999" start="7482" end="7494" title="James Bacque" label="James Bacque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168666" start="7526" end="7538" title="Other Losses" label="Other Losses"/>
<link wikidata="Q443953" start="7659" end="7674" title="Stephen Ambrose" label="Stephen Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710063" start="7676" end="7693" title="Albert E. Cowdrey" label="Albert E. Cowdrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q107918" start="7698" end="7714" title="Rüdiger Overmans" label="Rüdiger Overmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519248" start="7938" end="7952" title="Simon MacKenzie" label="S.P. MacKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q126136" start="8306" end="8319" title="Erich Maschke" label="Erich Maschke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047" start="8637" end="8650" title="Bad Kreuznach" label="Bad Kreuznach"/>
<link wikidata="Q548989" start="8688" end="8694" title="Sinzig" label="Sinzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q16086" start="8710" end="8719" title="Rheinberg" label="Rheinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q175746" start="8722" end="8732" title="Heidesheim" label="Heidesheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674301" start="8735" end="8747" title="Wickrathberg" label="Wickrathberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525213" start="9148" end="9165" title="Leonard D. Heaton" label="Leonard D. Heaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794178" start="9218" end="9255" title="United States Army Medical Department" label="United States Army Medical Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634900" start="10320" end="10357" title="List of POW camps in occupied Germany" label="List of POW camps in occupied Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q279740" start="10360" end="10393" title="Bad Nenndorf interrogation centre" label="Bad Nenndorf interrogation centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663642" start="10622" end="10645" title="Brigitte Bailer-Galanda" label="Brigitte Bailer-Galanda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11051" end="11081" title="Battle of Remagen#Remagen Bridge Peace Museum" label="Peace Museum Bridge at Remagen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290389" wikidata="Q1501617" url="?curid=290389" title="GHQ Line">
<text>The GHQ Line (General Headquarters Line) was a defence line built in the United Kingdom during World War II to contain an expected German invasion.

The British Army had abandoned most of its equipment in France after the Dunkirk evacuation. It was therefore decided to build a static system of defensive lines around Britain, designed to compartmentalise the country and delay the Germans long enough for more mobile forces to counter-attack. Over 50 defensive lines were constructed across the country. After the coastal defences, the GHQ Line was the longest and most important, designed to protect London and the industrial heart of Britain, and was considered to be the last chance of defence.

The &quot;green&quot; section of the GHQ Line ran from the northern end of the Taunton Stop Line near Highbridge in Somerset, along the River Brue, across the Mendips from Wells and following the railway from Masbury into the Wellow valley. This joined the &quot;blue&quot; line which followed the Kennet and Avon Canal to Reading. The green line continued from Bradford-on-Avon along the river to Malmesbury where it met the &quot;red&quot; line which ran to Abingdon, along the Thames to Pangbourne and rejoined the blue line at Theale. The green line continued to Avening then down the valley to Framilode, protecting the strategic areas of Bristol, Avonmouth, and Sharpness. The eastern line was to run inland of the coast from Essex to Edinburgh but was not completed. London was protected by the concentric rings of the Outer London Defence Ring.

On the section of the line in Essex, between Great Chesterford and Canvey Island, the defences were made up of around 400 FW3 type concrete pillboxes, which were part of the British hardened field defences of World War II. Well over 100 pillboxes still exist on this section in 2025, with around 40 highly visible FW3 Type 22, 24, 26, 27 and 28 boxes between the Rettendon Turnpike and Howe Green, mostly alongside the A130 road. Many more FW3s are still in place north of Chelmsford along the Chelmer Valley and towards Great Dunmow.

==See also==

* British anti-invasion preparations of World War II
*British hardened field defences of World War II
* British military history of World War II
* Coquet Stop Line
* Taunton Stop Line
*Tyne Stop Line

In other countries:

* Alpine Wall
* Maginot Line
*Siegfried Line

==External links==

* UK World War 2 Invasion Defences
* The Defence of Britain Project
* A blog post featuring a map of the line </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1501617" start="4" end="12" title="GHQ Line" label="GHQ Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="95" end="107" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q153341" start="131" end="146" title="Operation Sealion" label="German invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="153" end="165" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="205" end="211" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="222" end="240" title="Operation Dynamo" label="Dunkirk evacuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="602" end="608" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="637" end="644" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320595" start="779" end="796" title="Taunton Stop Line" label="Taunton Stop Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q684317" start="802" end="812" title="Highbridge, Somerset" label="Highbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="816" end="824" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q4250242" start="836" end="846" title="River Brue" label="River Brue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920360" start="859" end="866" title="Mendips" label="Mendips"/>
<link wikidata="Q212283" start="872" end="877" title="Wells, Somerset" label="Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388011" start="926" end="932" title="Wellow, Somerset" label="Wellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412795" start="998" end="1019" title="Kennet and Avon Canal" label="Kennet and Avon Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="1023" end="1030" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q896940" start="1062" end="1078" title="Bradford-on-Avon" label="Bradford-on-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q570153" start="1098" end="1108" title="Malmesbury" label="Malmesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q321381" start="1160" end="1168" title="Abingdon-on-Thames" label="Abingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="1180" end="1186" title="Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036324" start="1190" end="1200" title="Pangbourne" label="Pangbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519746" start="1231" end="1237" title="Theale" label="Theale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828132" start="1267" end="1274" title="Avening" label="Avening"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477996" start="1299" end="1308" title="Framilode" label="Framilode"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="1344" end="1351" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792885" start="1353" end="1362" title="Avonmouth" label="Avonmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241160" start="1368" end="1377" title="Sharpness, Gloucestershire" label="Sharpness"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="1432" end="1437" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="1441" end="1450" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q258324" start="1526" end="1551" title="Outer London Defence Ring" label="Outer London Defence Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020030" start="1599" end="1616" title="Great Chesterford" label="Great Chesterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033978" start="1621" end="1634" title="Canvey Island" label="Canvey Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q92069" start="1694" end="1703" title="Pillbox (military)" label="pillboxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095055" start="1728" end="1775" title="British hardened field defences of World War II" label="British hardened field defences of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921561" start="1940" end="1950" title="Howe Green, Chelmsford" label="Howe Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648868" start="1973" end="1977" title="A130 road" label="A130"/>
<link wikidata="Q210985" start="2027" end="2037" title="Chelmsford" label="Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560256" start="2075" end="2087" title="Great Dunmow" label="Great Dunmow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356038" start="2106" end="2156" title="British anti-invasion preparations of World War II" label="British anti-invasion preparations of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095055" start="2158" end="2205" title="British hardened field defences of World War II" label="British hardened field defences of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012319" start="2208" end="2248" title="British military history of World War II" label="British military history of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131662" start="2251" end="2267" title="Coquet Stop Line" label="Coquet Stop Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320595" start="2270" end="2287" title="Taunton Stop Line" label="Taunton Stop Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462812" start="2289" end="2303" title="Tyne Stop Line" label="Tyne Stop Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816879" start="2328" end="2339" title="Alpine Wall" label="Alpine Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q162746" start="2342" end="2354" title="Maginot Line" label="Maginot Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q154504" start="2356" end="2370" title="Siegfried Line" label="Siegfried Line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290392" wikidata="Q334147" url="?curid=290392" title="Julius Evola">
<text>Giulio Cesare Andrea &quot;Julius&quot; Evola (; 19 May 1898 – 11 June 1974) was an Italian far-right philosopher. Evola regarded his values as traditionalist, aristocratic, martial, and imperialist. An eccentric thinker in Fascist Italy, he also had ties to Nazi Germany; in the post-war era, he was an ideological mentor of the Italian neo-fascist and militant Right.

Evola was born in Rome. He served as an artillery officer in the First World War. He became a Dada artist but gave up painting in his twenties. He said he considered suicide until he had a revelation while reading a Buddhist text. In the 1920s he delved into the occult; he wrote on Western esotericism and of Eastern mysticism, developing his doctrine of &quot;magical idealism&quot;. His writings blend various ideas of German idealism, Eastern doctrines, traditionalism and the interwar Conservative Revolution. Evola believed that mankind is living in the &quot;Kali Yuga&quot;, a Dark Age of unleashed materialistic appetites. To counter this and call in a primordial rebirth, Evola presented a &quot;world of Tradition&quot;. Tradition for Evola was not Christian—he did not believe in God—but rather an eternal supernatural knowledge with values of authority, hierarchy, order, discipline and obedience.

Evola advocated for Fascist Italy&#x27;s racial laws, and eventually became Italy&#x27;s leading &quot;racial philosopher&quot;. Autobiographical remarks by Evola allude to his having worked for the &quot;Sicherheitsdienst&quot;, or SD, the intelligence agency of the SS and the Nazi Party. He fled to Nazi Germany in 1943 when the Italian Fascist regime fell, but returned to Rome under the puppet Salò government to organize a radical-right group. In 1945 in Vienna, a Soviet shell fragment paralysed him from the waist down. On trial in 1951, Evola denied being a fascist and instead referred to himself as &quot;&quot; (). Concerning this statement, historian Elisabetta Cassina Wolff wrote that &quot;It is unclear whether this meant that Evola was placing himself above or beyond Fascism&quot;.

Evola has been called the &quot;chief ideologue&quot; of Italy&#x27;s radical right after World War II, and his philosophy has been characterized as one of the most consistently &quot;antiegalitarian, antiliberal, antidemocratic, and antipopular systems in the twentieth century&quot;. Writings by Evola contain misogyny, racism, antisemitism, and attacks on Christianity and the Catholic Church. He continues to influence contemporary traditionalist and neo-fascist movements.

== Early life ==

Giulio Cesare Andrea Evola was born in Rome on 19 May 1898. His family were devout Roman Catholic aristocrats; he is sometimes described as a baron. Evola considered details about his early life irrelevant, and is noted for hiding some details of his personal life. He adopted the name Julius as a connection to ancient Rome.
Evola rebelled against his Catholic upbringing. He studied engineering at the Istituto Tecnico Leonardo da Vinci in Rome, but did not complete his course, later claiming this was because he did not want to be associated with &quot;bourgeois academic recognition&quot; and titles such as &quot;doctor and engineer&quot;. In his teenage years, Evola immersed himself in painting—which he considered one of his natural talents—and literature, including Oscar Wilde and Gabriele d&#x27;Annunzio. He was introduced to philosophers such as Friedrich Nietzsche and Otto Weininger. Other early philosophical influences included Italian man of letters Carlo Michelstaedter and German post-Hegelian thinker Max Stirner.

He was attracted to the avant-garde, and briefly associated with Filippo Tommaso Marinetti&#x27;s Futurist movement during his time at university. He broke with Marinetti in 1916 as Evola disagreed with his extreme nationalism and advocacy of industry. In the First World War, Evola served as an artillery officer on the Asiago plateau. Despite reservations that Italy was fighting on the wrong side (against Germany, which Evola admired for its discipline and hierarchy), Evola volunteered in 1917 and briefly saw frontline service the following year. Evola returned to civilian life after the war and became a painter in Italy&#x27;s Dadaist movement; he described his paintings as &quot;inner landscapes&quot;. He wrote his poetry in French and recited it in cabarets accompanied by classical music. Through his painting and poetry, and work on the short-lived journal &quot;Revue Bleue&quot;, he became a prominent representative of Dadaism in Italy. (In his autobiography, Evola described his Dadaism as an attack on rationalist cultural values.) In 1922, after concluding that avant-garde art was becoming commercialised and stiffened by academic conventions, he gave up painting and renounced poetry. Evola was a keen mountaineer, describing it as a source of revelatory spiritual experience.

Evola purportedly went through a &quot;spiritual crisis&quot; through the intolerance of civilian life and his need to &quot;transcend the emptiness&quot; of normal human activity. He experimented with hallucinogenics and magic, which, he wrote, almost brought him to madness. In 1922, at 23 years old, he considered suicide, he wrote in &quot;The Cinnabar Path&quot;. He said he avoided suicide thanks to a revelation he had while reading an early Buddhist text that dealt with shedding all forms of identity other than absolute transcendence.

Evola would later publish the text &quot;The Doctrine of Awakening&quot;, which he regarded as a repayment of his debt to Buddhism. By this time his interests led him into spiritual, transcendental, and &quot;supra-rational&quot; studies. He began reading various esoteric texts and gradually delved deeper into the occult, alchemy, magic, and Oriental studies, particularly Tibetan Tantric yoga. Historian Richard H. Drake wrote that Evola&#x27;s alienation from contemporary values resembled that of other Lost Generation intellectuals who came of age in World War I, but took an uncompromising, eccentric and reactionary form.

== Philosophy ==
Evola&#x27;s writings blended ideas from German idealism, Eastern doctrines, traditionalism, and especially the interwar Conservative Revolution, &quot;with which Evola had a deep personal involvement&quot;. He viewed himself as part of an aristocratic caste that had been dominant in an ancient Golden Age, as opposed to the contemporary Dark Age (the &quot;Kali Yuga&quot;). In his writing, Evola addressed others in that caste whom he called &quot;l&#x27;uomo differenziato&quot;—&quot;the man who has become different&quot;—who through heredity and initiation were able to transcend the ages. Evola considered human history to be, in general, decadent; he viewed modernity as the temporary success of the forces of disorder over tradition. Tradition, in Evola&#x27;s definition, was an eternal supernatural knowledge, with absolute values of authority, hierarchy, order, discipline and obedience. Matthew Rose wrote that &quot;Evola claimed to show how basic human activities—from eating and sex, commerce and games, to war and social intercourse—were elevated by Tradition into something ritualistic, becoming activities whose very repetitiveness offered a glimpse of an unchanging eternal realm&quot;. Ensuring Tradition&#x27;s triumph of order over chaos, in Evola&#x27;s view, required an obedience to aristocracy. Rose wrote that Evola &quot;aspired to be the most right-wing thinker possible in the modern world&quot;.

Evola&#x27;s philosophical work started in the 1920s with &quot;The Theory of the Absolute Individual&quot; and &quot;Phenomenology of the Absolute Individual. Teoria dell&#x27;individuo assoluto&quot; (&quot;Theory of The Absolute Individual&quot;) and &quot;Fenomenologia dell&#x27;individuo assoluto&quot; (&quot;Phenomenology of the Absolute Individual)&quot; originally constituted a single work which only for editorial reasons ended up being divided into two separate volumes, published a few years apart from each other, one in 1927 and the other in 1930, published in Turin at the publisher called &quot;Bocca.&quot; This work was different and even attack on the dominant Hegelian thought in Italy, prevailed by the works of Croce. Interesting, however, Benedetto Croce helped Evola find a publisher for his &quot;Theory and Phenomenology of Absolute Individual,&quot; this work which started in 1924 but were only published in final form in 1927 and 1930, though it is not certain to which extent Croce helped Evola. 

Evola wrote prodigiously on mysticism, Tantra, Hermeticism, the myth of the Holy Grail and Western esotericism. German Egyptologist and scholar of esotericism Florian Ebeling noted that Evola&#x27;s &quot;The Hermetic Tradition&quot; is viewed as an &quot;extremely important work&quot; on Hermeticism for esotericists. Evola gave particular focus to Cesare della Riviera&#x27;s text &quot;Il Mondo Magico degli Heroi&quot;, which he later republished in modern Italian. He held that Riviera&#x27;s text was consonant with the goals of &quot;high magic&quot;the reshaping of the earthly human into a transcendental &#x27;god man&#x27;. According to Evola, the alleged &quot;timeless&quot; Traditional science was able to come to lucid expression through this text, in spite of the &quot;coverings&quot; added to it to prevent accusations from the church. Though Evola rejected Carl Jung&#x27;s interpretation of alchemy, Jung described Evola&#x27;s &quot;The Hermetic Tradition&quot; as a &quot;magisterial account of Hermetic philosophy&quot;. In &quot;Hegel and the Hermetic Tradition&quot;, the philosopher Glenn Alexander Magee favoured Evola&#x27;s interpretation over that of Jung&#x27;s. In 1988, a journal devoted to Hermetic thought published a section of Evola&#x27;s book and described it as &quot;Luciferian.&quot;

Evola later confessed that he was not a Buddhist, and that his text on Buddhism was meant to balance out his earlier work on the Hindu &quot;tantras&quot;. Evola&#x27;s interest in tantra was spurred on by correspondence with John Woodroffe. Evola was attracted to the active aspect of tantra, and its claim to provide a practical means to spiritual experience, over the more &quot;passive&quot; approaches in other forms of Eastern spirituality. In &quot;Tantric Buddhism in East Asia&quot;, Richard K. Payne, Dean of the Institute of Buddhist Studies, argued that Evola manipulated Tantra in the service of right wing violence, and that the emphasis on &quot;power&quot; in &quot;The Yoga of Power&quot; gave insight into his mentality. Evola often relied on European sources about Asian creeds while evoking them for racist ends, Peter Staudenmaier wrote. Rose described Evola as an &quot;unreliable scholar of Eastern religions.&quot;

Evola advocated that &quot;differentiated individuals&quot; following the left-hand path use dark violent sexual powers against the modern world. For Evola, these &quot;virile heroes&quot; are both generous and cruel, possess the ability to rule, and commit &quot;Dionysian&quot; acts that might be seen as conventionally immoral. For Evola, the left-hand path embraces violence as a means of transgression.

According to A. James Gregor, Evola&#x27;s definition of spirituality can be found in &quot;Meditations on the Peaks&quot;: &quot;what has been successfully actualized and translated into a sense of superiority which is experienced inside by the soul, and a noble demeanor, which is expressed in the body.&quot; Evola attempted to construct, Ferraresi wrote, &quot;a model of man striving to reach the &#x27;absolute&#x27; within his inner self&quot;. For Evola, Furlong wrote, transcendence &quot;rested on the freeing of one&#x27;s spiritual self through the purity of physical and mental discipline.&quot; Evola wrote that the tension between a detached &quot;impulse toward transcendence&quot; and an engaged &quot;warrior spirit&quot; defined his life and work.

Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke wrote that Evola&#x27;s &quot;rigorous New Age spirituality speaks directly to those who reject absolutely the leveling world of democracy, capitalism, multi-racialism and technology at the outset of the twenty-first century. Their acute sense of cultural chaos can find powerful relief in his ideal of total renewal.&quot; Stephen Atkins summarized Evola&#x27;s philosophy as &quot;a complete rejection of modern society and its mores&quot;. Evola loathed liberalism, because, as Rose wrote, &quot;Everything he revered—social castes, natural inequalities, and sacred privileges—was targeted by liberalism for reform or abolition.&quot; Goodrick-Clarke wrote that Evola invoked Indo-Aryan tradition to advance &quot;a radical doctrine of anti-egalitarianism, anti-democracy, anti-liberalism and anti-Semitism&quot;. Rose described Evola as &quot;one of the strangest intellectual figures of his century&quot;.
=== Magical idealism ===

Thomas Sheehan wrote that &quot;Evola&#x27;s first philosophical works from the &#x27;twenties were dedicated to reshaping neo-idealism from a philosophy of Absolute Spirit and Mind into a philosophy of the &quot;absolute individual&quot; and action.&quot; Accordingly, Evola developed his doctrine of &quot;magical idealism&quot;, which held that &quot;the Ego must understand that everything that seems to have a reality independent of it is nothing but an illusion, caused by its own deficiency.&quot; For Evola, this ever-increasing unity with the &quot;absolute individual&quot; was consistent with unconstrained liberty, and therefore unconditional power. In his 1925 work &quot;Essays on Magical Idealism&quot;, Evola declared that &quot;God does not exist. The Ego must create him by making itself divine.&quot;

According to Sheehan, Evola discovered the power of metaphysical mythology while developing his theories. This led to his advocacy of supra-rational intellectual intuition over discursive knowledge. In Evola&#x27;s view, discursive knowledge separates man from Being. Sheehan stated that this position is a theme in certain interpretations of Western philosophers such as Plato, Thomas Aquinas, and Martin Heidegger that was exaggerated by Evola. Evola would later write: &quot;The truths that allow us to understand the world of Tradition are not those that can be &quot;learned&quot; or &quot;discussed.&quot; They either are or are not. We can only &quot;remember&quot; them, and that happens when we are freed from the obstacles represented by various human constructions (chief among these are the results and methods of the authorized &quot;researchers&quot;) and have awakened the capacity to &quot;see&quot; from the nonhuman viewpoint, which is the same as the Traditional viewpoint ... Traditional truths have always been held to be essentially &quot;non-human&quot;.&quot;

Evola developed a doctrine of the &quot;two natures&quot;: the natural world and the primordial &quot;world of &#x27;Being&#x27;&quot;. He believed that these &quot;two natures&quot; impose form and quality on lower matter and create a hierarchical &quot;great chain of Being.&quot; He understood &quot;spiritual virility&quot; as signifying orientation towards this postulated transcendent principle. He held that the State should reflect this &quot;ordering from above&quot; and the consequent hierarchical differentiation of individuals according to their &quot;organic preformation&quot;. By &quot;organic preformation&quot; he meant that which &quot;gathers, preserves, and refines one&#x27;s talents and qualifications for determinate functions.&quot;

===Ur Group===
Among Evola&#x27;s chief contacts was Arturo Reghini, a critic of Christianity and democracy and advocate for the ancient Roman aristocracy. Reghini welcomed the rise of Fascist Italy and sought to return to pre-Christian spirituality through the promotion of a &quot;cultured magic&quot;. Through Reghini, Evola was introduced to the French Orientalist René Guénon, a leading figure of traditionalism at the time who shared an interest in the occult. Guénon&#x27;s 1927 text &quot;Crisis of the Modern World&quot; inspired Evola to organise his thoughts around the critique of modernity, and Guénon, whom Evola called his &quot;master&quot;, would be one of the few writers Evola found worthy to debate with. In 1927, Reghini and Evola, along with other Italian esotericists, founded the &quot;Gruppo di Ur&quot; (&quot;Ur Group&quot;). The purpose of this group was to attempt to bring the members&#x27; individual identities into such a superhuman state of power and awareness that they would be able to exert a magical influence on the world. The group employed techniques from Buddhist, Tantric, and rare Hermetic texts. They aimed to provide a &quot;soul&quot; to the burgeoning Fascist movement of the time through the revival of ancient Roman religion, and to influence the fascist regime through esotericism.

Articles on occultism from the Ur Group were later published in &quot;Introduction to Magic&quot;. Reghini&#x27;s support of Freemasonry would however prove contentious for Evola; accordingly, Reghini broke himself from Evola and left the Ur Group in 1928. Reghini accused him of plagiarising his thoughts in the book &quot;Pagan Imperialism&quot;; Evola, in turn, blamed him for its premature publication. Evola&#x27;s later work owed a considerable debt to Guénon&#x27;s &quot;Crisis of the Modern World&quot;, though he diverged from Guénon by valuing action over contemplation, and the empire over the church.

===Sex and gender roles===
Evola held that &quot;just relations between the sexes&quot; involved women acknowledging their &quot;inequality&quot; with men. He quoted Joseph de Maistre&#x27;s statement that &quot;Woman cannot be superior except as woman, but from the moment in which she desires to emulate man she is nothing but a monkey.&quot; Coogan wrote, &quot;It goes almost without saying that Evola&#x27;s views on women were saturated with misogyny.&quot; Evola believed that the alleged higher qualities expected of a man of a particular race were not those expected of a woman of the same race. Evola believed that women&#x27;s liberation was &quot;the renunciation by woman of her right to be a woman&quot;. &quot;A woman&quot;, Evola wrote, &quot;could traditionally participate in the sacred hierarchical order only in a mediated fashion through her relationship with a man.&quot; He held, as a feature of his idealised gender relations, the archaic Hindu &quot;sati&quot; (suicide), which for him was a form of sacrifice indicating women&#x27;s respect for patriarchal traditions. For the &quot;pure, feminine&quot; woman, &quot;man is not perceived by her as a mere husband or lover, but as her lord.&quot; Women would find their true identity in total subjugation to men.

Evola regarded matriarchy and goddess religions as a symptom of decadence, and preferred a hyper-masculine, warrior ethos. He was influenced by Hans Blüher, a proponent of the &quot;Männerbund&quot; (&#x27;alliance of men&#x27;) concept as a model for his &quot;warrior-band&quot; or &quot;warrior-society&quot;. Goodrick-Clarke noted the fundamental influence of Otto Weininger&#x27;s book &quot;Sex and Character&quot; on Evola&#x27;s dualism of male-female spirituality. According to Goodrick-Clarke, &quot;Evola&#x27;s celebration of virile spirituality was rooted in Weininger&#x27;s work, which was widely translated by the end of the First World War.&quot; Evola denounced homosexuality as &quot;useless&quot; for his purposes. He did not neglect sadomasochism, so long as sadism and masochism &quot;are magnifications of an element potentially present in the deepest essence of eros.&quot; Then, it would be possible to &quot;extend, in a transcendental and perhaps ecstatic way, the possibilities of sex.&quot;

Evola held that women &quot;played&quot; with men, threatened their masculinity, and lured them into a &quot;constrictive&quot; grasp with their sexuality. He wrote that &quot;It should not be expected of women that they return to what they really are ... when men themselves retain only the semblance of true virility&quot;, and lamented that &quot;men instead of being in control of sex are controlled by it and wander about like drunkards&quot;. He believed that in Tantra and sex magic, in which he saw a strategy for aggression, he found the means to counter the &quot;emasculated&quot; West. Evola also said that the &quot;ritual violation of virgins&quot;, and &quot;whipping women&quot; were a means of &quot;consciousness raising&quot;, so long as these practices were done to the intensity required to produce the proper &quot;liminal psychic climate&quot;.

Evola translated Weininger&#x27;s &quot;Sex and Character&quot; into Italian. Dissatisfied with simply translating Weininger&#x27;s work, he wrote the text &quot;Eros and the Mysteries of Love: The Metaphysics of Sex&quot; (1958), where his views on sexuality were dealt with at length. Arthur Versluis described this text as Evola&#x27;s &quot;most interesting&quot; work aside from &quot;Revolt Against the Modern World&quot; (1934). This book remains popular among many &#x27;New Age&#x27; adherents.

===Race===
Evola&#x27;s views on race had roots in his aristocratic elitism. According to European studies professor Paul Furlong, Evola developed what he called &quot;the law of the regression of castes&quot; in &quot;Revolt Against the Modern World&quot; and other writings on racism from the 1930s and World War II period. In Evola&#x27;s view &quot;power and civilization have progressed from one to another of the four castes—sacred leaders, warrior nobility, bourgeoisie (economy, &#x27;merchants&#x27;) and slaves&quot;. Furlong explains: &quot;for Evola, the core of racial superiority lay in the spiritual qualities of the higher castes, which expressed themselves in physical as well as in cultural features, but were not determined by them. The law of the regression of castes places racism at the core of Evola&#x27;s philosophy, since he sees an increasing predominance of lower races as directly expressed through modern mass democracies.&quot; Evola used &quot;a man of race&quot; to mean &quot;a man of breeding&quot;. &quot;Only of an elite may one say that &#x27;it is of a race&#x27;: the people are only people, mass,&quot; Evola wrote in 1969.

In &quot;Synthesis of the Doctrine of Race&quot; (1941) (Italian: &quot;Sintesi di Dottrina della Razza&quot;), Evola provides an overview of his ideas concerning race and eugenics, introducing the concept of &quot;spiritual racism&quot;, and &quot;esoteric-traditionalist racism&quot;. The book was endorsed by Benito Mussolini.

Prior to the end of the Second World War, Evola frequently used the term &quot;Aryan&quot; to refer to the nobility, who in his view were imbued with traditional spirituality. Feinstein writes that this interpretation made the term &quot;Aryan&quot; more plausible in an Italian context and thereby furthered antisemitism in Fascist Italy. Evola&#x27;s interpretation was adopted by Mussolini, who declared in 1938 that &quot;Italy&#x27;s civilization is Aryan&quot;. Wolff notes that Evola seems to have stopped writing about race in 1945, but adds that the intellectual themes of Evola&#x27;s writings were otherwise unchanged. Evola continued to write about elitism and his contempt for the weak. His &quot;doctrine of the Aryan-Roman super-race was simply restated as a doctrine of the &#x27;leaders of men&#x27; ... no longer with reference to the SS, but to the mediaeval Teutonic knights or the Knights Templar, already mentioned in [his book] Rivolta.&quot;

Evola wrote of &quot;inferior, non-European races&quot;. He believed that military aggressions such as Fascist Italy&#x27;s 1935 invasion of Ethiopia were justified by Italy&#x27;s dominance, outweighing concerns he had about the possibility of race-mixing. Richard H. Drake wrote, &quot;Evola was never prepared to discount the value of blood altogether&quot;. Evola wrote: &quot;a certain balanced consciousness and dignity of race can be considered healthy&quot; in a time where &quot;the exaltation of the negro and all the rest, anticolonialist psychosis and integrationist fanaticism [are] all parallel phenomena in the decline of Europe and the West.&quot; Furlong wrote that a 1957 article by Evola about America &quot;leaves no doubt as to his deep prejudice against black people&quot;.

=== &quot;Spiritual racism&quot; ===

Evola&#x27;s racism included racism of the body, soul, and spirit, giving primacy to the latter factor, writing that &quot;races only declined when their spirit failed.&quot; For his spiritual interpretation of different racial psychologies, Evola was influenced by the German race theorist Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss. Like Evola, Clauss believed that physical race and spiritual race could diverge as a consequence of miscegenation. Peter Staudenmaier notes that many other racists of the time found Evola&#x27;s &quot;spiritual racism&quot; perplexing. 

Like René Guénon, Evola believed that mankind is living in the Kali Yuga of Hinduism—the Dark Age of unleashed materialistic appetites. He argued that both Italian fascism and Nazism represented hope that the &quot;celestial&quot; Aryan race would be reconstituted. He drew on mythological accounts of super-races and their decline, particularly the Hyperboreans, and maintained that traces of Hyperborean influence could be felt in Aryan men. He felt that Aryan men had devolved from these higher mythological races. Gregor noted that several contemporary criticisms of Evola&#x27;s theory were published: &quot;In one of Fascism&#x27;s most important theoretical journals, Evola&#x27;s critic pointed out that many Nordic-Aryans, not to speak of Mediterranean Aryans, fail to demonstrate any Hyperborean properties. Instead, they make obvious their materialism, their sensuality, their indifference to loyalty and sacrifice, together with their consuming greed. How do they differ from &#x27;inferior&#x27; races, and why should anyone wish, in any way, to favor them?&quot;

Concerning the relationship between &quot;spiritual racism&quot; and biological racism, Evola put forth the following viewpoint, which Furlong described as pseudo-scientific: &quot;The factor of &#x27;blood&#x27; or &#x27;race&#x27; has its importance, because it is not psychologically—in the brain or the opinions of the individual—but in the very deepest forces of life that traditions live and act as typical formative energies. Blood registers the effects of this action, and indeed offers through heredity, a matter that is already refined and pre-formed ...&quot;

=== Antisemitism ===
Writings by Evola in the late 1930s contributed arguments for Fascist Italy&#x27;s repression of its Jews. Evola encouraged and applauded Mussolini&#x27;s antisemitic racial laws in 1938, and called for a &quot;supreme Aryan elite&quot; to oppose the Jews. In some writings, Evola called Jews a virus. He said Fascism and Nazism&#x27;s final victory over Jews would end &quot;the spiritual decadence of the West&quot; and thereby &quot;re-establish genuine contact between man and a transcendent, supersensible reality&quot;. 

Evola wrote the foreword and an essay in the second Italian edition of the infamous antisemitic fabrication &quot;The Protocols of the Elders of Zion&quot; published in 1938 by the Catholic fascist Giovanni Preziosi. In it, Evola argued that the &quot;Protocols&quot;—whether or not a forgery—&quot;contain the plan for an occult war, whose objective is the utter destruction, in the non-Jewish peoples, of all tradition, class, aristocracy, and hierarchy, and of all moral, religious, and spiritual values.&quot; He was an admirer of Corneliu Zelea Codreanu, the antisemitic leader of the fascist Romanian Iron Guard. After Codreanu was assassinated in 1938 on orders from King Carol II, Evola railed against &quot;the Judaic horde&quot; that he accused of planning &quot;Talmudic, Israelite tyranny.&quot; 

Evola&#x27;s antisemitism did not emphasise the Nazi conception of Jews as &quot;representatives of a biological race&quot;, but rather as &quot;the carriers of a world view, a way of being and thinking—simply put, a spirit—that corresponded to the &#x27;worst&#x27; and &#x27;most decadent&#x27; features of modernity: democracy, egalitarianism and materialism&quot;, Wolff writes. According to Wolff, &quot;Evola&#x27;s &#x27;totalitarian&#x27; or &#x27;spiritual&#x27; racism was no milder than Nazi biological racism&quot;, and Evola was trying to promote an &quot;Italian version of racism and antisemitism, one that could be integrated into the Fascist project to create a New Man&quot;. Evola dismissed the biological racism of chief Nazi theorist Alfred Rosenberg and others as reductionist and materialistic. He also argued that one could be &quot;Aryan&quot; but have a &quot;Jewish&quot; soul, and could be &quot;Jewish&quot; but have an &quot;Aryan&quot; soul. In Evola&#x27;s view, Otto Weininger and Carlo Michelstaedter were Jews of &quot;sufficiently heroic, ascetic, and sacral&quot; character to fit the latter category. In 1970, Evola described Adolf Hitler&#x27;s antisemitism as a paranoid idée fixe that damaged the reputation of the Third Reich. But Evola never clearly acknowledged the Holocaust committed by the regimes he associated with, perpetrated in the name of racism—Furlong called this a &quot;fatal lapse that by itself ought to be enough to destroy his authority&quot;.

== Written works ==
Evola wrote more than 36 books and 1,100 articles. In some of his 1930s writings, and in works about magic, Evola used pseudonyms, including Ea (after a Babylonian god), Carlo d&#x27;Altavilla, and Arthos (from Arthurian legend).

=== Christianity ===
In 1928, Evola wrote an attack on Christianity titled &quot;Pagan Imperialism&quot;, which proposed transforming fascism into a system consistent with ancient Roman values and Western esotericism. Evola proposed that fascism should be a vehicle for reinstating the caste system and aristocracy of antiquity. Although he invoked the term &quot;fascism&quot; in this text, his diatribe against the Catholic Church was criticised by both Benito Mussolini&#x27;s fascist regime and the Vatican itself. A. James Gregor argued that the text was an attack on fascism as it stood at the time of writing, but noted that Mussolini made use of it to threaten the Vatican with the possibility of an &quot;anti-clerical fascism&quot;. Richard Drake wrote that Evola &quot;rarely missed an opportunity to attack the Catholic Church&quot;. On account of Evola&#x27;s anti-Christian proposals, in April 1928 the Vatican-backed right wing Catholic journal &quot;Revue Internationale des Sociétés Secrètes&quot; published an article entitled &quot;Un Sataniste Italien: Julius Evola&quot;, accusing him of satanism.

In his &quot;The Mystery of the Grail&quot; (1937), Evola discarded Christian interpretations of the Holy Grail and wrote that it &quot;symbolizes the principle of an immortalizing and transcendent force connected to the primordial state ... The mystery of the Grail is a mystery of a warrior initiation.&quot; He held that the Ghibellines, who had fought the Guelph for control of Northern and Central Italy in the thirteenth century, had within them the residual influences of pre-Christian Celtic and Nordic traditions that represented his conception of the Grail myth. He also held that the Guelph victory against the Ghibellines represented a regression of the castes, since the merchant caste took over from the warrior caste. In the epilogue to the book, Evola argued that the fictitious &quot;The Protocols of the Elders of Zion&quot;, regardless of whether it was authentic or not, was a cogent representation of modernity. The historian Richard Barber said, &quot;Evola mixes rhetoric, prejudice, scholarship, and politics into a strange version of the present and future, but in the process he brings together for the first time interest in the esoteric and in conspiracy theory which characterize much of the later Grail literature.&quot;

Goodrick-Clarke wrote that Evola &quot;regarded the advent of Christianity as an era of unprecedented decline&quot;, because Christianity&#x27;s egalitarianism and accessibility undermined the Roman ideals of &quot;duty, honor and command&quot; that Evola believed in.

=== Buddhism ===
In his &quot;The Doctrine of Awakening&quot; (1943), Evola argued that the Pāli Canon could be held to represent true Buddhism. His interpretation of Buddhism is intended to be anti-democratic. He believed that Buddhism revealed the essence of an &quot;Aryan&quot; tradition that had become corrupted and lost in the West. He believed it could be interpreted to reveal the superiority of a warrior caste. Harry Oldmeadow described Evola&#x27;s work on Buddhism as exhibiting a Nietzschean influence, but Evola criticised Nietzsche&#x27;s purported anti-ascetic prejudice. Evola claimed that the book &quot;received the official approbation of the Pāli [Text] Society&quot;, and was published by a reputable Orientalist publisher. Evola&#x27;s interpretation of Buddhism, as put forth in his article &quot;Spiritual Virility in Buddhism&quot;, is in conflict with the post-World War II scholarship of the Orientalist Giuseppe Tucci, who argues that the viewpoint that Buddhism advocates universal benevolence is legitimate. Arthur Versluis stated that Evola&#x27;s writing on Buddhism was a vehicle for his own theories, but was a far from accurate rendition of the subject, and he held that much the same could be said of Evola&#x27;s writings on Hermeticism. Ñāṇavīra Thera was inspired to become a bhikkhu from reading Evola&#x27;s text &quot;The Doctrine of Awakening&quot; in 1945 while hospitalised in Sorrento.

=== Modernity ===
Evola&#x27;s &quot;Revolt Against the Modern World&quot; (1934) promotes the mythology of an ancient Golden Age which gradually declined into modern decadence. In this work, Evola described the features of his idealised traditional society in which religious and temporal power were created and united not by priests, but by warriors expressing spiritual power. In mythology, he saw evidence of the West&#x27;s superiority over the East. Moreover, he claimed that the traditional elite had the ability to access power and knowledge through a hierarchical magic which differed from the lower &quot;superstitious and fraudulent&quot; forms of magic. He asserted that history&#x27;s intellectuals starting as early as ancient Greece had undermined traditional values through their questioning. He insisted that only &quot;nonmodern forms, institutions, and knowledge&quot; could produce a &quot;real renewal ... in those who are still capable of receiving it.&quot; The text was &quot;immediately recognized by Mircea Eliade and other intellectuals who allegedly advanced ideas associated with Tradition.&quot; Eliade was one of the most influential twentieth-century historians of religion, a fascist sympathiser associated with the Romanian Christian right wing movement Iron Guard. Evola was aware of the importance of myth from his readings of Georges Sorel, one of the key intellectual influences on fascism. Hermann Hesse described &quot;Revolt Against the Modern World&quot; as &quot;really dangerous.&quot; Richard Drake wrote that the book was not widely influential in the 1930s but eventually received a cult following on the extreme right and is now considered Evola&#x27;s most important work.

&quot;Ride the Tiger&quot; (1961), Evola&#x27;s last major work, saw him examining dissolution and subversion in a world in which God was dead, and rejected the possibility of any political or collective revival of Tradition due to his belief that the modern world had fallen too far into the Kali Yuga for any such thing to be possible. Instead of this and rather than advocating a return to religion as Rene Guénon had, he conceptualised what he considered an apolitical manual for surviving and ultimately transcending the Kali Yuga. This idea was summarised in the title of the book, the Tantric metaphor of &quot;Riding the Tiger&quot; which in general practice, consisted of turning things that were considered inhibitory to spiritual progress by mainstream Brahmanical society (for example, meat, alcohol and in very rare circumstances, sex, were all employed by Tantric practitioners) into a means of spiritual transcendence. The process that Evola described involved potentially making use of everything from modern music, hallucinogenic drugs, relationships with the opposite sex and even substituting the atmosphere of an urban existence for the Theophany that Traditionalists had identified in virgin nature.

During the 1960s Evola thought right-wing entities could no longer reverse the corruption of modern civilisation. E. C. Wolff noted that this is why Evola wrote &quot;Ride the Tiger,&quot; choosing to distance himself completely from active political engagement, without excluding the possibility of action in the future. He argued that one should stay firm and ready to intervene when the tiger of modernity &quot;is tired of running.&quot; Goodrick-Clarke notes that, &quot;Evola sets up the ideal of the &#x27;active nihilist&#x27; who is prepared to act with violence against modern decadence.&quot;

=== Other writings ===
Evola contributed to Giuseppe Bottai&#x27;s magazine &quot;Critica Fascista&quot; for a time&quot;.&quot; From 1934 to 1943 Evola was responsible for &#x27;Diorama Filosofico&#x27;, the cultural page of &quot;Il Regime Fascista&quot;, an influential radical fascist daily newspaper owned by Roberto Farinacci, the pro-Nazi mayor of Cremona. Evola used the page to publish international right-wing thinkers. Evola&#x27;s writings on the page argued for imperialism; leading up to Mussolini&#x27;s invasion of Ethiopia, Evola praised &quot;the sacred valor of war&quot;. During the same period he contributed to the antisemite Giovanni Preziosi&#x27;s magazine &quot;La vita italiana.&quot; 

Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke has written that Evola&#x27;s 1945 essay &quot;American &#x27;Civilization&#x27;&quot; described the United States as &quot;the final stage of European decline into the &#x27;interior formlessness&#x27; of vacuous individualism, conformity and vulgarity under the universal aegis of money-making.&quot; According to Goodrick-Clarke, Evola argued that the U.S. &quot;mechanistic and rational philosophy of progress combined with a mundane horizon of prosperity to transform the world into an enormous suburban shopping mall.&quot;

In the posthumously published collection of writings, &quot;Metaphysics of War&quot;, Evola, in line with the conservative revolutionary Ernst Jünger, explored the viewpoint that war could be a spiritually fulfilling experience. He proposed the necessity of a transcendental orientation in a warrior.

Evola translated some works of Oswald Spengler and Ortega y Gasset to Italian.

== Politics ==

In Evola&#x27;s view, a state ruled by a spiritual elite must reign with unquestionable supremacy over its populace. He cited two models of such an elite as the Nazi SS and Romanian Iron Guard, known for their violence. Evola&#x27;s philosophy, over his long career, adapted the spiritual orientation of Traditionalist writers such as René Guénon and the political concerns of the European authoritarian right, Furlong wrote. Sheehan described Evola as &quot;perhaps the most original and creative — and, intellectually, the most nonconformist, of the Italian Fascist philosophers&quot;. 

Evola had access to Benito Mussolini in the last years of the Fascist regime, and advised him on racial policies, but &quot;without much effect&quot;, Ferraresi wrote; Evola &quot;was kept (or stayed) on the sidelines of officialty, as some sort of eccentric&quot;. Evola was in charge of the cultural page of the influential fascist newspaper &quot;Il Regime Fascista&quot; for the regime&#x27;s last decade.&quot;&quot; Evola declined to join Italy&#x27;s National Fascist Party or any other party of the time; Ferraresi wrote that Evola&#x27;s &quot;lofty nonconformism&quot; and &quot;imperial paganism&quot; did not fit well in a party that would make the Catholic Church a regime pillar. Evola&#x27;s lack of party membership was later emphasized by admirers to distance him from the regime. 

Autobiographical remarks by Evola allude to his having worked for the &quot;Sicherheitsdienst&quot;, the intelligence agency of the SS and the Nazi Party. With its help, he fled to Berlin in Nazi Germany when the Italian Fascist regime fell in 1943. In May 1951, Evola was arrested in Italy and charged with promoting the revival of the Fascist Party, and of glorifying Fascism. Evola declared that he was not a Fascist but was instead &quot;&quot; (). He was acquitted of all charges.

===Fascist Italy===
Evola experienced Mussolini&#x27;s March on Rome in 1922 and was intrigued by fascism. He would praise fascism for &quot;its attempt to refashion the Italian people into a severe, military mold&quot;, in Ferraresi&#x27;s words, but would criticize any concessions to &quot;democratic&quot; pressures. Atkins wrote that &quot;Evola was critical of the Fascist regime because it was not fascist enough.&quot; 

Evola applauded Mussolini&#x27;s anti-bourgeois orientation and his goal of making Italian citizens into hardened warriors, but criticised Fascist populism, party politics, and elements of leftism that he saw in the fascist regime. Evola saw Mussolini&#x27;s Fascist Party as possessing no cultural or spiritual foundation. He was passionate about infusing it with these elements in order to make it suitable for his ideal conception of &quot;Übermensch&quot; culture which, in Evola&#x27;s view, characterised the imperial grandeur of pre-Christian Europe.

Evola applauded the fascist motto &quot;Everything in the State, nothing outside the State, nothing against the State&quot;. Sheehan described Evola as &quot;an ardent supporter of Mussolini&quot;. But his Traditionalist ethos rejected nationalism, which he viewed as a conception of the modern West and not of a Traditional hierarchical social arrangement. He stated that to become &quot;truly human&quot;, one would have to &quot;overcome brotherly contamination&quot; and &quot;purge oneself&quot; of the feeling that one is united with others &quot;because of blood, affections, country or human destiny&quot;.

Evola argued that the regime should dictate to the Catholic Church, not negotiate with it, and warned in &quot;Critica fascista&quot; in 1927 that allowing the church independent power would make fascism a &quot;laughable revolution&quot;. In 1928, he wrote that fascists had made &quot;the most absurd of all errors&quot; through entente with Christianity and the church. He also opposed the futurism that Italian society was aligned with, along with the &quot;plebeian&quot; nature of the movement. He opined that Mussolini should have disbanded his party after 1922 and become a loyal advisor to King Victor Emmanuel III instead. Accordingly, Evola launched the journal &quot;La Torre&quot; (The Tower) in 1930, to advocate for a more elitist social order. He wrote in &quot;La Torre&quot;, &quot;We would like a fascism more radical, more intrepid, a truly absolute fascism, made of pure force, inaccessible to any compromise.&quot; Evola&#x27;s ideas were poorly received by the contemporary fascist mainstream. Evola wrote that Mussolini&#x27;s censors had repressed &quot;La Torre&quot;, which lasted five months and ten issues; in Drake&#x27;s words, Italian fascism &quot;had as little tolerance for opposition on the right as on the left&quot;. Regardless, a few years later in 1934, Evola was put in charge of the cultural page of the influential radical fascist newspaper &quot;Il Regime Fascista&quot;, a position he held until 1943.&quot;&quot;

Scholars disagree about why Benito Mussolini embraced racist ideology in 1938—some have written that Mussolini was more motivated by political considerations than ideology when he introduced antisemitic legislation in Italy. Other scholars have rejected the argument that the racial ideology of Italian fascism could be attributed solely to Nazi influence. A more recent interpretation is that Mussolini was frustrated by the slow pace of fascist transformation and, by 1938, had adopted increasingly radical measures including a racial ideology. Aaron Gillette has written that &quot;Racism would become the key driving force behind the creation of the new fascist man, the &quot;uomo fascista&quot;.&quot; With the passage of the Italian racial laws in 1938 and Italy&#x27;s campaign against Jews, Evola demanded measures to counter &quot;the Jewish menace&quot;, through &quot;discrimination and selection&quot;. Echoing Evola&#x27;s writings, Mussolini declared in 1938 that &quot;The population of Italy today is of Aryan origin and Italy&#x27;s civilization is Aryan.&quot;

Mussolini read Evola&#x27;s &quot;Synthesis of the Doctrine of Race&quot; in August 1941, and met with Evola to offer him his praise. Evola later recounted that Mussolini had found in his work a uniquely Roman form of Fascist racism distinct from that found in Nazi Germany. With Mussolini&#x27;s backing, Evola started preparing the launch of a minor journal &quot;Sangue e Spirito&quot; (Blood and Spirit) which never appeared. While not always in agreement with German racial theorists, Evola travelled to Germany in February 1942 and obtained support for German collaboration on &quot;Sangue e Spirito&quot; from &quot;key figures in the German racial hierarchy.&quot; Fascists appreciated the palingenetic value of Evola&#x27;s &quot;proof&quot; &quot;that the true representatives of the state and the culture of ancient Rome were people of the Nordic race.&quot; Evola eventually became Italy&#x27;s leading racial philosopher. Mussolini directed the Ministry of Popular Culture to be guided by &quot;Evola&#x27;s racist thought&quot;.

Evola blended Sorelianism with Mussolini&#x27;s eugenics agenda. Evola has written that &quot;The theory of the Aryo-Roman race and its corresponding myth could integrate the Roman idea proposed, in general, by fascism, as well as give a foundation to Mussolini&#x27;s plan to use his state as a means to elevate the average Italian and to enucleate in him a new man.&quot;

===Third Reich===

Finding Italian fascism &quot;too compromising&quot; (in Goodrick-Clarke&#x27;s words), Evola sought more recognition in Nazi Germany. He began lecturing there in 1934. He described Berlin&#x27;s Herrenklub, associated with the Conservative Revolution aristocracy, as his &quot;natural habitat&quot;. His considerable amount of time in Germany in 1937 and 1938 included a series of lectures to the German–Italian Society in 1938. Evola appreciated what he called Nazism&#x27;s &quot;attempt to create a kind of new political-military Order with precise qualifictions of race&quot;, and believed that the Nazis&#x27; brand of fascism had taken its traditionalist thinkers seriously. Evola thought far more highly of Adolf Hitler than Mussolini, although he had reservations about Hitler&#x27;s &quot;völkisch&quot; nationalism. Evola wanted a spiritual unity between Italy and Germany and an Axis victory in Europe. (Martin A. Lee calls Evola an &quot;Italian Nazi philosopher&quot; in &quot;The Beast Reawakens&quot;.) 

Evola admired Heinrich Himmler, whom he knew personally. Evola took issue with Nazi populism and biological materialism. SS authorities initially rejected Evola&#x27;s ideas as supranational and aristocratic though he was better received by members of the conservative revolutionary movement. The Nazi Ahnenerbe reported that many considered his ideas to be pure &quot;fantasy&quot; which ignored &quot;historical facts&quot;. Himmler&#x27;s Schutzstaffel (&quot;SS&quot;) kept a dossier on Evola—dossier document AR-126 described his plans for a &quot;Roman-Germanic Imperium&quot; as &quot;utopian&quot; and described him as a &quot;reactionary Roman,&quot; whose goal was an &quot;insurrection of the old aristocracy against the modern world.&quot; The document recommended that the SS &quot;stop his effectiveness in Germany&quot; and provide him with no support, particularly because of his desire to create a &quot;secret international order&quot;.

Despite this opposition, Evola was able to establish political connections with pan-Europeanist elements inside the Reich Security Main Office. He subsequently ascended to the inner circles of Nazism as the influence of pan-European advocates overtook that of Völkisch proponents, due to military contingencies. Evola wrote the article &quot;Reich and Imperium as Elements in the New European Order&quot; for the Nazi-backed journal &quot;European Review&quot;. He spent World War II working for the Sicherheitsdienst. The Sicherheitsdienst bureau Amt VII, a Reich Security Main Office research library, helped Evola acquire arcane occult and Masonic texts.

Mussolini was deposed and imprisoned in 1943, and Italy surrendered to the Allies. At this point, Evola fled to Berlin in Nazi Germany with the help of the Sicherheitsdienst. Evola was one of the first people to greet Mussolini when the latter was broken out of prison by Otto Skorzeny in September 1943. According to Sheehan, Adolf Hitler also met with Evola and other fascist intellectuals. After the meeting with Mussolini, at Hitler&#x27;s Wolf&#x27;s Lair, Evola involved himself in Mussolini&#x27;s Italian Social Republic (the Republic of Salò, a Nazi puppet regime). Evola returned to Rome in 1943 to organize a radical right group called the Movimento per la Rinascita dell&#x27;Italia. He fled to Vienna in 1944, barely avoiding capture by the Americans when the Allies took Rome. 

In Vienna, Evola studied Masonic and Jewish documents confiscated by the Nazis, and worked with the SS and fascist leaders on recruiting an army to resist the Allies&#x27; advances. It was Evola&#x27;s custom to walk around the city during bombing raids in order to better &quot;ponder his destiny&quot;. During one such aerial bombardment in 1945, a shell fragment damaged his spinal cord and he became paralysed from the waist down, remaining so for the rest of his life.

About the alliance during World War II between Allies and the Soviet Union, Evola wrote: &quot;The democratic powers repeated the error of those who think they can use the forces of subversion for their own ends without cost. They do not know that, by a fatal logic, when exponents of two different grades of subversion meet or cross paths, the one representing the more developed grade will take over in the end.&quot;

=== Postwar and later years ===
Evola, partially paralysed after the Soviet bombing raid in Vienna in 1945, returned to postwar Italy in 1948, after being treated for his injuries in Austria. 

Ferraresi wrote that Evola was &quot;&quot;the&quot; guru&quot; for generations of radical right Italian militants, through his writings and youth groups. &quot;The political model Evola selected after 1945 was neither Mussolini nor Hitler,&quot; Wolff writes; instead, in post-World War II conversations with neo-fascists, Evola would reference the Nazi SS, the Spanish Falange, Codreanu&#x27;s Legionary Movement, Knut Hamsun, Vidkun Quisling, Léon Degrelle, Drieu La Rochelle, Robert Brasillach, Maurice Bardèche, Charles Maurras, Plato (particularly &quot;The Republic&quot;), Dante (particularly &quot;De Monarchia&quot;), Joseph de Maistre, Donoso Cortés, Otto von Bismarck, Klemens von Metternich, Gaetano Mosca, Vilfredo Pareto, and Robert Michels. He wrote for publications of the neo-fascist Italian Social Movement (MSI) but never joined the party. Adkins wrote that the MSI &quot;claimed him as their philosopher-king, but he barely tolerated their attention&quot;. Wolff described him as a &quot;freelance political commentator&quot;. 

Evola continued his work in the domain of esotericism, writing a number of books and articles on sex magic and various other esoteric studies, including &quot;The Yoga of Power: Tantra, Shakti, and the Secret Way&quot; (1949), &quot;Eros and the Mysteries of Love: The Metaphysics of Sex&quot; (1958), and &quot;Meditations on the Peaks: Mountain Climbing as Metaphor for the Spiritual Quest&quot; (1974). He also wrote his two explicitly political books &quot;Men Among the Ruins: Post-War Reflections of a Radical Traditionalist&quot; (1953), &quot;Ride the Tiger: A Survival Manual for the Aristocrats of the Soul&quot; (1961), and his autobiography, &quot;The Path of Cinnabar&quot; (1963). He also expanded upon critiques of American civilisation and materialism, as well as increasing American influence in Europe, collected in the posthumous anthology &quot;Civiltà Americana&quot;. 

Evola was arrested along with thirty-six others in April 1951 by the Political Office of the Rome Police Headquarters and charged on suspicion that he was an ideologist of the militant neofascist organisation Fasci di Azione Rivoluzionaria (FAR), after attempted bombings in 1949–50 were linked to Evola&#x27;s circle. Evola&#x27;s charges were glorifying fascism and promoting the revival of the Fascist Party. His lawyer was Francesco Carnelutti. He was carried into the courtroom on a stretcher. Defending himself at trial, Evola said that his work belonged to a long tradition of anti-democratic writers who could be linked to fascism—at least fascism interpreted according to certain Evolian criteria—but who could not be identified with the Fascist regime under Mussolini. Evola then denied being a fascist and instead referred to himself as &quot;&quot; (). Concerning this statement, historian Elisabetta Cassina Wolff wrote that it is unclear whether this meant he was placing himself &quot;above or beyond Fascism&quot;. The judges, who themselves had served during the fascist era, ruled that Evola could not be held responsible for the crimes. Evola was acquitted of all charges on 20 November 1951. Of the 36 other defendants, 13 received prison sentences.

While trying to distance himself from Nazism, Evola wrote in 1955 that the Nuremberg trials were a farce. Evola also made an effort to differentiate his caste based aristocratic state from totalitarianism, preferring the concept of the &quot;organic&quot; state, which he put forth in his text &quot;Men Among the Ruins,&quot; as well as in his &quot;autodifesa&quot;. Evola sought to develop a strategy for the implementation of a &quot;conservative revolution&quot; in post-World War II Europe. He rejected nationalism, advocating instead for a European &quot;Imperium&quot;, which could take various forms according to local conditions, but should be &quot;organic, hierarchical, anti-democratic, and anti-individual&quot;. Evola endorsed Francis Parker Yockey&#x27;s neo-fascist manifesto &quot;Imperium&quot;, but said Yockey had a &quot;superficial&quot; understanding of what was immediately possible. Evola believed that his conception of neo-fascist Europe could best be implemented by an elite of &quot;superior&quot; men who operated outside normal politics. He dreamt that such a &quot;New Order&quot; of aristocracy might seize power from above during a democratic crisis.

Evola&#x27;s occult ontology exerted influence over post-war neo-fascism. After 1945, Evola was considered the most important Italian theoretician of the conservative revolutionary movement and the &quot;chief ideologue&quot; of Italy&#x27;s post-war radical right. Ferraresi wrote that &quot;Evola&#x27;s thought was the &#x27;essential mortar&#x27; that held together generations of militants&quot;. According to Jacob Christiansen Senholt, Evola&#x27;s most significant post-war political texts are &quot;Orientamenti&quot; and &quot;Men Among the Ruins&quot;. In the opening phrase in the first edition of &quot;Men Among the Ruins&quot;, Evola said: &quot;Our adversaries would undoubtedly want us, in a Christian spirit, under the banner of progress or reform, having been struck on one cheek to turn the other. Our principle is different: &quot;Do to others what they would like to do to you: but do it to them first.&quot; 

In &quot;Men Among the Ruins&quot;, Evola defines the Fourth Estate as being the last stage in the cyclical development of the social elite, the first beginning with a spiritual elite of divine right. Expanding the concept in an essay in 1950, the Fourth State according to Evola would be characterised by &quot;the collectivist civilization... the communist society of the faceless-massman&quot;.

&quot;Orientamenti&quot; was a text against &quot;national fascism&quot;—instead, it advocated for a European Community modelled on the principles of the Nazis&#x27; Waffen-SS, which had mustered international forces. The Italian neo-fascist group Ordine Nuovo adopted &quot;Orientamenti&quot; as a guide for action in postwar Italy. Evola praised Ordine Nouvo as the only Italian group that had &quot;doctrinally had held firm without descending to compromise&quot;. The European Liberation Front of Francis Parker Yockey called Evola &quot;Italy&#x27;s greatest living authoritarian philosopher&quot; in the April 1951 issue of its publication &quot;Frontfighter&quot;. Giuliano Salierni, who was an activist in the neo-Fascist Italian Social Movement during the early 1950s, later recalled Evola&#x27;s calls to violence, along with Evola&#x27;s reminiscences about Nazis such as Joseph Goebbels.

==Personal life==
Evola was childless and never married, but as a young man he had a relationship with Sibilla Aleramo. He spent his postwar years in his Rome apartment. He died on 11 June 1974 in Rome from congestive heart failure. His ashes, per his will, were deposited in a hole cut in a glacier on Monte Rosa in the Pennine Alps.

== Influence on the far-right ==
At one time Italian Fascist leader Benito Mussolini, the Nazi Grail seeker Otto Rahn, and the Romanian fascist sympathiser and religious historian Mircea Eliade admired Evola. After World War II, Evola&#x27;s writings continued to influence many European far-right political, racist and neo-fascist movements. He is widely translated in French, Spanish, partly in German, and mostly in Hungarian (the largest number of his translated works). Franco Ferraresi described Evola in 1987 as &quot;possibly the most important intellectual figure for the Radical Right in contemporary Europe&quot; but &quot;virtually unknown outside the Right&quot;. He is described by Stanley Payne (in 1996) and Stephen Atkins (2004) as the leading neo-fascist intellectual in Europe until his death in 1974. Giorgio Almirante referred to him as &quot;our Marcuse—only better.&quot; But outside Italy, France and Germany, Evola was not well known until around 1990 when he received wider English language publication, according to Furlong.

Richard Drake wrote that Evola advocated for terrorism. Peter Merkl noted that Evola&#x27;s advocacy of force was part of his appeal to the radical right. Wolff wrote: &quot;The debate around his &#x27;moral and political&#x27; responsibility for terrorist actions perpetrated by right-wing extremist groups in Italy between 1969 and 1980 began as soon as Evola died in 1974 and have not yet come to an end.&quot;

According to one leader of the neofascist organization Ordine Nuovo, &quot;Our work since 1953 has been to transpose Evola&#x27;s teachings into direct political action.&quot; Neofascist terrorists Franco Freda and Mario Tuti reprinted Evola&#x27;s most militant texts. Radicals of the Nuclei Armati Rivoluzionari (NAR) helped spread Evola&#x27;s philosophy in far-right circles abroad after fleeing Italy in the wake of the terrorist bombing of the Bologna railway station in 1980; some influenced Britain&#x27;s National Front. Roberto Fiore and his colleagues in the early 1980s helped the National Front″s &quot;Political Soldiers&quot; forge a militant elitist philosophy based on Evola&#x27;s &quot;most militant tract&quot;, &quot;The Aryan Doctrine of Battle and Victory&quot;. &quot;The Aryan Doctrine&quot; called for a &quot;Great Holy War&quot; that would be fought for spiritual renewal and fought in parallel to the physical &quot;Little Holy War&quot; against perceived enemies.

Umberto Eco mocked Evola; his 1995 essay &quot;Ur-Fascism&quot; referred to Evola as the &quot;most influential theoretical source of the theories of the new Italian right&quot;, and as &quot;one of the most respected fascist gurus&quot;.

The far-right English politician and orator Jonathan Bowden gave lectures on Evola&#x27;s philosophy. The French far-right figure Alain de Benoist has cited Evola as an influence.

Goodrick-Clarke noted Evola&#x27;s pessimistic invocation of the Kali Yuga as an influence on esoteric Nazism and Aryan cults. 

Evola&#x27;s &quot;Heidnischer Imperialismus&quot; (1933) was translated by the Russian radical-right Eurasianist Aleksandr Dugin in 1981. Dugin has said that in his youth he was &quot;deeply inspired&quot; by Guénon&#x27;s and Evola&#x27;s Traditionalism.

The Greek neo-Nazi party Golden Dawn includes his works on its suggested reading list, and the leader of Jobbik, the Hungarian nationalist party, admires Evola and wrote an introduction to his works.

References to Evola are widespread in the alt-right movement. Steve Bannon has called him an influence.

== Works ==
;Books
*&quot;L&#x27;individuo e il divenire del mondo&quot; (1926; &quot;The Individual and the Becoming of the World&quot;).
*&quot;L&#x27;uomo come potenza&quot; (1925; &quot;Man as Potency&quot;).
*&quot;Teoria dell&#x27;individuo assoluto&quot; (1927; &quot;The Theory of the Absolute Individual&quot;).
*&quot;Imperialismo pagano&quot; (1928; second edition 1978)English translation: 
*&quot;Fenomenologia dell&#x27;individuo assoluto&quot; (1930; &quot;The Phenomenology of the Absolute Individual&quot;).
*&quot;La tradizione ermetica&quot; (1931; third edition 1971)English translation: 
*&quot;Maschera e volto dello spiritualismo contemporaneo: Analisi critica delle principali correnti moderne verso il sovrasensibile&quot; (1932)English translation: And: 
*&quot;Heidnischer Imperialismus&quot; (1933)English translations: And: 
*&quot;Rivolta contro il mondo moderno&quot; (1934; second edition 1951; third edition 1970)English translation: 
*&quot;Il Mistero del Graal e la Tradizione Ghibellina dell&#x27;Impero&quot; (1937)English translation: 
*&quot;Il mito del sangue. Genesi del Razzismo&quot; (1937; second edition 1942)English translation: 
*&quot;Sintesi di dottrina della razza&quot; (1941)English translation: 
*&quot;Indirizzi per una educazione razziale&quot; (1941)English translations: 
*&quot;La dottrina del risveglio&quot; (1943)English translation: 
*&quot;Lo Yoga della potenza&quot; (1949; second edition 1968)English translation: 
*&quot;Gli uomini e le rovine&quot; (1953; second edition 1972)English translation: 
*&quot;Metafisica del sesso&quot; (1958; second edition 1969)English translations: 1983–1991: 
*&quot;L&#x27;operaio nel pensiero di Ernst Jünger&quot; (1960; &quot;The Worker in the Thought of Ernst Jünger&quot;). Excerpts in English
*&quot;Cavalcare la tigre&quot; (1961)English translation: 
*&quot;Il cammino del cinabro&quot; (1963; second edition 1972)English translation: 
*&quot;Il Fascismo. Saggio di una analisi critica dal punto di vista della Destra&quot; (1964; second edition 1970)English translation: And: 
;Collections
*&quot;Saggi sull&#x27;idealismo magico&quot; (1925; &quot;Essays on Magical Idealism&quot;).
*&quot;Introduzione alla magia&quot; (1927–1929; 1971)English translation: And: And: 
*&quot;L&#x27;arco e la clava&quot; (1968)English translation: 
*&quot;Ricognizioni. Uomini e problemi&quot; (1974)English translation: 
*&quot;Meditazioni delle vette&quot; (1974)English translation: 
*&quot;Metafisica della Guerra&quot; (1996)English translation: 
*&quot;Jobboldali fiatalok kézikönyve&quot; (2012, collection of Hungarian translations of periodicals by Evola, published by Kvintesszencia Kiadó)English translation: 
*

;Articles and pamphlets
* &quot;L&#x27;Homme et son devenir selon le Vedânta.&quot; (1925&quot;;&quot; Review of Guenon&#x27;s work published in 1925 in &quot;L&#x27;Idealismo Realistico&quot;).
* &quot;Il superamento dello spiritismo&quot; (1928) Il Lavoro d’Italia,11 April.
*&quot;Tre aspetti del problema ebraico&quot; (1936)Originally published by &quot;Edizioni Mediterranee&quot; in 1936, this was also published in Italian by &quot;Edizioni di Ar&quot;, in 1978. English translation: 
* &quot;La tragedia della &#x27;Guardia di Ferro -&quot; (1938) English translation&quot;: .&quot; Originally published in &quot;La vita italiana 309,&quot; Dec 1938.
* &quot;On the Secret of Decay&quot; (1938)Originally written in German and published by the &quot;Deutsches Volkstum&quot; magazine n. 14&quot;.&quot;
* &quot;Una vittima d&#x27;Israele&quot; (1939). Published in January 1939 in &quot;La vita Italiana.&quot;
*&quot;Orientamenti, undici punti&quot; (1950)English translation: 
*&quot;L’emancipazione dell’islam è una strada verso il comunismo&quot; (1957) - English translation: &quot;The emancipation of Islam is a path towards communism.&quot; Published on &quot;Meridiano d’Italia&quot; newspaper&quot;.&quot; It appears this article was reprinted in the journal &quot;Roma&quot; in 1958.
*&quot;Il vampirismo ed i vampiri&quot; (1973)English: &quot;Vampirism and Vampires.&quot; Written for journal &quot;Roma in&quot; September 1973.
;Works edited and/or translated by Evola
*&quot;Tao Tê Ching: Il libro della via e della virtù&quot; (1923; &quot;The Book of the Way and Virtue&quot;). Second edition: &quot;Il libro del principio e della sua azione&quot; (1959; &quot;The Book of the Primary Principle and of Its Action&quot;).
*&quot;La guerra occulta: armi e fasi dell&#x27;attacco ebraico-massonico alla tradizione europea&quot; by Emmanuel Malynski and Léon de Poncins (1939)English translation: 

== See also ==
*Mysticism
*Traditionalist School
*Western esotericism

== References ==
Notes
Works cited
* Aprile, Mario (1984), &quot;Julius Evola: An Introduction to His Life and Work,&quot; &quot;The Scorpion&quot; No. 6 (Winter/Spring): 20–21.
*
* Coletti, Guillermo (1996), &quot;Against the Modern World: An Introduction to the Work of Julius Evola,&quot; &quot;Ohm Clock&quot; No. 4 (Spring): 29–31.
* De Benoist, Alain. &quot;Julius Evola, réactionnaire radical et métaphysicien engagé. Analyse critique de la pensée politique de Julius Evola,&quot; &quot;Nouvelle Ecole&quot;, No. 53–54 (2003), pp. 147–69.
* 
* Drake, Richard H. (1988), &quot;Julius Evola, Radical Fascism and the Lateran Accords,&quot; &quot;The Catholic Historical Review&quot; 74: 403–419.
* Drake, Richard H. (1989), &quot;The Children of the Sun,&quot; in &quot;The Revolutionary Mystique and Terrorism in Contemporary Italy&quot; (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, ), 114–134.
*
*
*
* 
*
*
* Griffin, Roger (1985), &quot;Revolts against the Modern World: The Blend of Literary and Historical Fantasy in the Italian New Right,&quot; &quot;Literature and History&quot; 11 (Spring): 101–123.
* Griffin, Roger (1995) (ed.), &quot;Fascism&quot; (Oxford University Press, ), 317–318.
* Hans Thomas Hakl, &quot;La questione dei rapporti fra Julius Evola e Aleister Crowley&quot;, in: &quot;Arthos&quot; 13, Pontremoli, Centro Studi Evoliani, 2006, pp. 269–289.
* Hansen, H. T. (1994), &quot;A Short Introduction to Julius Evola,&quot; &quot;Theosophical History&quot; 5 (January): 11–22; reprinted as introduction to Evola, &quot;Revolt Against the Modern World&quot;, (Vermont: Inner Traditions, 1995).
* Hansen, H. T. (2002), &quot;Julius Evola&#x27;s Political Endeavors,&quot; introduction to Evola, &quot;Men Among the Ruins&quot;, (Vermont: Inner Traditions).
*
*
*
* Rees, Philip (1991), &quot;Biographical Dictionary of the Extreme Right Since 1890&quot; (New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, ), 118–120.
*
*
*
* Stucco, Guido (1992), &quot;Translator&#x27;s Introduction,&quot; in Evola, &quot;The Yoga of Power&quot; (Vermont: Inner Traditions), ix–xv.
* Stucco, Guido (1994), &quot;Introduction,&quot; in Evola, &quot;The Path of Enlightenment According to the Mithraic Mysteries&quot;, &quot;Zen: The Religion of the Samurai&quot;, &quot;Rene Guenon: A Teacher for Modern Times&quot;, and &quot;Taoism: The Magic, the Mysticism&quot; (Edmonds, WA: Holmes Publishing Group).
*
* Wasserstrom, Steven M. (1995), &quot;The Lives of Baron Evola,&quot; &quot;Alphabet City&quot; 4 + 5 (December): 84–89.
*
* 
==Further reading==

* 
== External links ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334147" start="0" end="20" title="Julius Evola" label="Giulio Cesare Andrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q334147" start="27" end="33" title="Julius Evola" label="Julius"/>
<link wikidata="Q334147" start="40" end="45" title="Julius Evola" label="Evola"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="84" end="91" title="Italian people" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="92" end="101" title="far-right politics" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466570" start="144" end="158" title="Traditionalist conservatism" label="traditionalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="160" end="172" title="Aristocracy" label="aristocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="174" end="181" title="War" label="martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q48349" start="187" end="198" title="Empire" label="imperialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="224" end="237" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="259" end="271" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349904" start="280" end="292" title="Aftermath of World War II" label="post-war era"/>
<link wikidata="Q696116" start="338" end="349" title="neo-fascism" label="neo-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="389" end="393" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="436" end="451" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="465" end="469" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001051" start="587" end="600" title="Buddhist texts" label="Buddhist text"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="634" end="640" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="654" end="673" title="Western esotericism" label="Western esotericism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="681" end="698" title="Eastern mysticism" label="Eastern mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60684" start="733" end="749" title="magical idealism" label="magical idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q679842" start="793" end="808" title="German idealism" label="German idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q307043" start="810" end="827" title="Eastern philosophy" label="Eastern doctrines"/>
<link wikidata="Q50685643" start="829" end="843" title="Traditionalist School (perennialism)" label="traditionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411984" start="861" end="884" title="Conservative Revolution" label="Conservative Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q228409" start="937" end="946" title="Kali Yuga" label="Kali Yuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q217192" start="956" end="964" title="Dark Age" label="Dark Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228412" start="1033" end="1051" title="Palingenesis" label="primordial rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q541880" start="1303" end="1335" title="Italian racial laws" label="Fascist Italy&amp;#x27;s racial laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q153559" start="1488" end="1505" title="Sicherheitsdienst" label="Sicherheitsdienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="1562" end="1572" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="1682" end="1697" title="Italian Social Republic" label="Salò government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="1744" end="1750" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="2155" end="2168" title="Far-right politics" label="radical right"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2175" end="2187" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="2269" end="2284" title="antiegalitarian" label="antiegalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="2286" end="2297" title="Criticism of liberalism" label="antiliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435425" start="2299" end="2313" title="Criticism of democracy" label="antidemocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q422933" start="2319" end="2330" title="Elitism" label="antipopular"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="2397" end="2405" title="misogyny" label="misogyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="2407" end="2413" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="2415" end="2427" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139611" start="2444" end="2456" title="Criticism of Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q620992" start="2465" end="2480" title="Criticism of the Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q696116" start="2540" end="2561" title="Neo-fascism" label="neo-fascist movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="2621" end="2625" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="2724" end="2729" title="baron" label="baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="3139" end="3148" title="bourgeois" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="3358" end="3369" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q193236" start="3374" end="3398" title="Gabriele d&amp;#x27;Annunzio" label="Gabriele d&amp;#x27;Annunzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="3442" end="3461" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q78513" start="3466" end="3480" title="Otto Weininger" label="Otto Weininger"/>
<link wikidata="Q58968" start="3536" end="3550" title="man of letters" label="man of letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q738539" start="3551" end="3571" title="Carlo Michelstaedter" label="Carlo Michelstaedter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="3583" end="3596" title="post-Hegelian" label="post-Hegelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q76725" start="3605" end="3616" title="Max Stirner" label="Max Stirner"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="3643" end="3654" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q216582" start="3684" end="3709" title="Filippo Tommaso Marinetti" label="Filippo Tommaso Marinetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="3717" end="3725" title="Futurism" label="Futurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3879" end="3894" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="3915" end="3924" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q47066" start="3940" end="3946" title="Asiago" label="Asiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667316" start="4028" end="4035" title="Germany in World War I" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="4255" end="4259" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q131183" start="4381" end="4389" title="Cabaret" label="cabarets"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="4641" end="4652" title="rationalism" label="rationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="4844" end="4855" title="mountaineer" label="mountaineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q194270" start="5122" end="5136" title="hallucinogenic" label="hallucinogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="5369" end="5377" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="5638" end="5647" title="spirituality" label="spiritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493282" start="5649" end="5663" title="transcendence (religion)" label="transcendental"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="5790" end="5797" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="5799" end="5804" title="magic (paranormal)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q476294" start="5810" end="5826" title="Oriental studies" label="Oriental studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="5841" end="5856" title="Vajrayana" label="Tibetan Tantric"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="5857" end="5861" title="yoga" label="yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q234105" start="5974" end="5989" title="Lost Generation" label="Lost Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q679842" start="6155" end="6170" title="German idealism" label="German idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q307043" start="6172" end="6189" title="Eastern philosophy" label="Eastern doctrines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466570" start="6191" end="6205" title="Traditionalist conservatism" label="traditionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411984" start="6235" end="6258" title="Conservative Revolution" label="Conservative Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q484416" start="6367" end="6372" title="caste" label="caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q228409" start="6473" end="6482" title="Kali Yuga" label="Kali Yuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q945895" start="6761" end="6769" title="Decadence" label="decadent"/>
<link wikidata="Q192348" start="8279" end="8284" title="Benedetto Croce" label="Croce"/>
<link wikidata="Q192348" start="8308" end="8323" title="Benedetto Croce" label="Benedetto Croce"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="8602" end="8611" title="mysticism" label="mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181510" start="8613" end="8619" title="Tantra" label="Tantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q192933" start="8621" end="8632" title="Hermeticism" label="Hermeticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q162808" start="8650" end="8660" title="Holy Grail" label="Holy Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="8665" end="8684" title="Western esotericism" label="Western esotericism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="9451" end="9460" title="Carl Jung" label="Carl Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q181510" start="10083" end="10089" title="tantra" label="tantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702223" start="10128" end="10142" title="John Woodroffe" label="John Woodroffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q794819" start="10916" end="10930" title="left-hand path" label="left-hand path"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806574" start="11264" end="11279" title="A. James Gregor" label="A. James Gregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="12083" end="12090" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="12501" end="12511" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="12723" end="12733" title="Indo-Aryan languages" label="Indo-Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105779" start="12981" end="12995" title="Thomas Sheehan (academic)" label="Thomas Sheehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60684" start="13289" end="13305" title="magical idealism" label="magical idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="14174" end="14179" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="14181" end="14195" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="14201" end="14217" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624582" start="15699" end="15713" title="Arturo Reghini" label="Arturo Reghini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392538" start="15775" end="15800" title="social class in ancient Rome" label="ancient Roman aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="15831" end="15844" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42865" start="16003" end="16014" title="Orientalism" label="Orientalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q496850" start="16015" end="16026" title="René Guénon" label="René Guénon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777902" start="16456" end="16468" title="Gruppo di Ur" label="Gruppo di Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="16898" end="16920" title="religion in ancient Rome" label="ancient Roman religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="17105" end="17116" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q309854" start="17761" end="17778" title="Joseph de Maistre" label="Joseph de Maistre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031205" start="18220" end="18243" title="Women&amp;#x27;s liberation movement" label="women&amp;#x27;s liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208088" start="18564" end="18580" title="Sati (practice)" label="&amp;quot;sati&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q70113" start="19028" end="19039" title="Hans Blüher" label="Hans Blüher"/>
<link wikidata="Q96386505" start="19066" end="19076" title="Männerbund" label="Männerbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q78513" start="19248" end="19262" title="Otto Weininger" label="Otto Weininger"/>
<link wikidata="Q78513" start="19281" end="19298" title="Sex and Character" label="Sex and Character"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="19564" end="19577" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211650" start="19638" end="19651" title="sadomasochism" label="sadomasochism"/>
<link wikidata="Q121973" start="19770" end="19774" title="eros" label="eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q625143" start="19858" end="19866" title="ecstasy (emotion)" label="ecstatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181510" start="20374" end="20380" title="Tantra" label="Tantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752601" start="20385" end="20394" title="sex magic" label="sex magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21004871" start="21061" end="21076" title="Arthur Versluis" label="Arthur Versluis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938022" start="21164" end="21195" title="Revolt Against the Modern World" label="Revolt Against the Modern World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="21312" end="21316" title="Race (human categorization)" label="race"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938022" start="21498" end="21529" title="Revolt Against the Modern World" label="Revolt Against the Modern World"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="22617" end="22625" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="22757" end="22773" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="23846" end="23892" title="Second Italo-Ethiopian War" label="Fascist Italy&amp;#x27;s 1935 invasion of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090033" start="23988" end="23999" title="miscegenation" label="race-mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="24591" end="24597" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090033" start="24994" end="25007" title="miscegenation" label="miscegenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q496850" start="25137" end="25148" title="René Guénon" label="René Guénon"/>
<link wikidata="Q228409" start="25195" end="25204" title="Kali Yuga" label="Kali Yuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="25208" end="25216" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="25308" end="25314" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q718909" start="25363" end="25373" title="Aryan race" label="Aryan race"/>
<link wikidata="Q243333" start="25482" end="25492" title="Hyperborea" label="Hyperborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q541880" start="26970" end="26981" title="Italian racial laws" label="racial laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839017" start="27415" end="27438" title="Antisemitic canard" label="antisemitic fabrication"/>
<link wikidata="Q26193" start="27445" end="27480" title="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" label="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q348283" start="27529" end="27546" title="Giovanni Preziosi" label="Giovanni Preziosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q318105" start="27866" end="27889" title="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu" label="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="27938" end="27948" title="Iron Guard" label="Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="28005" end="28018" title="King Carol II" label="King Carol II"/>
<link wikidata="Q75849" start="28896" end="28912" title="Alfred Rosenberg" label="Alfred Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q78513" start="29136" end="29150" title="Otto Weininger" label="Otto Weininger"/>
<link wikidata="Q738539" start="29155" end="29175" title="Carlo Michelstaedter" label="Carlo Michelstaedter"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="29305" end="29317" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421961" start="29352" end="29361" title="Idée fixe (psychology)" label="idée fixe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="29397" end="29408" title="Third Reich" label="Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="29451" end="29460" title="The Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q189726" start="29812" end="29834" title="Éa (Babylonian god)" label="after a Babylonian god"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="29878" end="29887" title="King Arthur" label="Arthurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="30095" end="30114" title="Western esotericism" label="Western esotericism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="30354" end="30370" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806574" start="30417" end="30432" title="A. James Gregor" label="A. James Gregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="31007" end="31015" title="satanism" label="satanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q162808" start="31119" end="31129" title="Holy Grail" label="Holy Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="31346" end="31357" title="Ghibellines" label="Ghibellines"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="31378" end="31384" title="Guelphs" label="Guelph"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="31613" end="31651" title="Guelphs and Ghibellines" label="Guelph victory against the Ghibellines"/>
<link wikidata="Q26193" start="31819" end="31854" title="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" label="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430499" start="31965" end="31979" title="Richard Barber" label="Richard Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730493" start="32570" end="32595" title="The Doctrine of Awakening" label="The Doctrine of Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="32632" end="32642" title="Pāli Canon" label="Pāli Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="32675" end="32683" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671374" start="32962" end="32977" title="Harry Oldmeadow" label="Harry Oldmeadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q715146" start="33473" end="33487" title="Giuseppe Tucci" label="Giuseppe Tucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q21004871" start="33580" end="33595" title="Arthur Versluis" label="Arthur Versluis"/>
<link wikidata="Q434517" start="33817" end="33831" title="Nanavira Thera" label="Ñāṇavīra Thera"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="33857" end="33864" title="bhikkhu" label="bhikkhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q72672" start="33964" end="33972" title="Sorrento" label="Sorrento"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938022" start="34012" end="34043" title="Revolt Against the Modern World" label="Revolt Against the Modern World"/>
<link wikidata="Q238526" start="34094" end="34104" title="Golden Age" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q41590" start="35001" end="35014" title="Mircea Eliade" label="Mircea Eliade"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="35263" end="35273" title="Iron Guard" label="Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q313666" start="35338" end="35351" title="Georges Sorel" label="Georges Sorel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25973" start="35404" end="35417" title="Hermann Hesse" label="Hermann Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q228409" start="35991" end="36000" title="Kali Yuga" label="Kali Yuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q194497" start="36462" end="36473" title="Brahmanical" label="Brahmanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="36951" end="36961" title="Right-wing politics" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q751205" start="37569" end="37584" title="Giuseppe Bottai" label="Giuseppe Bottai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697774" start="37607" end="37623" title="Critica fascista" label="Critica Fascista"/>
<link wikidata="Q707580" start="37839" end="37856" title="Roberto Farinacci" label="Roberto Farinacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231" start="37880" end="37887" title="Cremona" label="Cremona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="38000" end="38011" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="38044" end="38064" title="Second Italo-Ethiopian War" label="invasion of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q348283" start="38173" end="38190" title="Giovanni Preziosi" label="Giovanni Preziosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366669" start="38239" end="38263" title="Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke" label="Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q190662" start="38538" end="38543" title="aegis" label="aegis"/>
<link wikidata="Q76727" start="38932" end="38944" title="Ernst Jünger" label="Ernst Jünger"/>
<link wikidata="Q57112" start="39128" end="39143" title="Oswald Spengler" label="Oswald Spengler"/>
<link wikidata="Q153020" start="39148" end="39163" title="José Ortega y Gasset" label="Ortega y Gasset"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="39354" end="39361" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Nazi SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="39366" end="39385" title="Iron Guard" label="Romanian Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q496850" start="39528" end="39539" title="René Guénon" label="René Guénon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="39583" end="39596" title="Authoritarianism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="39803" end="39819" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q139596" start="40241" end="40263" title="National Fascist Party" label="National Fascist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q153559" start="40659" end="40676" title="Sicherheitsdienst" label="Sicherheitsdienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="40726" end="40736" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="40764" end="40770" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q468823" start="41125" end="41138" title="March on Rome" label="March on Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="42294" end="42305" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="43067" end="43075" title="futurism" label="futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="43273" end="43297" title="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy" label="King Victor Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="44162" end="44178" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q541880" start="44866" end="44885" title="Italian racial laws" label="Italian racial laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="45441" end="45447" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="45476" end="45488" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q472629" start="45913" end="45925" title="Palingenetic ultranationalism" label="palingenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="46150" end="46159" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687444" start="46173" end="46200" title="Ministry of Popular Culture" label="Ministry of Popular Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841610" start="46273" end="46284" title="Sorelianism" label="Sorelianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="46307" end="46315" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="46774" end="46786" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411984" start="46881" end="46904" title="Conservative Revolution" label="Conservative Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="47368" end="47380" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295325" start="47569" end="47582" title="Martin A. Lee" label="Martin A. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q194200" start="47644" end="47663" title="The Beast Reawakens" label="The Beast Reawakens"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="47688" end="47704" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q160394" start="47976" end="47985" title="Ahnenerbe" label="Ahnenerbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="48116" end="48129" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152698" start="48746" end="48772" title="Reich Security Main Office" label="Reich Security Main Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q153559" start="49130" end="49147" title="Sicherheitsdienst" label="Sicherheitsdienst"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49303" end="49325" title="Military history of Italy during World War II#Allied invasion of Sicily, Fall of Mussolini and Armistice" label="deposed and imprisoned"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="49401" end="49407" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q89383" start="49561" end="49574" title="Otto Skorzeny" label="Otto Skorzeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="49616" end="49628" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q157153" start="49733" end="49749" title="Wolf&amp;#x27;s Lair" label="Wolf&amp;#x27;s Lair"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="49794" end="49817" title="Italian Social Republic" label="Italian Social Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="49996" end="50002" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="50241" end="50247" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q891804" start="50322" end="50334" title="Bombing of Vienna in World War II" label="bombing raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="50433" end="50438" title="shell (projectile)" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="50460" end="50471" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="50486" end="50495" title="paralysis" label="paralysed"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="50583" end="50595" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="50604" end="50610" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="50619" end="50631" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="51070" end="51076" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="51522" end="51529" title="German SS" label="Nazi SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249339" start="51535" end="51550" title="Spanish Falange" label="Spanish Falange"/>
<link wikidata="Q318105" start="51552" end="51560" title="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu" label="Codreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="51568" end="51586" title="Iron Guard" label="Legionary Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q40826" start="51588" end="51599" title="Knut Hamsun" label="Knut Hamsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q151364" start="51601" end="51616" title="Vidkun Quisling" label="Vidkun Quisling"/>
<link wikidata="Q158844" start="51618" end="51631" title="Léon Degrelle" label="Léon Degrelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q325974" start="51633" end="51650" title="Pierre Drieu La Rochelle" label="Drieu La Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488" start="51652" end="51669" title="Robert Brasillach" label="Robert Brasillach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548547" start="51671" end="51687" title="Maurice Bardèche" label="Maurice Bardèche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048" start="51689" end="51704" title="Charles Maurras" label="Charles Maurras"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="51706" end="51711" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q123397" start="51732" end="51744" title="Republic (Plato)" label="The Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="51753" end="51758" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q134221" start="51779" end="51791" title="De Monarchia" label="De Monarchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q309854" start="51800" end="51817" title="Joseph de Maistre" label="Joseph de Maistre"/>
<link wikidata="Q723141" start="51819" end="51832" title="Juan Donoso Cortés" label="Donoso Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="51834" end="51851" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q45662" start="51853" end="51875" title="Klemens von Metternich" label="Klemens von Metternich"/>
<link wikidata="Q351527" start="51877" end="51890" title="Gaetano Mosca" label="Gaetano Mosca"/>
<link wikidata="Q11031" start="51892" end="51907" title="Vilfredo Pareto" label="Vilfredo Pareto"/>
<link wikidata="Q57314" start="51913" end="51927" title="Robert Michels" label="Robert Michels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126102" start="51974" end="51997" title="Italian Social Movement" label="Italian Social Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752601" start="52319" end="52328" title="sex magic" label="sex magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="53290" end="53298" title="Urban guerrilla warfare" label="militant"/>
<link wikidata="Q696116" start="53299" end="53309" title="neofascist" label="neofascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739869" start="53323" end="53353" title="Fasci di Azione Rivoluzionaria" label="Fasci di Azione Rivoluzionaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237450" start="53541" end="53561" title="Francesco Carnelutti" label="Francesco Carnelutti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="54423" end="54429" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="54460" end="54476" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386299" start="55127" end="55148" title="Francis Parker Yockey" label="Francis Parker Yockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q696116" start="55633" end="55644" title="neo-fascism" label="neo-fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="57070" end="57079" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664761" start="57152" end="57164" title="Ordine Nuovo" label="Ordine Nuovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088491" start="57376" end="57401" title="European Liberation Front" label="European Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386299" start="57405" end="57426" title="Francis Parker Yockey" label="Francis Parker Yockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126102" start="57634" end="57657" title="Italian Social Movement" label="Italian Social Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="57787" end="57802" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q287741" start="57908" end="57923" title="Sibilla Aleramo" label="Sibilla Aleramo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14668" start="58108" end="58118" title="Monte Rosa" label="Monte Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270" start="58126" end="58138" title="Pennine Alps" label="Pennine Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="58209" end="58225" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q63117" start="58249" end="58258" title="Otto Rahn" label="Otto Rahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q41590" start="58321" end="58334" title="Mircea Eliade" label="Mircea Eliade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236400" start="58962" end="58979" title="Giorgio Almirante" label="Giorgio Almirante"/>
<link wikidata="Q60030" start="59009" end="59016" title="Herbert Marcuse" label="Marcuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="59239" end="59248" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664761" start="59664" end="59676" title="Ordine Nuovo" label="Ordine Nuovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751335" start="59807" end="59819" title="Franco Freda" label="Franco Freda"/>
<link wikidata="Q94739" start="59895" end="59922" title="Nuclei Armati Rivoluzionari" label="Nuclei Armati Rivoluzionari"/>
<link wikidata="Q569287" start="60034" end="60082" title="Bologna massacre" label="terrorist bombing of the Bologna railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q158093" start="60123" end="60137" title="National Front (UK)" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343074" start="60139" end="60152" title="Roberto Fiore" label="Roberto Fiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q12807" start="60604" end="60615" title="Umberto Eco" label="Umberto Eco"/>
<link wikidata="Q99620602" start="60651" end="60661" title="Ur-Fascism" label="Ur-Fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272633" start="60888" end="60903" title="Jonathan Bowden" label="Jonathan Bowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q516375" start="60974" end="60990" title="Alain de Benoist" label="Alain de Benoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002560" start="61119" end="61134" title="esoteric Nazism" label="esoteric Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q438839" start="61268" end="61283" title="Aleksander Dugin" label="Aleksandr Dugin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82256" start="61437" end="61448" title="Golden Dawn (political party)" label="Golden Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q633442" start="61517" end="61523" title="Jobbik" label="Jobbik"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018230" start="61655" end="61664" title="alt-right" label="alt-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146870" start="61675" end="61687" title="Steve Bannon" label="Steve Bannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938022" start="62579" end="62610" title="Revolt Against the Modern World" label="Rivolta contro il mondo moderno"/>
<link wikidata="" start="63290" end="63310" title=":it:Metafisica del sesso" label="Metafisica del sesso"/>
<link wikidata="" start="64550" end="64568" title=":fr:L&amp;#x27;Homme_et_son_devenir_selon_le_Vêdânta" label="Guenon&amp;#x27;s work"/>
<link wikidata="Q98479" start="65190" end="65220" title="Wilhelm Stapel" label="&amp;quot;Deutsches Volkstum&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="" start="65720" end="65724" title=":it:Roma_(quotidiano)" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="" start="65857" end="65861" title=":it:Roma_(quotidiano)" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="66373" end="66382" title="Mysticism" label="Mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q50685643" start="66384" end="66405" title="Traditionalist School (perennialism)" label="Traditionalist School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="66407" end="66426" title="Western esotericism" label="Western esotericism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721734" start="67078" end="67108" title="The Catholic Historical Review" label="The Catholic Historical Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q11130954" start="67285" end="67309" title="Indiana University Press" label="Indiana University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q705817" start="67338" end="67352" title="Roger Griffin" label="Griffin, Roger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436678" start="67572" end="67579" title="Fascism (book)" label="Fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="67587" end="67610" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q94300" start="67626" end="67642" title="Hans Thomas Hakl" label="Hans Thomas Hakl"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="67695" end="67711" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q94300" start="67802" end="67815" title="Hans Thomas Hakl" label="Hansen, H. T."/>
<link wikidata="Q3938022" start="67969" end="68000" title="Revolt Against the Modern World" label="Revolt Against the Modern World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184273" start="68213" end="68225" title="Philip Rees" label="Rees, Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914872" start="68240" end="68295" title="Biographical Dictionary of the Extreme Right Since 1890" label="Biographical Dictionary of the Extreme Right Since 1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055845" start="68781" end="68792" title="Edmonds, WA" label="Edmonds, WA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290393" wikidata="Q92763" url="?curid=290393" title="Jay Wright Forrester">
<text>Jay Wright Forrester (July 14, 1918 – November 16, 2016) was an American computer engineer, management theorist and systems scientist. He spent his entire career at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, entering as a graduate student in 1939, and eventually retiring in 1989.

During World War II Forrester worked on servomechanisms as a research assistant to Gordon S. Brown. After the war he headed MIT&#x27;s Whirlwind digital computer project. There he is credited as a co-inventor of magnetic core memory, the predominant form of random-access computer memory during the most explosive years of digital computer development (between 1955 and 1975). It was part of a family of related technologies which bridged the gap between vacuum tubes and semiconductors by exploiting the magnetic properties of materials to perform switching and amplification. His team is also believed to have created the first animation in the history of computer graphics, a &quot;jumping ball&quot; on an oscilloscope.

Later, Forrester was a professor at the MIT Sloan School of Management, where he introduced the Forrester effect describing fluctuations in supply chains. He has been credited as a founder of system dynamics, which deals with the simulation of interactions between objects in dynamic systems. After his initial efforts in industrial simulation, Forrester attempted to simulate urban dynamics and then world dynamics, developing a model with the Club of Rome along the lines of that popularized in &quot;The Limits to Growth&quot;. Today system dynamics is most often applied to research and consulting in organizations and other social systems.

==Early life and education==
Forrester was born on a farm near Anselmo, Nebraska, where &quot;his early interest in electricity was spurred, perhaps, by the fact that the ranch had none. While in high school, he built a wind-driven, 12-volt electrical system using old car parts—it gave the ranch its first electric power.&quot;

Forrester received his Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering in 1939 from the University of Nebraska–Lincoln. He went on to graduate school at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he worked with servomechanism pioneer Gordon S. Brown and gained his master&#x27;s in 1945 with a thesis on &#x27;Hydraulic Servomechanism Developments&#x27;. In 1949 he was inducted into Eta Kappa Nu the Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering Honor Society.

==Career==
===Whirlwind projects===
During the late 1940s and early 50s, Forrester continued research in electrical and computer engineering at MIT, heading the Whirlwind project. Trying to design an aircraft simulator, the group moved away from an initial analog design to develop a digital computer. The team perfected magnetic-core memory, and developed the &quot;multi-coordinate digital information storage device&quot; (coincident-current system), the forerunner of today&#x27;s RAM. In 1948-49 the Whirlwind team created the first animation in the history of computer graphics, a &quot;jumping ball&quot; on an oscilloscope. Whirlwind began operation in 1951, the first digital computer to operate in real time and to use video displays for output. It subsequently evolved into the air defence system Semi-Automatic Ground Environment (SAGE).

=== DEC board member ===
Forrester was invited to join the board of Digital Equipment Corporation by Ken Olsen in 1957, and advised the early company on management science. He left before 1966 due to changes in DEC to a product line led organisation. 
===Forrester effect===
In 1956, Forrester moved to the MIT Sloan School of Management, where he was the Germeshausen professor and after his retirement continued until 1989 as Professor Emeritus and Senior Lecturer. In 1961 was published his seminal book Industrial Dynamics the first work in what later is named System Dynamics. The work is a result of analyzing operations of Sprague Electric in Massachusetts. The study was the first model of supply chains proving that ups and downs of inventory is due to fluctuations in demand, revealing internal differences that his continuous approach could detect. The phenomenon was called the Forrester effect and today more frequently described as the &quot;bullwhip effect&quot;.

===System dynamics===
Forrester was the founder of system dynamics, which deals with the simulation of interactions between objects in dynamic systems. &quot;Industrial Dynamics&quot; was the first book Forrester wrote using system dynamics to analyze industrial business cycles. Several years later, interactions with former Boston Mayor John F. Collins led Forrester to write &quot;Urban Dynamics&quot;, which sparked an ongoing debate on the feasibility of modeling broader social problems. The book went on to influence the video game SimCity.
Forrester&#x27;s 1971 paper &#x27;Counterintuitive Behavior of Social Systems&#x27; argued that the use of computerized system models to inform social policy was superior to simple debate, both in generating insight into the root causes of problems and in understanding the likely effects of proposed solutions. He characterized normal debate and discussion as being dominated by inexact mental models:

The paper summarized the results of a previous study on the system dynamics governing the economies of urban centers, which showed &quot;how industry, housing, and people interact with each other as a city grows and decays.&quot; The study&#x27;s findings, presented more fully in Forrester&#x27;s 1969 book &quot;Urban Dynamics&quot;, suggested that the root cause of depressed economic conditions was a shortage of job opportunities relative to the population level, and that the most popular solutions proposed at the time (e.g. increasing low-income housing availability, or reducing real estate taxes) counter-intuitively would worsen the situation by increasing this relative shortage. The paper further argued that measures to reduce the shortage—such as converting land use from housing to industry, or increasing real estate taxes to spur property redevelopment—would be similarly counter-effective.

===Club of Rome===
&#x27;Counterintuitive Behavior of Social Systems&#x27; also sketched a model of world dynamics that correlated population, food production, industrial development, pollution, availability of natural resources, and quality of life, and attempted future projections of those values under various assumptions. Forrester presented this model more fully in his 1971 book &quot;World Dynamics&quot;, notable for serving as the initial basis for the World3 model used by Donella and Dennis Meadows in their popular 1972 book &quot;The Limits to Growth&quot;.

Forrester met Aurelio Peccei, a founder of the Club of Rome in 1970. He later met with the Club of Rome to discuss issues surrounding global sustainability; the book &quot;World Dynamics&quot; followed. &quot;World Dynamics&quot; took on modeling the complex interactions of the world economy, population and ecology, which was controversial (see also Donella Meadows and &quot;The Limits to Growth&quot;). It was the start of the field of global modeling. Forrester continued working in applications of system dynamics and promoting its use in education.

==Awards==
In 1972, Forrester received the IEEE Medal of Honor, IEEEs highest award.
In 1982, he received the IEEE Computer Pioneer Award. In 1995, he was made a Fellow of the Computer History Museum &quot;for his perfecting of core memory technology into a practical computer memory device; for fundamental contributions to early computer systems design and development&quot;. In 2006, he was inducted into the Operational Research Hall of Fame.

==Publications==
Forrester wrote several books, including:
* 1961. &quot;Industrial dynamics&quot;. Waltham, MA: Pegasus Communications.
* 1968. &quot;Principles of Systems&quot;, 2nd ed. Pegasus Communications.
* 1969. &quot;Urban Dynamics&quot;. Pegasus Communications.
* 1971. &quot;World Dynamics&quot;. Wright-Allen Press.
* 1975. &quot;Collected Papers of Jay W. Forrester&quot;. Pegasus Communications.

His articles and papers include:
* 1958. &#x27;Industrial Dynamics – A Major Breakthrough for Decision Makers&#x27;, &quot;Harvard Business Review&quot;, Vol. 36, No. 4, pp. 37–66.
* 1968, &#x27;Market Growth as Influenced by Capital Investment&#x27;, &quot;Industrial Management Review&quot;, Vol. IX, No. 2, Winter 1968.
* 1971, &#x27;Counterintuitive Behavior of Social Systems&#x27;, &quot;Theory and Decision&quot;, Vol. 2, December 1971, pp. 109–140. Also available online.
* 1989, &#x27;The Beginning of System Dynamics&#x27;. Banquet Talk at the international meeting of the System Dynamics Society, Stuttgart, Germany, July 13, 1989. MIT System Dynamics Group Memo D.
* 1992, &#x27;System Dynamics and Learner-Centered-Learning in Kindergarten through 12th Grade Education.&#x27;
* 1993, &#x27;System Dynamics and the Lessons of 35 Years&#x27;, in Kenyon B. Greene (ed.) &quot;A Systems-Based Approach to Policymaking&quot;, New York: Springer, pp. 199–240.
* 1996, &#x27;System Dynamics and K–12 Teachers: a lecture at the University of Virginia School of Education&#x27;. 
* 1998, &#x27;Designing the Future&#x27;. Lecture at Universidad de Sevilla, December 15, 1998.
* 1999, &#x27;System Dynamics: the Foundation Under Systems Thinking&#x27;. Cambridge, MA: Sloan School of Management.
* 2016, &#x27;Learning through System Dynamics as preparation for the 21st Century&#x27;, &quot;System Dynamics Review&quot;, Vol. 32, pp. 187–203.

== See also ==
*DYNAMO (programming language)
*Roger Sisson

== References ==
==External links==

* Selected papers by Forrester.
* Biography of Jay W. Forrester from the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences
* &quot;The many careers of Jay Forrester,&quot; &quot;MIT Technology Review&quot;, June 23, 2015
*Jay Wright Forrester Papers, MC 439, box X. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Institute Archives and Special Collections, Cambridge, Massachusetts.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q92763" start="0" end="20" title="Jay Wright Forrester" label="Jay Wright Forrester"/>
<link wikidata="Q428691" start="73" end="90" title="computer engineer" label="computer engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="92" end="111" title="management theorist" label="management theorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167061" start="116" end="133" title="systems scientist" label="systems scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="165" end="202" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="285" end="297" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q640815" start="318" end="333" title="servomechanisms" label="servomechanisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585768" start="361" end="376" title="Gordon S. Brown" label="Gordon S. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="423" end="439" title="digital computer" label="digital computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q839647" start="490" end="510" title="magnetic core memory" label="magnetic core memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q218825" start="536" end="549" title="random access" label="random-access"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="550" end="565" title="computer memory" label="computer memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="601" end="617" title="digital computer" label="digital computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="733" end="744" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="750" end="763" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="908" end="917" title="animation" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="936" end="953" title="computer graphics" label="computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q174320" start="988" end="1000" title="oscilloscope" label="oscilloscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q142740" start="1043" end="1073" title="MIT Sloan School of Management" label="MIT Sloan School of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343909" start="1099" end="1115" title="Forrester effect" label="Forrester effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824206" start="1143" end="1155" title="supply chain" label="supply chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q598451" start="1195" end="1210" title="system dynamics" label="system dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="1279" end="1294" title="dynamic systems" label="dynamic systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q107569" start="1448" end="1460" title="Club of Rome" label="Club of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q277111" start="1506" end="1526" title="The Limits to Growth" label="The Limits to Growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610611" start="1712" end="1729" title="Anselmo, Nebraska" label="Anselmo, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353679" start="2065" end="2095" title="University of Nebraska–Lincoln" label="University of Nebraska–Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="2134" end="2171" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q640815" start="2194" end="2208" title="servomechanism" label="servomechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585768" start="2217" end="2232" title="Gordon S. Brown" label="Gordon S. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402362" start="2367" end="2379" title="Eta Kappa Nu" label="Eta Kappa Nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413683" start="2599" end="2616" title="Whirlwind (computer)" label="Whirlwind project"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="2722" end="2738" title="digital computer" label="digital computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q839647" start="2759" end="2779" title="magnetic-core memory" label="magnetic-core memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="2923" end="2926" title="Random Access Memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="2976" end="2985" title="animation" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="3004" end="3021" title="computer graphics" label="computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q174320" start="3056" end="3068" title="oscilloscope" label="oscilloscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935523" start="3246" end="3279" title="Semi-Automatic Ground Environment" label="Semi-Automatic Ground Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="3357" end="3386" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q142740" start="3596" end="3626" title="MIT Sloan School of Management" label="MIT Sloan School of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824206" start="3987" end="3999" title="supply chain" label="supply chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343909" start="4179" end="4195" title="Forrester effect" label="Forrester effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q598451" start="4320" end="4335" title="system dynamics" label="system dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="4404" end="4419" title="dynamic systems" label="dynamic systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837807" start="4595" end="4607" title="List of Mayors of Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232224" start="4608" end="4623" title="John F. Collins" label="John F. Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q249854" start="4808" end="4815" title="SimCity" label="SimCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433256" start="6594" end="6600" title="World3" label="World3"/>
<link wikidata="Q271226" start="6615" end="6622" title="Donella Meadows" label="Donella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189291" start="6627" end="6641" title="Dennis Meadows" label="Dennis Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q277111" start="6675" end="6695" title="The Limits to Growth" label="The Limits to Growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q775671" start="6718" end="6732" title="Aurelio Peccei" label="Aurelio Peccei"/>
<link wikidata="Q107569" start="6751" end="6763" title="Club of Rome" label="Club of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="6989" end="6996" title="Economics" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="6998" end="7008" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="7013" end="7020" title="ecology" label="ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q271226" start="7056" end="7071" title="Donella Meadows" label="Donella Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q277111" start="7082" end="7102" title="The Limits to Growth" label="The Limits to Growth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7144" end="7159" title="global modeling" label="global modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q678414" start="7304" end="7323" title="IEEE Medal of Honor" label="IEEE Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="7325" end="7329" title="IEEE" label="IEEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="7371" end="7375" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="IEEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q964035" start="7437" end="7460" title="Computer History Museum" label="Computer History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5206860" start="9584" end="9613" title="DYNAMO (programming language)" label="DYNAMO (programming language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358923" start="9615" end="9627" title="Roger Sisson" label="Roger Sisson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290395" wikidata="Q1136322" url="?curid=290395" title="Legio V Alaudae">
<text>Legio V Alaudae (&quot;Fifth Legion of the Lark&quot;), sometimes also known as Legio V Gallica (&quot;Fifth Gallic Legion&quot;), was a legion of the Roman army founded in 52 BC by the general Gaius Julius Caesar (dictator of Rome 49-44 BC). It was levied in Transalpine Gaul to fight the armies of Vercingetorix, and was the first Roman legion to comprise non-citizens. Historians disagree whether the legion was destroyed during the Batavian rebellion in AD 70, or during the First Battle of Tapae (AD 86).

==History==

=== Origin and early history ===
The legion was founded in Transalpine Gaul in 52 BC by Julius Caesar. Caesar paid the soldiers from his private purse. Only later was it recognized by the Senate. It is possible the legion was originally named Legio &quot;V Gallica&quot;. The unusual, Gaulish surname must refer to the Gallic custom to wear lark&#x27;s wings on their helmets. The new legion saw its first action during the campaign against the Gallic leader Vercingetorix and the siege of Alesia. During the civil war between Caesar and Pompey, the V Alaudae took part in Caesar&#x27;s invasion of Italy and stayed in Apulia for some time. It also fought at Dyrrhachium. The legion did take part in the African campaign against Cato, which culminated in the Battle of Thapsus. Here, the legion heroically fought against the elephants used by Caesar&#x27;s republican enemies. This made a great impression, and V Alaudae became the only Caesarian legion known not to have used the bull as its emblem, instead choosing the elephant. This emblem was awarded in 46 BC for this action.

=== The last war of the Republic ===
After a civil war broke out between Mark Antony and Augustus, the legion sided with Antony and fought for him in the lost Battle of Mutina. When the two men earlier cooperated, they defeated the Liberators Brutus and Cassius, who were seeking to restore the Republic after they had killed Caesar, in the Battle of Philippi the V Alaudae was there. The legion participated in Antony&#x27;s war against the Parthian empire. Antony employed the legion also during his campaign against Octavian, which culminated in the naval Battle of Actium, where Antony was defeated. Augustus transferred the V Alaudae to Mérida in Lusitania after 30 BC, where it took part in the campaigns against the Cantabrians.

=== Service in Germania ===
After a few years, V Alaudae was moved to Gallia Belgica. While in Gaul the legion may have temporarily lost its standard when its commander Marcus Lollius was defeated by the Germanic Sugambri. The battle probably took place in the valley of the Meuse. Although we cannot be precise, it is likely that the transfer from Hispania Ulterior to Belgica had taken place in 19 BC, when Augustus&#x27; friend Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa invaded Germania. The legion was transferred to or Xanten by Augustus&#x27; stepson Drusus and it took part in his Germanic campaigns. The soldiers of V Alaudae crossed the Weser and reached the Elbe in 9 BC. For some time, they may have lived at Oberaden or Haltern on the east bank of the Rhine. In 6 AD, several legions marched against king Maroboduus of the Marcomanni in Czechia; at the same time, the V Alaudae were to attack the Marcomanni along the Elbe. It was to be the most grandiose operation that was ever conducted by a Roman army, but a rebellion in Pannonia obstructed its execution.

Not much later, the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest put an end to Roman ambition to conquer Germania. Commander Lucius Nonius Asprenas used the First legion Germanica and the Fifth legion Alaudae to occupy the fortresses of Germania Inferior and prevent a Germanic raid on Belgica After the disaster, V Alaudae was stationed at Xanten, together with XXI Rapax, keeping an eye on the nearby tribe of the Cugerni and guarding the confluence of the Rhine and Lippe. Both units took part in the Germanic campaigns of Germanicus in the first years of the reign of Tiberius. In 43 AD, the twenty-first was replaced by XV Primigenia. At the same time, Xanten was rebuilt. We know that the Fifteenth occupied the eastern half of the base, and the Fifth the western.

In 28 AD, the fifth legion suppressed a Frisian revolt, but the Emperor Tiberius nonetheless allowed the Frisians to be independent. Twelve years later, V Alaudae joined the emperor Caligula when he visited the delta of the Rhine. The famous anecdote, told by Suetonius, about the emperor commanding soldiers to collect shells on the beach, refers to the visit of the fifth to Lugdunum. The V Alaudae and XV Primigenia are thought to have been part of the expeditionary force that was led against the Frisians and Chauci by the Roman general Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo in 47 AD.

The operation was very successful, but the emperor Claudius ordered the Romans to keep the Rhine as the empire&#x27;s frontier. The soldiers were now ordered to build fortifications along the Rhine and dig a canal from Matilo to the capital of the Cananefates, Voorburg; this canal still exists. Another non-military activity was the production of tiles. Every legion owned and operated a tilery. It is odd to notice that V Alaudae made these objects at Feldkassel, more than 90 kilometers away.

=== Year of Four Emperors ===
In 67 AD, many senators hated Nero. And several governors discussed his removal. Among these were Lucius Clodius Macer of Africa and Gaius Julius Vindex of one of the provinces in Gaul, who supported the governor of Hispania Tarraconensis, Servius Sulpicius Galba, when he proclaimed that he wanted to dethrone Nero. The army of Germania Inferior, which included the Legio V Alaudae marched to the south and defeated Gaius Julius Vindex. Therefore, the army of Germania Inferior acclaimed their own commander, Vitellius, as emperor, and marched on Rome. They were successful, and Vitellius started his reign. However, in the east, general Vespasian had also decided to make a bid for power; the two armies clashed near Cremona in northern Italy, and the Rhine army turned out to be no match for the soldiers of Vespasian.

=== Revolt of the Batavi ===
Meanwhile, in Germania Inferior the Batavians revolted. A Roman expeditionary force, consisting of the remains of V Alaudae and XV Primigenia, was defeated near Nijmegen, and not much later, these two legions found themselves besieged at Xanten. Although I Germanica, XVI Gallica and a legion from Germania Superior, XXII Primigenia, tried to rescue them, the two legions at Xanten were forced to surrender in March 70 AD. Not much later, I Germanica and XVI Gallica surrendered as well. It took several months before the new emperor Vespasian could send a strong Roman army to recover the Rhineland and suppress the Batavian revolt, commanded by his relative Quintus Petillius Cerialis. The legions XVI Gallica and IIII Macedonica, which had guarded Mainz, were renamed XVI Flavia Firma and IIII Flavia Felix; the remains of I Germanica were added with Galba&#x27;s Seventh legion and became known as VII Gemina. XV Primigenia and V Alaudae were never reconstituted.

== Attested members ==
==See also==
* List of Roman legions
* Roman legion

==Notes==
==References==

===Primary sources===
* Tacitus, &quot;Annales&quot;

===Secondary sources===
*

==External links==

*Lendering article on Legio V Alaudae
*Legio V Living History Group</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1136322" start="0" end="15" title="Legio V Alaudae" label="Legio V Alaudae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136322" start="80" end="95" title="Legio V Alaudae" label="Legio V Gallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="109" end="115" title="Gaul" label="Gallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="137" end="143" title="Roman legion" label="legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114493" start="151" end="161" title="Roman army" label="Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="194" end="213" title="Gaius Julius Caesar" label="Gaius Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q236885" start="215" end="223" title="Roman dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q26897" start="260" end="276" title="Gallia Narbonensis" label="Transalpine Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q178953" start="300" end="313" title="Vercingetorix" label="Vercingetorix"/>
<link wikidata="Q576364" start="436" end="454" title="Batavian rebellion" label="Batavian rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403337" start="479" end="500" title="First Battle of Tapae" label="First Battle of Tapae"/>
<link wikidata="Q26897" start="583" end="599" title="Transalpine Gaul" label="Transalpine Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q40019" start="603" end="608" title="52 BC" label="52 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="612" end="625" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q178953" start="983" end="996" title="Vercingetorix" label="Vercingetorix"/>
<link wikidata="Q131386" start="1005" end="1020" title="Battle of Alesia" label="siege of Alesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="1143" end="1149" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q525325" start="1183" end="1194" title="Battle of Dyrrhachium (48 BC)" label="Dyrrhachium"/>
<link wikidata="Q193506" start="1253" end="1257" title="Cato the Younger" label="Cato"/>
<link wikidata="Q849653" start="1283" end="1300" title="Battle of Thapsus" label="Battle of Thapsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116320" start="1652" end="1661" title="War of Actium" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="1696" end="1704" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353917" start="1766" end="1782" title="Battle of Mutina" label="Battle of Mutina"/>
<link wikidata="Q335330" start="1948" end="1966" title="Battle of Philippi" label="Battle of Philippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334699" start="2019" end="2064" title="Antony&amp;#x27;s Parthian War" label="Antony&amp;#x27;s war against the Parthian empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q160387" start="2166" end="2182" title="Battle of Actium" label="Battle of Actium"/>
<link wikidata="Q14323" start="2249" end="2255" title="Mérida, Spain" label="Mérida"/>
<link wikidata="Q188650" start="2259" end="2268" title="Lusitania" label="Lusitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340107" start="2308" end="2341" title="Cantabrian Wars" label="campaigns against the Cantabrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q206443" start="2414" end="2428" title="Gallia Belgica" label="Gallia Belgica"/>
<link wikidata="Q206403" start="2557" end="2565" title="Sicambri" label="Sugambri"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="2619" end="2624" title="Meuse" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q747040" start="2693" end="2710" title="Hispania Ulterior" label="Hispania Ulterior"/>
<link wikidata="Q206443" start="2714" end="2721" title="Gallia Belgica" label="Belgica"/>
<link wikidata="Q48174" start="2775" end="2799" title="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa" label="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q162890" start="2851" end="2857" title="Xanten" label="Xanten"/>
<link wikidata="Q313737" start="2884" end="2890" title="Drusus Julius Caesar" label="Drusus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650" start="2973" end="2978" title="Weser" label="Weser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="2995" end="2999" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192" start="3047" end="3055" title="Bergkamen" label="Oberaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q14900" start="3059" end="3066" title="Haltern am See" label="Haltern"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="3091" end="3096" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q165144" start="3144" end="3154" title="Maroboduus" label="Maroboduus"/>
<link wikidata="Q209851" start="3162" end="3172" title="Marcomanni" label="Marcomanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="3176" end="3183" title="Czech Republic" label="Czechia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="3365" end="3373" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q87779" start="3421" end="3451" title="Battle of the Teutoburg Forest" label="Battle of the Teutoburg Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q654348" start="3512" end="3534" title="Lucius Nonius Asprenas (suffect consul AD 6)" label="Lucius Nonius Asprenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q917212" start="3544" end="3566" title="Legio I Germanica" label="First legion Germanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q266367" start="3750" end="3759" title="Legio XXI Rapax" label="XXI Rapax"/>
<link wikidata="Q329216" start="3803" end="3810" title="Cugerni" label="Cugerni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="4341" end="4349" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q665" start="4536" end="4544" title="Lugdunum" label="Lugdunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q106416" start="4660" end="4668" title="Frisians" label="Frisians"/>
<link wikidata="Q313066" start="4701" end="4724" title="Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo" label="Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863008" start="4955" end="4961" title="Matilo" label="Matilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q652984" start="4984" end="4995" title="Cananefates" label="Cananefates"/>
<link wikidata="Q809821" start="4997" end="5005" title="Voorburg" label="Voorburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q550616" start="5361" end="5381" title="Lucius Clodius Macer" label="Lucius Clodius Macer"/>
<link wikidata="Q333826" start="5396" end="5415" title="Gaius Julius Vindex" label="Gaius Julius Vindex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414" start="5503" end="5526" title="Galba" label="Servius Sulpicius Galba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417" start="5773" end="5782" title="Vitellius" label="Vitellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="5902" end="5911" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q688978" start="5982" end="5989" title="Battle of Cremona" label="Cremona"/>
<link wikidata="Q176825" start="6151" end="6160" title="Batavi (Germanic tribe)" label="Batavians"/>
<link wikidata="Q348926" start="6775" end="6801" title="Quintus Petillius Cerialis" label="Quintus Petillius Cerialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334983" start="7122" end="7143" title="List of Roman legions" label="List of Roman legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="7146" end="7158" title="Roman legion" label="Roman legion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290398" wikidata="Q5216920" url="?curid=290398" title="Daniel David Moses">
<text>Daniel David Moses (February 18, 1952 - July 13, 2020) was a Canadian poet and playwright.

Moses was born in Ohsweken, Ontario, and raised on a farm on the Six Nations of the Grand River near Brantford, Ontario, Canada. From 1979 onwards, he worked as an independent literary artist. In 2003, Moses joined the department of drama at Queen&#x27;s University as an assistant professor. In 2019, he was appointed Professor Emeritus by Queen&#x27;s University, Kingston, Canada. He died in 2020.

==Personal life==
Moses identified as Delaware First Nations; he was not enrolled in any Indigenous nation. He was openly gay, and also claimed &quot;brothers and sisters among Two-Spirit people.&quot; Some of his works, therefore, reflect upon and explore the complexities of Native Two-Spirit or Queer identities.

== Education==
Moses held an Honours Bachelor of Arts from York University and a Masters in Fine Arts from the University of British Columbia.

== Career and accomplishments==
In the mid 1970s, Daniel David Moses took a degree in literature and creative writing at York University, at a time when few Indigenous people were pursuing degrees in the arts. In 1974, while at York, he had his first poem published, a period that marks his life-long devotion to literary craft. He subsequently moved to Vancouver to pursue an MFA at UBC, where he won the creative writing department&#x27;s prize for playwriting. He returned to Toronto in 1979, and while he considered himself to be an independent artist and poet, he worked at various jobs including security guard and assistant immigration officer at Pearson Airport. After 1986, he devoted all of his time to writing. It was during the mid 1980s that he immersed himself in the literary and theatrical world and met Lenore Keeshig-Tobias and Tomson Highway and co-founded the short-lived but influential &quot;Committee to Re-Establish the Trickster&quot;. Embracing the philosophy that Indigenous artists could not know where they were going if they did not know where they came from, he began writing plays in earnest, and by the late 1980s and into the 1990s, he had already written some of his groundbreaking work, much of it produced by the Toronto based company Native Earth Performing Arts.

Accolades followed, and Moses&#x27; &quot;Coyote City&quot;, produced in 1988, was shortlisted for the Governor General&#x27;s Award for Drama; this was followed by &quot;The Dreaming Beauty&quot; in 1990, winner of First Prize in Theatre Canada&#x27;s National Playwriting Competition; &quot;The Moon and Dead Indians&quot; in 1994, winner of the Du Maurier One Act Playwrighting Competition; and &quot;The Indian Medicine Shows&quot; in 1996, winner of the James Buller Award for Excellence in Aboriginal Drama. His best known play, &quot;Almighty Voice and His Wife&quot;, was a reimagining of the story of Almighty Voice, a young Cree man who was killed in a shoot-out with the North-West Mounted Police in 1897. It was overlooked at the time it was produced in 1992, but has become his most beloved play, continuing to be produced across the country. An experimental work of startling audacity, it is now firmly part of the canon of great Canadian plays.

Further awards won by Moses are the Harbourfront Festival Prize and a Harold Award in 2001, and the Chalmers Arts Fellowship in 2003. In 2016 he was elected as a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada. 

A strong believer in community and in contributing to the arts, Moses served on the boards of the Association for Native Development in the Performing and Visual Arts, Native Earth Performing Arts and the Playwrights Union of Canada (now the Playwrights Guild of Canada). In addition to working as a playwright, dramaturge, editor and essayist, he held the position of the artist-playwright or writer-in-residence at various institutions, including Theatre Passe Muraille, the Banff Centre for the Arts, the Sage Hill Writing Experience, the University of British Columbia, the University of Western Ontario, the University of Windsor, the University of Toronto (Scarborough), McMaster University and Concordia University, positions that included teaching and highlighted his abiding interest in education and his belief in &quot;passing the torch&quot; to a younger generation of writers. He most recently became a member of the Advisory Board of Oskana Poetry and Poetics book series of the University of Regina Press.

Throughout his career, Moses continued to publish his writing widely – a body of work that includes drama, poetry, short stories and essays – in his own books and in literary journals and anthologies. These publications range from small presses, including Theytus Books&quot;&#x27; Gatherings&quot; anthology series and &quot;Exile Editions&quot;&#x27; &quot;Native Canadian Fiction and Drama&quot; (edited by Moses) to large publishers, including W.W. Norton&#x27;s &quot;The Norton Anthology of Drama&quot;, Vol. 2, and OUP&#x27;s &quot;An Anthology of Indigenous Literature in English: Voice from Canada&quot;, 5th Edition. In 1992,1998, 2005 and 2013, Moses himself co-edited the seminal text, &quot;An Anthology of Canadian Native Literature&quot; for Oxford University Press. 

In 2003, while still based in Toronto, Moses was appointed as a Queen&#x27;s National Scholar to the Department of Drama at Queen&#x27;s University in Kingston, Ontario, where he was an Associate Professor. Until his retirement in 2019, when he returned to Toronto, he divided his time between Kingston and Toronto and remained active in the theatrical and literary arts scene in Toronto in a career that extended over 30 years.

==Works==
*&quot;Delicate Bodies&quot; – 1980
*&quot;The White Line&quot; – 1988
*&quot;Coyote City: A Play in Two Acts&quot; – 1990 (nominated for a Governor General&#x27;s Award)
*&quot;The Dreaming Beauty&quot; – 1990 – (won 1990 Theatre Canada&#x27;s National Playwrighting Competition)
*&quot;Almighty Voice and His Wife&quot; – 1992
*&quot;The Moon and Dead Indians&quot; – 1994 – (won 1994 Du Maurier One Act Playwrighting Competition)
*&quot;The Indian Medicine Shows&quot; – 1996 – (won 1996 James Buller Award for Aboriginal Theatre Excellence – Playwright of the Year)
*&quot;Big Buck City&quot; - 1998
*&quot;Hotel Centrale, Rotterdam&quot; - 2000
*&quot;Brébeuf&#x27;s Ghost&quot; – 2000
*&quot;Sixteen Jesuses&quot; – 2000
*&quot;City of Shadows: Necropolite!&quot; – 2000
*&quot;Songs of Love and Medicine&quot; – 2005
*&quot;Pursued by a Bear: Talks, Monologues and Tales&quot; – 2005
*&quot;Kyotopolis&quot; – 2008
*&quot;River Range: Poems&quot; – 2009
Moses&#x27; poems have been published in international and national literary magazines, such as:
* Prism International 
* ARC
* Atlanta Review
* The Fiddlehead 
* Poetry Canada Review 
* Impulse Magazine 
* Prairie Fire 
* QUARRY
* Exile, the Literary Quarterly

His poetry has also appeared or been featured in the following collections:
* &quot;Native Poetry in Canada, A Contemporary Anthology&quot;, edited by Jeanette C. Armstrong and Lally Grauer
* &quot;Native Writers and Canadian Writing&quot;, edited by W.H. New
* &quot;The Last Blewointment&quot; Anthology, Volume II, edited by Bill Bissett
* &quot;First People, First Voices&quot;, edited by Penny Petrone.

Moses was a co-editor of &quot;An Anthology of Canadian Native Literature in English&quot; with Terry Goldie.

==References==
==External links==
* Daniel David Moses </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5216920" start="0" end="18" title="Daniel David Moses" label="Daniel David Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081157" start="110" end="127" title="Ohsweken, Ontario" label="Ohsweken, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457190" start="157" end="187" title="Six Nations 40, Ontario" label="Six Nations of the Grand River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420038" start="334" end="357" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s University, Canada" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q301702" start="671" end="681" title="Two-Spirit" label="Two-Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q51415" start="792" end="797" title="Queer" label="Queer"/>
<link wikidata="Q849751" start="870" end="885" title="York University" label="York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="922" end="952" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q62081969" start="1775" end="1796" title="Lenore Keeshig-Tobias" label="Lenore Keeshig-Tobias"/>
<link wikidata="Q902180" start="1899" end="1908" title="Trickster" label="Trickster"/>
<link wikidata="Q112228139" start="2868" end="2882" title="Almighty Voice (Cree)" label="Almighty Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506428" start="2940" end="2965" title="North-West Mounted Police" label="North-West Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="3964" end="3994" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="4000" end="4029" title="University of Western Ontario" label="University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065769" start="4035" end="4056" title="University of Windsor" label="University of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="4062" end="4083" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q632891" start="4099" end="4118" title="McMaster University" label="McMaster University"/>
<link wikidata="Q326342" start="4123" end="4143" title="Concordia University" label="Concordia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405762" start="5808" end="5837" title="1991 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245675" start="6728" end="6747" title="Prism International" label="Prism International"/>
<link wikidata="Q15757141" start="6757" end="6771" title="Atlanta Review" label="Atlanta Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947288" start="6774" end="6788" title="The Fiddlehead" label="The Fiddlehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q599358" start="7043" end="7064" title="Jeannette Armstrong" label="Jeanette C. Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911496" start="7220" end="7232" title="Bill Bissett" label="Bill Bissett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164416" start="7285" end="7298" title="Penny Petrone" label="Penny Petrone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290399" wikidata="Q2270916" url="?curid=290399" title="Sultans of Swing">
<text>&quot;Sultans of Swing&quot; is a song by British rock band Dire Straits, written by lead vocalist and guitarist Mark Knopfler. The demo of the song was recorded at Pathway Studios, North London, in July 1977 and quickly acquired a following after it was put in rotation on BBC Radio London. Its popularity soon reached record executives, and Dire Straits were offered a contract with Phonogram Records. The song was then re-recorded in February 1978 at Basing Street Studios for the band&#x27;s eponymous debut album.

The B-side, &quot;Eastbound Train&quot;, is a live track that otherwise only appears on the &quot;Live at the Hope &amp; Anchor Front Row Festival&quot; album. The single would go on to reach the top 5 in Canada, South Africa, and the United States as well as the top 10 in Australia, Ireland, and the United Kingdom. The song has since remained a staple of classic rock radio, and is one of the band&#x27;s most recognizable songs.

==Background and composition==
&quot;Sultans of Swing&quot; was originally composed by Mark Knopfler on a National Steel guitar in open tuning. He thought the song was &quot;dull&quot; until he bought his first Fender Stratocaster in 1977: &quot;It just came alive as soon as I played it on that &#x27;61 Strat ... the new chord changes just presented themselves and fell into place.&quot;

The lyrics were inspired by a performance of a Dixieland jazz band playing in the corner of an almost empty pub in Deptford, South London. At the end of their performance, the lead singer announced their name, the Sultans of Swing; Knopfler found the contrast between the group&#x27;s dowdy appearance and surroundings and their grandiose name amusing. 

The song is set in common time, with a tempo of 149 beats per minute. It is in the key of D minor with Knopfler&#x27;s vocal range spanning G2 to D4. It uses a chord progression of Dm–C–B–A for the verses, and F–C–B for the choruses. The riff uses triads, particularly second inversions. The song employs the Andalusian cadence or diatonic phrygian tetrachord. All the chords are compatible with a D natural minor scale, except for the A major triad, which suggests a D harmonic minor scale. Knopfler used similar triads on &quot;Lady Writer&quot;.

==Recording==
Shortly after Dire Straits formed in 1977, they recorded a five-song demo tape at Pathway Studios, including &quot;Sultans of Swing&quot;. They took the tape to DJ Charlie Gillett, presenter of &quot;Honky Tonk&quot; on BBC Radio London, hoping for advice. Gillett liked the music and put &quot;Sultans of Swing&quot; on his rotation. Two months later, Dire Straits signed a recording contract with Phonogram Records.

&quot;Sultans of Swing&quot; was re-recorded in February 1978 at Basing Street Studios for the debut album &quot;Dire Straits,&quot; produced by Muff Winwood. Knopfler used the guitar technique of finger picking on the recording.

==Critical reception==
Ken Tucker of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; singled out &quot;Sultans of Swing&quot; as a highlight of the album for its &quot;inescapable hook&quot; and compared Knopfler&#x27;s vocal stylings to those of Bob Dylan. &quot;Cash Box&quot; said that &quot;the phrasing of the vocals is reminiscent of Lou Reed&quot; and that &quot;the arrangement of moderate beat and excellent guitar work are exceptionally fluid and engaging.&quot; &quot;Record World&quot; said that &quot;The lyrics are thoughtful and the hook instantly memorable.&quot; &quot;The New Rolling Stone Album Guide&quot; called the song &quot;an insinuating bit of bar-band mythmaking&quot; whose lyrics &quot;paint a vivid picture of an overlooked and underappreciated pub combo&quot;. 

The &quot;Spokane Chronicle&quot;&#x27;s Jim Kershner wrote that &quot;Sultans of Swing&quot; is &quot;remarkable, both for its lyrics that made fun of hip young Londoners and the phenomenal guitar sound of Knopfler&quot;, which &quot;sounded like no other guitar on radio&quot;. Jon Marlowe of &quot;The Palm Beach Post&quot; called it &quot;an infectious, sounds-damn-good-on-the-car-radio ode to every bar band who has ever done four sets a night, seven nights a week&quot;. &quot;Classic Rock&quot; critic Paul Rees rated the live version on &quot;&quot; to be Dire Straits&#x27; greatest song.

Writing in 2013 on the impact of the song, Rick Moore of &quot;American Songwriter&quot; reflected:
&quot;Record Mirror&quot; named &quot;Sultans of Swing&quot; the tenth-best song of 1978. In 1992, &quot;Life&quot; named it one of the top five songs of 1979. In 1993, Paul Williams included it in his book &quot;Rock and Roll: The 100 Best Singles&quot;. The song is on The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame&#x27;s 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll list, Dire Straits&#x27; only appearance. In 2006, &quot;Mojo&quot; included it in a list of the 50 best British songs. &quot;Guitar World&quot; ranked its guitar solo at the 22nd greatest, and &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; named it the 32nd greatest guitar song.

==Chart performance==
The song was originally released in May 1978, but it did not chart at the time. Following its re-issue in January 1979, the song entered the American music pop chart. Unusually, the success of this single release came more than six months after the relatively unheralded release of the band&#x27;s debut album in October 1978. BBC Radio was initially unwilling to play the song due to its high lyrical content but after it became a US hit, their line softened. The song reached the top 10 in both the UK and the US, reaching No. 8 on the UK Singles Chart and No. 4 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and helped drive sales of the album, which also became a hit.

&quot;Sultans of Swing&quot; was re-issued again as a single in November 1988, a month after it appeared on the band&#x27;s greatest hits album &quot;Money for Nothing&quot;, when it peaked at No. 62. It was also included on &quot;Sultans of Swing: The Very Best of Dire Straits&quot; and &quot;The Best of Dire Straits &amp; Mark Knopfler: Private Investigations&quot;.

==Other versions==
Knopfler has improvised and expanded the solo during live performances. The coda of the live recording on the 1984 album &quot;&quot; stretches the song to nearly 11 minutes. Another live version of the song came at the 1988 Nelson Mandela 70th Birthday Tribute concert in London when Eric Clapton teamed up with the band to play the song, providing rhythm guitar.

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===


===Year-end charts===


==Certifications==




==Notes==
==References==
*
*
* 

==External links==
*Guitar World: 100 Greatest Guitar Solos - Sultans of Swing</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2270916" start="6" end="22" title="Sultans of Swing" label="Sultans of Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="50" end="54" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q50040" start="60" end="72" title="Dire Straits" label="Dire Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q185343" start="113" end="126" title="Mark Knopfler" label="Mark Knopfler"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="132" end="136" title="Demo (music)" label="demo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144880" start="165" end="180" title="Pathway Studios" label="Pathway Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q734547" start="182" end="194" title="North London" label="North London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246718" start="262" end="270" title="Rotation (music)" label="rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834838" start="274" end="290" title="BBC Radio London" label="BBC Radio London"/>
<link wikidata="Q58825265" start="385" end="402" title="Phonogram Records" label="Phonogram Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q909770" start="454" end="475" title="Basing Street Studios" label="Basing Street Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q731870" start="496" end="517" title="Dire Straits (album)" label="eponymous debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q5899036" start="618" end="666" title="Hope &amp;amp; Anchor Front Row Festival" label="Live at the Hope &amp;amp; Anchor Front Row Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="725" end="731" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="733" end="745" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="755" end="768" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="794" end="803" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="805" end="812" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="822" end="836" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096120" start="878" end="890" title="classic rock" label="classic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818058" start="1085" end="1096" title="open tuning" label="open tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q208173" start="1165" end="1184" title="Fender Stratocaster" label="Fender Stratocaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q906647" start="1392" end="1406" title="Dixieland jazz" label="Dixieland jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308650" start="1460" end="1468" title="Deptford" label="Deptford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394500" start="1470" end="1482" title="South London" label="South London"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="1719" end="1730" title="Common-time" label="common time"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="1739" end="1744" title="tempo (music)" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="1752" end="1768" title="beats per minute" label="beats per minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q534932" start="1783" end="1786" title="Key (music)" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q283903" start="1790" end="1797" title="D minor" label="D minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326471" start="1860" end="1877" title="chord progression" label="chord progression"/>
<link wikidata="Q944899" start="1948" end="1954" title="triad (music)" label="triads"/>
<link wikidata="Q360636" start="1969" end="1985" title="second inversion" label="second inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q488411" start="2009" end="2027" title="Andalusian cadence" label="Andalusian cadence"/>
<link wikidata="Q927954" start="2230" end="2241" title="Lady Writer" label="Lady Writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144880" start="2346" end="2361" title="Pathway Studios" label="Pathway Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084920" start="2428" end="2443" title="Charlie Gillett" label="Charlie Gillett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834838" start="2484" end="2500" title="BBC Radio London" label="BBC Radio London"/>
<link wikidata="Q909770" start="2748" end="2769" title="Basing Street Studios" label="Basing Street Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q731870" start="2796" end="2808" title="Dire Straits (album)" label="Dire Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q981603" start="2828" end="2840" title="Muff Winwood" label="Muff Winwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140333" start="2880" end="2894" title="finger picking" label="finger picking"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="2957" end="2970" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="3139" end="3148" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="3156" end="3164" title="Cash Box" label="Cash Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q189080" start="3232" end="3240" title="Lou Reed" label="Lou Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q379755" start="3266" end="3277" title="arrangement (music)" label="arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422110" start="3371" end="3383" title="Record World" label="Record World"/>
<link wikidata="Q751678" start="3478" end="3511" title="The New Rolling Stone Album Guide" label="The New Rolling Stone Album Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q21056604" start="3696" end="3713" title="Spokane Chronicle" label="Spokane Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522163" start="3987" end="4006" title="The Palm Beach Post" label="The Palm Beach Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745125" start="4349" end="4368" title="American Songwriter" label="American Songwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q844480" start="4392" end="4405" title="Record Mirror" label="Record Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="4491" end="4495" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="4657" end="4730" title="The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame&amp;#x27;s 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll" label="The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame&amp;#x27;s 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q261633" start="4788" end="4792" title="Mojo (magazine)" label="Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q930471" start="4857" end="4869" title="Guitar World" label="Guitar World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446979" start="4887" end="4898" title="guitar solo" label="guitar solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="4931" end="4944" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="5552" end="5568" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="5586" end="5615" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292532" start="5829" end="5846" title="Money for Nothing (album)" label="Money for Nothing"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5910" end="5957" title="Sultans of Swing: The Very Best of Dire Straits" label="Sultans of Swing: The Very Best of Dire Straits"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5974" end="6042" title="The Best of Dire Straits &amp;amp; Mark Knopfler: Private Investigations" label="The Best of Dire Straits &amp;amp; Mark Knopfler: Private Investigations"/>
<link wikidata="Q852466" start="6146" end="6150" title="Coda (music)" label="coda"/>
<link wikidata="Q454858" start="6295" end="6331" title="Nelson Mandela 70th Birthday Tribute" label="Nelson Mandela 70th Birthday Tribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="6343" end="6349" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="6355" end="6367" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290400" wikidata="Q1101126" url="?curid=290400" title="Legio VIII Augusta">
<text>Legio VIII Augusta (&quot;Augustus&#x27; Eighth Legion&quot;) was one of the oldest legions of the Imperial Roman army.

==In republican service==

They were ordered to Cisalpine Gaul around 58 BC by Julius Caesar and marched with him throughout the entirety of the Gallic Wars, especially during the battles of Gergovie and Alesia. During the war the legion won the title &quot;Gallica.&quot; It also earned a reputation for courage.

They stood with him at the Battle of Pharsalus. The legion was also present in Egypt, when Caesar captured Egypt for Cleopatra. In 46 BC, it took part in the Battle of Thapsus near what is now Bakalta, Tunisia shortly before their disbandment. 

In 44 BC, Octavian reconstituted the legion that had helped him attain the control of the Roman Empire. In 43 BC it took part in the siege of the Battle of Mutina (current Modena) by Marc Antony, defended by the troops of Decimus Brutus, which earned Legio VIII Gallica the nickname &quot;Mutinensis&quot;.

==In imperial service==
In or before 9 AD the legion was transferred to Poetovium (modern Ptuj). The legion must have won a victory around this time that earned them the cognomen Augusta. At least a detachment also stayed in Burnum, Illyricum where their stamped tiles have been found.

Around 45 under Claudius, the VIII Augusta took part in the suppression of the Thracian uprising, and founded its castrum at Novae where the Danube has its most southern bend and from where the legion controlled a long section of the river. 

The legion received the title &quot;BIS AUGUSTA&quot; (twice August) for their actions in Thrace. After Nero&#x27;s death in 69 it gave up this title and in the confusion of the Year of the Four Emperors, the legion voted for Otho and sent a detachment of 2000 men to Italy (as did the 7th and the 3rd legions). Soon after Otho&#x27;s death, the Danube legions voted for Vespasian and went with him to Mirebeau-sur-Bèze in Gaul where it built its new base in 70 to oppose the revolts of the Treveri and especially the Ubii and Lingones against Rome. 

After restoration of Rome`s rule in the North in or before 86, the legion moved to its new headquarters at Argentoratum in Germania Superior (now Strasbourg), where the main part of the unit was stationed until the 5th century.

The legion also fought the Parthian Empire with Septimius Severus, who ruled from 193 until 211, and with his successors. 

Records indicate that they were still active during the first years of the fourth century at the Rhine frontier. This means that the history of the legion covers more than 400 years of almost continuous service. In 371 it was again stationed in Argentoratum, according to an inscription. Later, the Roman general Stilicho, was compelled to move the German legions back to Italy to defend it against the Visigothic invasion.

According to &quot;Notitia Dignitatum&quot;, around 420 an &quot;Octaviani&quot; unit was under the &quot;Magister Peditum&quot; of Italia; it is possible that this unit was the old VIII Augusta, which was originally a &quot;comitatensis&quot; unit but had been promoted to &quot;palatina&quot; status.

== Attested members ==
==Epigraphic inscriptions==

- &quot;ri[…] G̣allorum tribunus militum legionis VIII Augustae&quot;. Cohort of Gauls, military [tribune] of the Eighth Legion Augusta. Brougham (&quot;Brocavum&quot;). CIL VII 300 = RIB 782.

==See also==
* List of Roman legions

==References==

==External links==

* livius.org account
* VEX LEG VIII AVG, German re-enactment society
* LEGION VIII AUGUSTA, French re-enactment society
* LEGIO VIII AUGUSTA, US re-enactment society
* , British re-enactment society
* Octaviani in &quot;Notitia Dignitatum&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1101126" start="0" end="18" title="Legio VIII Augusta" label="Legio VIII Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="84" end="91" title="Roman legion" label="legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q8772741" start="99" end="118" title="Imperial Roman army" label="Imperial Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q199728" start="169" end="183" title="Cisalpine Gaul" label="Cisalpine Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="200" end="213" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q202161" start="266" end="277" title="Gallic Wars" label="Gallic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189964" start="312" end="320" title="Gergovie" label="Gergovie"/>
<link wikidata="Q835966" start="325" end="331" title="Alesia (city)" label="Alesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203681" start="463" end="482" title="Battle of Pharsalus" label="Battle of Pharsalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="515" end="520" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q635" start="553" end="562" title="Cleopatra" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q849653" start="594" end="611" title="Battle of Thapsus" label="Battle of Thapsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="638" end="645" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="692" end="700" title="Octavian" label="Octavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="772" end="784" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353917" start="828" end="844" title="Battle of Mutina" label="Battle of Mutina"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="865" end="876" title="Marc Antony" label="Marc Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q294846" start="904" end="918" title="Decimus Junius Brutus Albinus" label="Decimus Brutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15906" start="1062" end="1071" title="Poetovium" label="Poetovium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15906" start="1080" end="1084" title="Ptuj" label="Ptuj"/>
<link wikidata="Q777342" start="1160" end="1168" title="cognomen" label="cognomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q548862" start="1215" end="1221" title="Burnum" label="Burnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q753824" start="1223" end="1232" title="Illyricum (Roman province)" label="Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q635058" start="1356" end="1363" title="Thracia" label="Thracia"/>
<link wikidata="Q88205" start="1391" end="1398" title="castrum" label="castrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257083" start="1402" end="1407" title="Novae (fortress)" label="Novae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="1418" end="1424" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="1624" end="1628" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q470596" start="1698" end="1723" title="Year of the Four Emperors" label="Year of the Four Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416" start="1746" end="1750" title="Otho" label="Otho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="1891" end="1900" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q55660" start="1922" end="1939" title="Mirebeau-sur-Bèze" label="Mirebeau-sur-Bèze"/>
<link wikidata="Q322168" start="2011" end="2018" title="Treveri" label="Treveri"/>
<link wikidata="Q664800" start="2038" end="2042" title="Ubii" label="Ubii"/>
<link wikidata="Q931808" start="2047" end="2055" title="Lingones" label="Lingones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361353" start="2179" end="2191" title="Argentoratum" label="Argentoratum"/>
<link wikidata="Q153553" start="2195" end="2212" title="Germania Superior" label="Germania Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="2218" end="2228" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="2328" end="2343" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="2349" end="2366" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="2522" end="2527" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q203636" start="2738" end="2746" title="Stilicho" label="Stilicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="2828" end="2838" title="Visigoths" label="Visigothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q641178" start="2869" end="2887" title="Notitia Dignitatum" label="Notitia Dignitatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q913582" start="2982" end="2988" title="Roman Italy" label="Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114814" start="3075" end="3087" title="comitatensis" label="comitatensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543009" start="3130" end="3138" title="palatina" label="palatina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824574" start="3359" end="3367" title="Brocavum" label="Brocavum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334983" start="3415" end="3436" title="List of Roman legions" label="List of Roman legions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290401" wikidata="Q375467" url="?curid=290401" title="Prince Augustus Frederick, Duke of Sussex">
<text>Prince Augustus Frederick, Duke of Sussex (27 January 1773 – 21 April 1843), was the sixth son and ninth child of King George III and his queen consort, Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz. He was the only surviving son of George III who did not pursue an army or navy career. A Whig, he was known for his liberal views, which included reform of Parliament, abolition of the slave trade, Catholic Emancipation, and the removal of existing civil restrictions on Jews and Dissenters.

== Biography ==

=== Early life ===
Augustus Frederick was born on 27 January 1773 at Buckingham House, London. He was the ninth child and sixth son of King George III and Queen Charlotte. 

Augustus Frederick was baptised in the Great Council Chamber at St James&#x27;s Palace, on 25 February 1773, by Archbishop of Canterbury Frederick Cornwallis. His godparents were the Duke of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg (his paternal first cousin once-removed, for whom The Earl of Hertford, Lord Chamberlain, stood proxy), Duke George Augustus of Mecklenburg (his maternal uncle, for whom the Earl of Bristol, Groom of the Stool, stood proxy) and Princess Charles of Hesse-Cassel (his first cousin once-removed, for whom The Viscountess Weymouth, Lady of the Bedchamber to the queen, stood proxy).

Augustus Frederick was tutored at home before being sent to the University of Göttingen in Germany in the summer of 1786, along with his brothers Prince Ernest and Prince Adolphus. Prince Augustus, who suffered from asthma, did not join his brothers in receiving military training in Hanover. He briefly considered becoming a cleric in the Church of England. In 1805, during the Napoleonic War, he served at home in Britain as Lieutenant-Colonel Commandant of the &quot;Loyal North Britons&quot; Volunteers regiment.

=== First marriage ===

While travelling in Italy, the prince met Lady Augusta Murray (1768–1830), the second daughter of the 4th Earl of Dunmore. The couple secretly married in Rome on 4 April 1793. The King&#x27;s minister of Hanover affairs Ernst zu Münster was sent to Italy to escort him back to London.

The couple married again without revealing their full identities at St George&#x27;s, Hanover Square, Westminster, on 5 December 1793. Both marriages took place without the consent, or even the knowledge, of his father.

In August 1794, the Court of Arches pronounced the prince&#x27;s first marriage null and void on the grounds that it contravened the Royal Marriages Act 1772, not having been approved by the King. However, Prince Augustus Frederick continued to live with Lady Augusta until 1801, when he received a parliamentary grant of £12,000 and the couple separated, the Duke moving to Grosvenor Square. Lady Augusta retained custody of their children and received maintenance of £4,000 a year. Their two children were named Augustus Frederick d&#x27;Este and Augusta Emma d&#x27;Este, both parents being descended from the royal House of Este. In 1806, their mother, Lady Augusta, was given royal licence to use the surname &quot;de Ameland&quot; instead of Murray.

=== Duke of Sussex and Knight of the Garter ===

Augustus Frederick was invested as a Knight of the Garter on 2 June 1786, and installed by dispensation on 28 May 1801. The King created him Duke of Sussex, Earl of Inverness, and Baron Arklow in the Peerage of the United Kingdom on 24 November 1801. Since he had no legitimate issue, the title became extinct on his death in 1843. In 1815 the Duke became a patron of the Jews&#x27; Hospital and Orphan Asylum, later to become the charity known today as Norwood. Royal patronage continued, with Queen Elizabeth II eventually becoming Norwood&#x27;s patron.

===Mistresses===
A known mistress was Mrs. Bugge. Sir William Dillon recorded in his diary they were both present with him at a party held by Emma Hamilton (Lord Nelson&#x27;s mistress) where she rented tableware for the meal but neglected to rent a carving knife, creating great difficulty in serving the Christmas dinner to her guests.

===United Grand Lodge of England===

In January 1813, Augustus Frederick became Grand Master of the Premier Grand Lodge of England, and in December of that year his brother, Prince Edward Augustus, Duke of Kent and Strathearn, became Grand Master of the Antient Grand Lodge of England. On 27 December 1813 the United Grand Lodge of England was constituted at Freemasons&#x27; Hall, London with Prince Augustus Frederick as Grand Master. In 1842, he founded the Royal Masonic Benevolent Institution.

George Oliver&#x27;s &quot;Signs and Symbols Illustrated and Explained in a Course of Twelve Lectures on Freemasonry&quot; (1837) was dedicated to Prince Augustus Frederick, Duke of Sussex.

=== Second marriage ===

A year after the death of Lady Augusta D&#x27;Ameland (Lady Augusta Murray), the Duke of Sussex married a second time on 2 May 1831 (again in contravention of the Royal Marriages Act) to Lady Cecilia Letitia Buggin (1793–1873), the eldest daughter of Arthur Gore, 2nd Earl of Arran, and Elizabeth Underwood, and the widow of Sir George Buggin. On the same day, Lady Cecilia assumed the surname Underwood by Royal Licence. She was never titled or recognized as the Duchess of Sussex. However, she was created Duchess of Inverness in her own right by Queen Victoria in 1840.

=== Later life ===

William IV appointed his younger brother Chief Ranger and Keeper of St James&#x27;s Park and Hyde Park on 29 January 1831, and Queen Victoria appointed her uncle Governor of Windsor Castle in 1842. The Duke of Sussex was elected president of the Society of Arts in 1816 and held that post for the rest of his life. He also held the honorary posts of Colonel of the Honourable Artillery Company from 1817, and of Captain-General (at which point the posts were united) from 1837 onward. He was president of the Royal Society between 1830 and 1838, and had a keen interest in biblical studies and Hebrew. His personal library contained over 50,000 theological manuscripts, some in Hebrew. In 1838, he introduced in a meeting scientist John Herschel, and the Duke gave a speech in which he spoke about the compatibility of science and religion:


The Duke of Sussex was the favourite uncle of Queen Victoria. He gave her away at her wedding to Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha in 1840. The Duke of Sussex died, aged 70 of erysipelas, at Kensington Palace in 1843. In his will he specified that he was not to have a state funeral and was accordingly buried at Kensal Green Cemetery on 4 May 1843. He is buried in front of the main chapel, immediately opposite the tomb of his sister Princess Sophia.

The Duchess of Inverness continued to reside at Kensington Palace until her death in 1873. She was buried next to Prince Augustus.

== Titles, styles, honours and arms ==
=== Titles and styles ===
* 27 January 1773 – 27 November 1801: &quot;His Royal Highness&quot; Prince Augustus Frederick
* 24 November 1801 – 21 April 1843: &quot;His Royal Highness&quot; The Duke of Sussex
The duke held the subsidiary titles of Earl of Inverness and Baron Arklow.

=== Honours ===
* Grand Prior of England of the Order of the Temple
* Grand Master of the Premier Grand Lodge of England, &quot;1813&quot;
* Grand Master of the United Grand Lodge of England, &quot;1813–1843&quot;
* Knight of the Order of the Garter, &quot;27 June 1786&quot;
* Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Guelphic Order, &quot;12 July 1815&quot;
* Knight of the Order of the Thistle, &quot;19 July 1830&quot;
* Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath, &quot;15 December 1837&quot;
* Grand Master of the Order of the Bath, &quot;16 December 1837&quot;
* Captain-General and Colonel Honourable Artillery Company

=== Arms ===
As a son of the sovereign, the Duke of Sussex had use of the arms of the kingdom, differenced by a label argent of three points, the centre point bearing two hearts gules, the outer points each bearing a cross gules.

== Issue ==

==Ancestors==
==See also==
* List of presidents of the Royal Society

== Notes ==
== External links ==
* . James Marshall and Marie-Louise Osborn Collection, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q375467" start="0" end="41" title="Prince Augustus Frederick, Duke of Sussex" label="Prince Augustus Frederick, Duke of Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="114" end="129" title="George III" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q719039" start="138" end="151" title="queen consort" label="queen consort"/>
<link wikidata="Q161159" start="153" end="186" title="Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="277" end="281" title="Whig (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="344" end="354" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q428286" start="386" end="407" title="Catholic Emancipation" label="Catholic Emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="459" end="463" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195178" start="468" end="478" title="English Dissenters" label="Dissenters"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="567" end="583" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham House"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="633" end="648" title="King George III" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q161159" start="653" end="668" title="Queen Charlotte" label="Queen Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q272162" start="736" end="758" title="St James&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="St James&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="784" end="808" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q907404" start="809" end="829" title="Frederick Cornwallis" label="Frederick Cornwallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q213698" start="855" end="883" title="Ernest II, Duke of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg" label="Duke of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081687" start="934" end="954" title="Francis Seymour-Conway, 1st Marquess of Hertford" label="The Earl of Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355456" start="956" end="972" title="Lord Chamberlain" label="Lord Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q877646" start="988" end="1023" title="Duke George Augustus of Mecklenburg" label="Duke George Augustus of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540566" start="1058" end="1073" title="George Hervey, 2nd Earl of Bristol" label="Earl of Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918893" start="1075" end="1093" title="Groom of the Stool" label="Groom of the Stool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805444" start="1112" end="1144" title="Princess Louise of Denmark (1750–1831)" label="Princess Charles of Hesse-Cassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3723379" start="1186" end="1210" title="Elizabeth Thynne, Marchioness of Bath" label="The Viscountess Weymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216038" start="1212" end="1234" title="Lady of the Bedchamber" label="Lady of the Bedchamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="1328" end="1351" title="University of Göttingen" label="University of Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1355" end="1362" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q162302" start="1410" end="1423" title="Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover" label="Prince Ernest"/>
<link wikidata="Q313771" start="1428" end="1443" title="Prince Adolphus, 1st Duke of Cambridge" label="Prince Adolphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="1480" end="1486" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="1548" end="1555" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="1590" end="1596" title="clergy" label="cleric"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1604" end="1621" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="1643" end="1657" title="Napoleonic War" label="Napoleonic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1826" end="1831" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q434358" start="1848" end="1867" title="Lady Augusta Murray" label="Lady Augusta Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q336639" start="1908" end="1927" title="John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore" label="4th Earl of Dunmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1960" end="1964" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q67418" start="2026" end="2042" title="Ernst zu Münster" label="Ernst zu Münster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495317" start="2160" end="2192" title="St George&amp;#x27;s, Hanover Square" label="St George&amp;#x27;s, Hanover Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="2194" end="2205" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786150" start="2333" end="2348" title="Court of Arches" label="Court of Arches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939753" start="2393" end="2406" title="void marriage" label="null and void"/>
<link wikidata="Q377769" start="2446" end="2470" title="Royal Marriages Act 1772" label="Royal Marriages Act 1772"/>
<link wikidata="Q932992" start="2688" end="2704" title="Grosvenor Square" label="Grosvenor Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q464281" start="2827" end="2857" title="Augustus d&amp;#x27;Este" label="Augustus Frederick d&amp;#x27;Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q766430" start="2862" end="2886" title="Augusta Emma d&amp;#x27;Este" label="Augusta Emma d&amp;#x27;Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q677173" start="2932" end="2945" title="House of Este" label="House of Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="3156" end="3176" title="Knight of the Garter" label="Knight of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q772304" start="3260" end="3274" title="Duke of Sussex" label="Duke of Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326299" start="3276" end="3293" title="Earl of Inverness" label="Earl of Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862111" start="3299" end="3311" title="Baron Arklow" label="Baron Arklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q863009" start="3319" end="3348" title="Peerage of the United Kingdom" label="Peerage of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061602" start="3573" end="3580" title="Norwood (charity)" label="Norwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="3620" end="3632" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q234811" start="3819" end="3832" title="Emma, Lady Hamilton" label="Emma Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q83235" start="3834" end="3845" title="Lord Nelson" label="Lord Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637868" start="4116" end="4146" title="Premier Grand Lodge of England" label="Premier Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q157009" start="4190" end="4241" title="Prince Edward Augustus, Duke of Kent and Strathearn" label="Prince Edward Augustus, Duke of Kent and Strathearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618677" start="4270" end="4300" title="Antient Grand Lodge of England" label="Antient Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543757" start="4326" end="4355" title="United Grand Lodge of England" label="United Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453586" start="4375" end="4404" title="Freemasons&amp;#x27; Hall, London" label="Freemasons&amp;#x27; Hall, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374458" start="4477" end="4513" title="Royal Masonic Benevolent Institution" label="Royal Masonic Benevolent Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q457644" start="4919" end="4946" title="Cecilia Underwood, Duchess of Inverness" label="Lady Cecilia Letitia Buggin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798851" start="4983" end="5013" title="Arthur Gore, 2nd Earl of Arran" label="Arthur Gore, 2nd Earl of Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q457644" start="5240" end="5260" title="Duchess of Inverness" label="Duchess of Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q130822" start="5326" end="5336" title="William IV of the United Kingdom" label="William IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q216914" start="5394" end="5414" title="St James&amp;#x27;s Park" label="St James&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q123738" start="5419" end="5428" title="Hyde Park, London" label="Hyde Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="5453" end="5467" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="5500" end="5514" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="5572" end="5587" title="Royal Society of Arts" label="Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q219514" start="5691" end="5719" title="Honourable Artillery Company" label="Honourable Artillery Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="5835" end="5848" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q794605" start="5899" end="5915" title="biblical studies" label="biblical studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="5920" end="5926" title="Biblical Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q14278" start="6058" end="6071" title="John Herschel" label="John Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="6266" end="6300" title="Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha" label="Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q207092" start="6346" end="6356" title="erysipelas" label="erysipelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q207385" start="6361" end="6378" title="Kensington Palace" label="Kensington Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="6439" end="6452" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574424" start="6483" end="6504" title="Kensal Green Cemetery" label="Kensal Green Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q257227" start="6606" end="6621" title="Princess Sophia of the United Kingdom" label="Princess Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632005" start="7020" end="7036" title="subsidiary title" label="subsidiary title"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326299" start="7041" end="7058" title="Earl of Inverness" label="Earl of Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862111" start="7063" end="7075" title="Baron Arklow" label="Baron Arklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940122" start="7148" end="7160" title="Grandmaster (Masonic)" label="Grand Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637868" start="7168" end="7198" title="Premier Grand Lodge of England" label="Premier Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543757" start="7239" end="7268" title="United Grand Lodge of England" label="United Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="7308" end="7327" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q705153" start="7382" end="7402" title="Royal Guelphic Order" label="Royal Guelphic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q721030" start="7445" end="7465" title="Order of the Thistle" label="Order of the Thistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="7520" end="7537" title="Order of the Bath" label="Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q219514" start="7668" end="7696" title="Honourable Artillery Company" label="Honourable Artillery Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q202581" start="7810" end="7815" title="Label (heraldry)" label="label"/>
<link wikidata="Q460978" start="7971" end="8010" title="List of presidents of the Royal Society" label="List of presidents of the Royal Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290404" wikidata="Q7355820" url="?curid=290404" title="Rocky Horror">
<text>Rocky Horror is the title character from &quot;The Rocky Horror Show&quot;. It may also refer to

* The Rocky Horror Show (franchise)
* &quot;The Rocky Horror Show&quot;, a stage musical from 1973
* &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot;, 1975 film adaptation of the stage musical
* &quot;Rocky Horror Show Live&quot;, a 2015 performance
*&quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show: Let&#x27;s Do the Time Warp Again&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7355821" start="100" end="133" title="The Rocky Horror Show (franchise)" label="The Rocky Horror Show (franchise)"/>
<link wikidata="Q583612" start="142" end="163" title="The Rocky Horror Show" label="The Rocky Horror Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q751921" start="205" end="234" title="The Rocky Horror Picture Show" label="The Rocky Horror Picture Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q21585391" start="292" end="314" title="Rocky Horror Show Live" label="Rocky Horror Show Live"/>
<link wikidata="" start="348" end="412" title="The Rocky Horror Picture Show: Let&amp;#x27;s Do the Time Warp Again" label="The Rocky Horror Picture Show: Let&amp;#x27;s Do the Time Warp Again"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290407" wikidata="Q3181180" url="?curid=290407" title="S-CRY-ed">
<text>, also known as s.CRY.ed or Scryed, is a 26-episode Japanese anime television series which first aired in Japan on TV Tokyo. The series is written by Yōsuke Kuroda, produced by Sunrise, and directed by Gorō Taniguchi, with music composed by Kōtarō Nakagawa. It is set in an alternative time in Kanagawa Prefecture where a phenomenon gave 1% of its people supernatural powers; they are known as Alters. The plot follows a young Alter mercenary known as Kazuma, as well as Ryuho, a man working for the Alter special forces known as HOLY, who become rivals as their areas clash.

The series&#x27; concept originated in 1999 when Taniguchi was working on &quot;Infinite Ryvius&quot;. He wanted to create another series that would contain themes similar to it, as well as new ones centered mostly on how people adapted to the 21st century. A manga adaptation of &quot;s-CRY-ed&quot;, drawn by Yasunari Toda, was serialized in Akita Shoten&#x27;s &quot;Weekly Shōnen Champion&quot;. A novelization by Kazuho Hyodo has been published. Additionally, a two-part recollection film was released by Sunrise. Both the anime and the manga have also seen English release.

&quot;s-CRY-ed&quot; has been popular in Japan, often appearing on polls taken by Japanese magazines, and once took third place in the Anime Grand Prix awards. Critical reception to the series has been generally positive, with reviewers noting while initial episodes might be simple, the plot becomes more interesting as the series unfolds.

==Story==
===Setting===
The series takes place several years after &quot;The Great Uprising&quot;, a powerful geological events which occurred in Kanagawa Prefecture near Tokyo, dividing the city in two parts: The &quot;Lost Ground&quot; and the &quot;Mainland&quot;. Alongside this disaster, many people in the Lost Ground began to develop a power known as &quot;Alter&quot;, granting them the ability to create weapons with supernatural properties. Among the steadily rising number of Alter users, there are two forces who directly oppose each other: The &quot;Native Alters&quot;, who live outside the central city and avoid any relationships with the government; and &quot;HOLY&quot;, a subgroup of an organization called &quot;HOLD&quot; (which functions as the Mainland government&#x27;s super police force and representative in the Lost Ground) and is composed exclusively of Alter users who serve as a special operations unit tasked with dangerous missions.

===Plot===
Kazuma is a Native Alter user who makes his living as a mercenary so that he and his close friend, Kanami Yuta, can live together.

Kazuma&#x27;s friend Kunihiko Kimishima gives him a mission to defeat another Native Alter user. However, a man known as Ryuho from HOLY captures Kazuma in the aftermath; during this, Ryuho tries to interrogate Kazuma about an unknown Alter user (later dubbed Crystal) who killed his mother and dog.

After managing to break free of his bonds, Kazuma uses a female HOLY agent named Mimori Kiryu as a hostage and manages to escape the facility and make it back to his house. However, HOLY then arrives and proceeds to capture many Native Alter users, during which Kazuma meets Crystal in a forest and the two proceed to fight, after which his Alter receives a power-up.

Later on, it&#x27;s revealed the Great Uprising was caused by a similar event in a parallel universe where all creatures are independent, thinking Alters.

Kazuma then goes on a rampage against HOLY after Kimishima dies while helping him during one of his fights which leads to him and Ryuho fighting again; however, during their battle, they end up opening a gateway to the parallel universe, causing another uprising and attracting the attention of the Mainland government.

Both Kazuma and Ryuho are believed to have died following this event when, in actually, the former goes into hiding in an underground fighting circuit whilst the latter ends up suffering from amnesia. With help from an old friend, a HOLY member known as Straight Cougar, Kazuma recovers his will to protect Kanami who hasn&#x27;t stopped looking for him. Meanwhile, Ryuho manages to recover his lost memories whilst protecting Natives from HOLY agents, ultimately leading to him becoming an ally of Kazuma.

The Mainland sends one of its best agents, Kyouji Mujo, to the Lost Ground in an attempt to exploit the power of the parallel universe for economic gain. However, Mujo develops delusions of grandeur after becoming the de facto head of the Lost Ground government and absorbing the Crystal entity from &quot;the other side&quot; to add to his already formidable Alter power.

Both he and Crystal are defeated by the separate efforts of Kazuma and Ryuho respectively, as both increase their Alter powers by taking energy from the parallel world. The Mainland once again attempts to exert control over the Lost Ground by sending in a fleet of refined Alter users under their control, only for all of them to be defeated by Kazuma and Ryuho.

Following the defeat of the Mainland forces, Kazuma and Ryuho decide to engage in one final battle in order to finally settle their rivalry. As one of them is about to declare victory, the screen fades to white. In an epilogue, taking place years later, they remain the protectors of the Lost Ground and defend it from Mainland invaders; meanwhile, an older Kanami awaits their return.

==Creation and release==

According to the series&#x27; director Gorō Taniguchi, the idea for &quot;s-CRY-ed&quot; originated in 1999 when he was working on the series &quot;Infinite Ryvius&quot;. One of &quot;Infinite Ryvius&quot;″s themes was people communicating with each other. The series&#x27; staff wanted to show people already on their own paths, focusing more on individualism. With the storyline beginning in the early 21st century, Taniguchi said the cast would already have adapted to the new times allowing &quot;s-CRY-ed&quot; to take more themes from &quot;Infinite Ryvius&quot;. The title &quot;s-CRY-ed&quot; is basically a combination of one English word and Japanese. The first lower-case &quot;s&quot; is a representation of the Japanese word &quot;su&quot; which means something in its natural form and not artificial. &quot;Cry&quot; comes from the English, and the last &quot;ed&quot; represents a person. Combined as &quot;s-CRY-ed&quot; the Sunrise studio staff wanted it to express the idea of how people react or interact when they are in their most natural state. They had devised the word when the project was in its early phases of production, and while it was meant to be a temporary name, the staff ended up using it as the title.

When asked by the staff of the magazine &quot;Animerica&quot; if the anime was influenced by Western superheroes like Spider-Man or Batman, Taniguchi denied that influence. Instead, he said his inspirations for &quot;s-CRY-ed&quot; were other works he had produced for Sunrise. The society shown in the series was not meant to be another take on classic superheroes but instead investigate how everyone can adapt to their own situation. While the series is known for the extensive action in its episodes, the director believes everything he wanted viewers to see was presented. To distinguish the HOLY members, the Sunrise staff researched the costumes they could design. Taniguchi said their outfits are meant to resemble prison uniforms.

In Japan, the series aired between July 4 and December 26, 2001, with a total of twenty-six episodes. These were collected on nine DVD volumes between November 25, 2001, and July 25, 2002. A DVD box set containing all the episodes was released on January 25, 2008; a Blu-ray box set was made available on October 26, 2011. The Blu-ray box of the series sold a total of 6,172 units during its release week in Japan.

The anime was licensed by Bandai Entertainment in early 2003. Starting in 2003, they released the show in North America as six individual Region 1 volumes, followed by a complete six-disc box set in November 2004. A Universal Media Disc version of the first volume was released on October 11, 2005. Bandai&#x27;s European branch, Beez Entertainment, published the series in the United Kingdom. The release was a six-disc box set released between June 6, 2005, and February 27, 2006.

Later, the series premiered on Cartoon Network&#x27;s Adult Swim in the United States on May 29, 2005, after select episodes had been aired on Adult Swim&#x27;s video on demand service for nearly a year. On September 27, 2005, Bandai re-released &quot;s-CRY-ed&quot; under the Anime Legends banner, in three two-disc volumes, followed by the Anime Legends Complete Collection on October 24, 2006. Following the 2012 closure of Bandai Entertainment, Sunrise announced at Otakon 2013, that Sentai Filmworks had rescued &quot;s-CRY-ed&quot;, along with a handful of other former BEI titles. However, Sentai never re-released the anime and the license eventually expired. On May 3, 2020, it was announced that Discotek Media had picked up the license for S-CRY-ed. It was released on April 27, 2021, on Blu-ray. In Australia, the series is licensed by Madman Entertainment.

&quot;s-CRY-ed&quot; music was composed by Kōtarō Nakagawa. Its original soundtrack was released on November 21, 2001, and two drama CDs were released on December 19 of the same year. For the first twenty-five episodes the opening and ending theme songs are &quot;Reckless Fire&quot; by Yasuaki Ide and &quot;Drastic My Soul&quot; by Mikio Sakai, respectively. However, for episode twenty-six, &quot;Reckless Fire&quot; is replaced by &quot;Drastic My Soul&quot;, and the episode&#x27;s ending theme is &quot;Tabidachi no Kane ga Naru&quot; (&quot;The Bell of Setting out for a Journey Will Ring&quot;) by Sakai. There are also three insert songs starting with &quot;All I Need Is Love&quot; by Sakai for episodes fourteen and seventeen, &quot;Magma&quot; by Ide for episode nineteen, and &quot;Discovery&quot; by Sakai. Both the singles of &quot;Reckless Fire&quot; and &quot;Drastic My Soul&quot; were released on August 22, 2001.

==Films==
On April 8, 2011, Sunrise announced on the official &quot;s-CRY-ed&quot; Japanese website the series would be re-released and re-mastered in a two-movie release comprising the entire series and including new footage, titled &quot;s-CRY-ed Alteration&quot;, as part of the &quot;s-CRY-ed&quot; 10th Anniversary Project. During its release, &quot;TAO&quot;, the first part, took fifteenth place at the Japanese box office earning US$141,055 on nine screens for a per-screen average of US$15,673. In the following week the film dropped off the charts. The Blu-ray of the first part was released on February 24, 2012. It sold 6,624 units in its release week; it had sold 7,726 units by the end of the second week.

The second part, &quot;QUAN&quot;, was released on March 10, 2011. Its Blu-ray volume was released on July 27 of the following year. The Blu-ray format of the second part sold a total of 6,543 units in Japan. The films also had a single CD including the new version of &quot;Reckless Fire&quot; alongside &quot;SPIRITS&quot; which was released on March 7, 2012. Additionally, another CD drama was released for the films on the same date as the single CD.

==Related media==
A manga of the series written by Yōsuke Kuroda and illustrated by Yasunari Toda was published in the magazine &quot;Weekly Shōnen Champion&quot; between October 4, 2001, and June 20, 2002. The manga was collected in a total of five &quot;tankōbon&quot; (book) volumes. Tokyopop licensed this series in October 2002. They released the manga between March 11 and November 4, 2003.

Additionally, a light novel series was written by Kazuho Hyodo and illustrated by Hisashi Hirai and published by Dengeki Bunko. The series was released between May 10, 2002, and May 10, 2003. Additionally, Kazuma has appeared in the crossover role-playing game &quot;Heroes Phantasia&quot;.

==Reception==
The series has been popular in Japan. &quot;Anihabara!&quot; listed &quot;s-CRY-ed&quot; in its top three anime series twice during 2001. In 2002, it took the same place in a poll by &quot;Animage&quot;. In the &quot;Animage&quot; Anime Grand Prix awards, &quot;s-CRY-ed&quot; took the third place in the series category. The Kazuma character also took second place, being defeated by &quot;Inuyasha&quot;″s title character. In a TV Asahi survey of the top hundred shows Japanese fans enjoyed, &quot;s-CRY-ed&quot; took 51st place. In March 2010, Kazuma was ranked nineteenth best male anime character of the 2000s by the Japanese magazine &quot;Newtype&quot;.

The anime series has received mostly positive reviews by manga and anime publications. DVD Verdict&#x27;s Mac McEntire said that while the first volume lacked depth, its action scenes made the series as well as its characters appealing despite their tendency to shout their attacks. In a review of the same volume, John Sinnott of DVD Talk also said the fight scenes were good, remarking it has more &quot;plot&quot; in contrast to other fighting series. He also found the two protagonists, Kazuma and Ryuho, appealing noting they have multiple similarities that had yet to be explored. Regarding the series&#x27; dialog, he expressed a preference for the Japanese cast over the English one. Seb Reid of UK Anime Network enjoyed the anime series but unlike Sinnot he felt the English dub was more &quot;enjoyable&quot;. He also found the series&#x27; beginning enjoyable noting that while the series might be simplistic, he like the theme of &quot;freedom&quot;, mostly seen through Kazuma&#x27;s personality. While agreeing with Reid about the plot (to the point of comparing Kazuma to Han Solo from the &quot;Star Wars&quot; franchise due to their anti-heroic traits), Anime News Network&#x27;s Zac Bertschy disliked the English dub. He also found the main plot confusing. Reviewers also compared the series positively with the famous Clamp series &quot;X&quot;. Bryan Morton of Mania Beyond Entertainment found the morality of some characters, such as Ryuho, who has several reasons for his cold personality such as his quest for revenge, interesting. Despite some issues with the animation, and not being a fan of fights himself, he recommended the series for fans of &quot;Dragon Ball Z&quot;, a series famous for its fight scenes.

In a later review, Morton noted that Kazuma&#x27;s character had developed as he not only fights Ryuho, but protect people from the Lost Ground. Despite saying he disliked the series for its focus on fighting, Morton noted &quot;s-CRY-ed&quot; &quot;has grown on me a bit&quot;. Danielle D&#x27;Ornellas of Animefringe noted how many characters the anime covered, including both the protagonists and the antagonists, forcing viewers to pick which side they should root for. While she was not amazed by the animation, saying &quot;strictly from an animation perspective, s-CRY-ed is average&quot;. She also found the English cast enjoyable while the music reminded her of a popular anime, &quot;Cowboy Bebop&quot;.

The series&#x27; plot development surprised some reviewers. Reid was amazed by how the plot changed until its ending to the point of calling it an &quot;excellent end to a superior series&quot; despite having been able to predict most of the plot twists in the series. Justin Rich of Mania noted how similar both Kazuma and Ryuho became across the series with the exception of their upbringings and commented they still keep clashing every time they meet. Both Rich and Norton of Mania shared mixed feelings regarding the finale finding Kyouji Mujo&#x27;s fight to be anticlimactic. As well, while the former liked the conclusion, the latter found it disappointing. Nevertheless, both of them found the final fight between Kazuma and Ryuho highly appealing. Don Houston of DVD Talk enjoyed how the relationship between Kazuma and Ryuho developed similar to &quot;buddy films&quot;. While still clashing, they came to develop a mutual respect. He also recommended fans buy the DVD box rather than single volumes because of their high prices. In his review of the final volume, Houston stated that while the series started as &quot;generic&quot; its development allowed him to enjoy more of the show. He felt the storyline could have been finished in less than twenty-six episodes.

&quot;s-CRY-ed&quot; was featured in an IGN article by Ryan Clements titled &quot;The Anime We&#x27;d Love to Play&quot;. Clements commented that while the anime suffered from pacing and animation issues, both the cast and the powers were entertaining, remarking on the rivalry between Kazuma and Ryuho. In the 2007 book &quot;&quot; author Jason Thompson found the manga &quot;over-the-top&quot; as an adaptation of the anime series. Thompson found it similar to &quot;Jojo&#x27;s Bizarre Adventure&quot; based on the &quot;enjoyably weird, exaggerated&quot; art which is also one of the series&#x27; main appeal.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="61" end="66" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q734663" start="115" end="123" title="TV Tokyo" label="TV Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273101" start="150" end="163" title="Yōsuke Kuroda" label="Yōsuke Kuroda"/>
<link wikidata="Q854654" start="177" end="184" title="Sunrise (company)" label="Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304185" start="202" end="216" title="Gorō Taniguchi" label="Gorō Taniguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275127" start="241" end="256" title="Kōtarō Nakagawa" label="Kōtarō Nakagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q127513" start="294" end="313" title="Kanagawa Prefecture" label="Kanagawa Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="452" end="458" title="List of S-CRY-ed characters#Kazuma" label="Kazuma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="471" end="476" title="List of S-CRY-ed characters#Ryuho" label="Ryuho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191236" start="657" end="672" title="Infinite Ryvius" label="Infinite Ryvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="837" end="842" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q419352" start="921" end="933" title="Akita Shoten" label="Akita Shoten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660441" start="947" end="969" title="Weekly Shōnen Champion" label="Weekly Shōnen Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850077" start="1293" end="1309" title="Anime Grand Prix" label="Anime Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q127513" start="1646" end="1665" title="Kanagawa Prefecture" label="Kanagawa Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2478" end="2484" title="List of S-CRY-ed characters#Kazuma" label="Kazuma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2577" end="2588" title="List of S-CRY-ed characters#Kanami Yuta" label="Kanami Yuta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2631" end="2649" title="List of S-CRY-ed characters#Kunihiko Kimishima" label="Kunihiko Kimishima"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2731" end="2736" title="List of S-CRY-ed characters#Ryuho" label="Ryuho"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2870" end="2877" title="List of S-CRY-ed characters#The Crystal" label="Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2992" end="3004" title="List of S-CRY-ed characters#Mimori Kiryu" label="Mimori Kiryu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221140" start="3363" end="3380" title="Parallel universe (fiction)" label="parallel universe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4011" end="4026" title="List of S-CRY-ed characters#Straight Cougar" label="Straight Cougar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4308" end="4319" title="List of S-CRY-ed characters#Kyouji Mujo" label="Kyouji Mujo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304185" start="5455" end="5469" title="Gorō Taniguchi" label="Gorō Taniguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191236" start="5564" end="5579" title="Infinite Ryvius" label="Infinite Ryvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="5763" end="5776" title="individualism" label="individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q854654" start="6357" end="6364" title="Sunrise (company)" label="Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034049" start="6701" end="6710" title="Animerica" label="Animerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="6773" end="6783" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="6787" end="6793" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q806252" start="7838" end="7858" title="Bandai Entertainment" label="Bandai Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q806252" start="8142" end="8160" title="Beez Entertainment" label="Beez Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="8327" end="8342" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="8350" end="8360" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q723685" start="8457" end="8472" title="video on demand" label="video on demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357564" start="8766" end="8772" title="Otakon" label="Otakon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20966664" start="8784" end="8800" title="Sentai Filmworks" label="Sentai Filmworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281717" start="9002" end="9016" title="Discotek Media" label="Discotek Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816526" start="9144" end="9164" title="Madman Entertainment" label="Madman Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275127" start="9210" end="9225" title="Kōtarō Nakagawa" label="Kōtarō Nakagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546789" start="9501" end="9512" title="Mikio Sakai" label="Mikio Sakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="11298" end="11303" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273101" start="11329" end="11342" title="Yōsuke Kuroda" label="Yōsuke Kuroda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660441" start="11412" end="11434" title="Weekly Shōnen Champion" label="Weekly Shōnen Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q241996" start="11534" end="11542" title="tankōbon" label="tankōbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q315736" start="11565" end="11573" title="Tokyopop" label="Tokyopop"/>
<link wikidata="Q747381" start="11692" end="11703" title="light novel" label="light novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136480" start="11758" end="11771" title="Hisashi Hirai" label="Hisashi Hirai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071352" start="11789" end="11802" title="Dengeki Bunko" label="Dengeki Bunko"/>
<link wikidata="Q21192427" start="11909" end="11918" title="crossover (fiction)" label="crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="11919" end="11936" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785298" start="11943" end="11959" title="Heroes Phantasia" label="Heroes Phantasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201306" start="12171" end="12178" title="Animage" label="Animage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850077" start="12213" end="12229" title="Anime Grand Prix" label="Anime Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q182056" start="12373" end="12381" title="Inuyasha" label="Inuyasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q858425" start="12390" end="12405" title="Inuyasha (character)" label="title character"/>
<link wikidata="Q908436" start="12412" end="12420" title="TV Asahi" label="TV Asahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q482793" start="12628" end="12635" title="Newtype" label="Newtype"/>
<link wikidata="Q5206367" start="12731" end="12742" title="DVD Verdict" label="DVD Verdict"/>
<link wikidata="Q20670005" start="12975" end="12983" title="DVD Talk" label="DVD Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="13592" end="13599" title="individual freedom" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q51802" start="13731" end="13739" title="Han Solo" label="Han Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="13755" end="13764" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q220509" start="13815" end="13833" title="Anime News Network" label="Anime News Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q334471" start="13981" end="13986" title="Clamp (manga artists)" label="Clamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q730229" start="14000" end="14001" title="X (manga)" label="X"/>
<link wikidata="Q477916" start="14322" end="14335" title="Dragon Ball Z" label="Dragon Ball Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q232246" start="15076" end="15088" title="Cowboy Bebop" label="Cowboy Bebop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460327" start="16719" end="16733" title="Jason Thompson (writer)" label="Jason Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="16744" end="16749" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q696918" start="16848" end="16877" title="Jojo&amp;#x27;s Bizarre Adventure" label="Jojo&amp;#x27;s Bizarre Adventure"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290409" wikidata="Q2003581" url="?curid=290409" title="The Night They Drove Old Dixie Down">
<text>&quot;The Night They Drove Old Dixie Down&quot; is a song written by Robbie Robertson. It was originally recorded by his Canadian-American roots rock group The Band in 1969 and released on their eponymous second album. Levon Helm provided the lead vocals. The song is a first-person narrative relating the economic and social distress experienced by the protagonist, a poor white Southerner, during the last year of the American Civil War, when George Stoneman was raiding southwest Virginia.

Joan Baez&#x27;s version peaked at No. 3 on the Hot 100 on October 2, 1971; it did likewise on the &quot;Cashbox&quot; Top 100 chart. However, on the &quot;Record World&quot; Top Singles chart for the week of September 25, 1971, the Baez single hit No. 1 for one week.

==Creation and recordings==
The song was written by Robbie Robertson, who spent about eight months working on it. Robertson said he had the music to the song in his head and would play the chords over and over on the piano but had no idea what the song was to be about. Then the concept came to him and he researched the subject with help from the Band&#x27;s drummer Levon Helm, a native of Arkansas. In his 1993 autobiography, &quot;This Wheel&#x27;s on Fire&quot;, Helm wrote, &quot;Robbie and I worked on &#x27;The Night They Drove Old Dixie Down&#x27; up in Woodstock. I remember taking him to the library so he could research the history and geography of the era and make General Robert E. Lee come out with all due respect.&quot;

The lyrics tell of the last days of the American Civil War, portraying the suffering of the protagonist, Virgil Caine, a poor white Southerner. Dixie is the historical nickname for the states making up the Confederate States of America. The song&#x27;s opening stanza refers to one of George Stoneman&#x27;s raids behind Confederate lines attacking the railroads of Danville, Virginia, at the end of the Civil War in 1865:

&quot;The Night They Drove Old Dixie Down&quot; is considered one of the highlights of &quot;The Band&quot;, the group&#x27;s second album, which was released in the fall of 1969. According to Rob Bowman&#x27;s liner notes to the 2000 reissue of &quot;The Band&quot;, the album has been viewed as a concept album, with the songs focusing on the peoples, places and traditions associated with an older version of Americana.

A highlight of the group&#x27;s repertoire, it has been included in every compilation covering their recording career 1968 to 1977. The Band frequently performed the song in concert, and it is included on the group&#x27;s live albums &quot;Rock of Ages&quot; (1972) and &quot;Before the Flood&quot; (1974). The song also was included in the Band&#x27;s Thanksgiving Day concert in 1976 which was the subject of Martin Scorsese&#x27;s documentary film &quot;The Last Waltz&quot;, and on that film&#x27;s soundtrack released in 1978.

The last time the song was performed by Helm was in &quot;The Last Waltz&quot;. Helm refused to play the song afterwards. Although it has long been believed that the reason for Helm&#x27;s refusal to play the song was a dispute with Robertson over songwriting credits, according to Garth Hudson the refusal was due to Helm&#x27;s dislike for Joan Baez&#x27;s version.

==Reception==
The song was number 245 on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine&#x27;s 2004 list of the 500 greatest songs of all time. Pitchfork Media named it the forty-second best song of the 1960s. The song is included in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame&#x27;s &quot;500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll&quot; and &quot;Time&quot; magazine&#x27;s All-Time 100.

Critic Ralph J. Gleason (in the review in &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; (U.S. edition only) of October 1969) explains why this song has such an impact on listeners:Nothing I have read … has brought home the overwhelming human sense of history that this song does. The only thing I can relate it to at all is &quot;The Red Badge of Courage&quot;. It&#x27;s a remarkable song, the rhythmic structure, the voice of Levon and the bass line with the drum accents and then the heavy close harmony of Levon, Richard and Rick in the theme, make it seem impossible that this isn&#x27;t some traditional material handed down from father to son straight from that winter of 1865 to today. It has that ring of truth and the whole aura of authenticity.
==21st century political criticism==
Some commentators in the 21st century have questioned whether the song&#x27;s original lyrics made it an endorsement of slavery and the ideology of the Lost Cause of the Confederacy. In 2009, writing in &quot;The Atlantic&quot;, Ta-Nehisi Coates characterized the song as &quot;another story about the blues of Pharaoh&quot;. In an August 2020 interview in &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, contemporary singer-songwriter Early James described how he had started changing the lyrics of the song, while covering it, to oppose the Confederate cause – for example, in the first verse, &quot;where Helm sang that the fall of the Confederacy was &#x27;a time I remember oh so well&#x27;, James declared it &#x27;a time to bid farewell, and he reworked the final verse to state &quot;Unlike my father before me, who I will never understand... I think it&#x27;s time we laid hate in its grave.&quot; An editorial in &quot;The Roanoke Times&quot; in 2020 argued that these views are based on a misunderstanding of the song, which does not glorify slavery, the Confederacy, or Robert E. Lee, but, rather, tells the story of a poor, non-slave-holding Southerner who tries to make sense of the loss of his brother and his livelihood. It notes that it was written, not by a Southerner, but by a Canadian, and contained factual errors. Jack Hamilton, of the University of Virginia, writing in &quot;Slate&quot;, said that it is &quot;an anti-war song first and foremost&quot;, pointing to the references to &quot;bells ringing&quot; and &quot;people singing&quot; in the chorus.

==Joan Baez version==
The most successful version of the song was the one by Joan Baez, which became a RIAA-certified Gold record on October 22, 1971. In addition to chart action on the Hot 100, the record spent five weeks atop the easy listening chart. &quot;Billboard&quot; ranked it as the No. 20 song for 1971. The version reached number six in the pop charts in the UK in October 1971.

The Baez recording had some changes in the lyrics. Baez later told &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s Kurt Loder that she initially learned the song by listening to the recording on the Band&#x27;s album, and had never seen the printed lyrics at the time she recorded it, and thus sang the lyrics as she had (mis)heard them. In more recent years in her concerts, Baez has performed the song as originally written by Robertson.

===Chart performance===
====Weekly singles charts====
====Year-end charts====
===Certifications===


==Other versions==
Johnny Cash recorded the song on his 1975 album &quot;John R. Cash&quot;. Old-time musician Jimmy Arnold recorded the song on his album &quot;Southern Soul&quot;, which was composed of songs associated with the Southern side of the Civil War. A fairly large-scale orchestrated version of the song appears on the 1971 concept album &quot;California &#x27;99&quot; by Jimmie Haskell, with lead vocal by Jimmy Witherspoon. Others to record versions of the song include Don Rich, Steve Young, John Denver, the Allman Brothers Band, Derek Warfield. the Charlie Daniels Band, Big Country, the Dave Brockie Experience, Vikki Carr, Richie Havens, the Black Crowes, Solomon Burke, Earl Thomas Conley, the Jerry Garcia Band, Sophie B. Hawkins, Legion of Mary, and the Zac Brown Band; many of these artists have played it live. In 2008, Johnny Logan covered the song on his album, &quot;Irishman in America&quot;. Glen Hansard (of the Frames and the Swell Season), accompanied by Lisa Hannigan and John Smith, performed the song in July 2012 for The A.V. Club A.V. Undercover: Summer Break series.

The 1972 song &quot;Am Tag als Conny Kramer starb&quot; (&quot;The Day That Conny Kramer Died&quot;), which uses the tune of the song, was a number-one hit in West Germany for singer Juliane Werding. The lyrics are about a young man dying because of his drug addiction.

Samples from the song can be found in the 2006 song &quot;Stopping All Stations&quot; released by Australian hip-hop group Hilltop Hoods, played at a higher pitch and at an increased speed. The song follows a fictional storyline of three separate events, written by MC Pressure and influenced by a &quot;series of robbings, stabbings and bashings of senior citizens&quot; across the various Adelaide Metro train-lines in South Australia. In 2007, Hilltop Hoods released &quot;Stopping All Stations Restrung&quot; featuring the Adelaide Symphony Orchestra.

==Personnel (The Band version)==
*Levon Helm – lead vocals, drums
*Rick Danko – bass guitar, backing vocals
*Garth Hudson – melodica, slide trumpet
*Richard Manuel – piano, backing vocals
*Robbie Robertson – acoustic and electric guitars, backing vocals

==See also==
*List of anti-war songs
*List of &quot;Billboard&quot; Easy Listening number ones of 1971
*List of train songs

==References==
== Further reading ==

* Brooke Gladstone. Why Some Hear &#x27;The Night They Drove Old Dixie Down&#x27; As A Neo-Confederate Anthem &quot;On the Media&quot; | WNYC. January 8, 2021.

==External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2003581" start="6" end="41" title="The Night They Drove Old Dixie Down" label="The Night They Drove Old Dixie Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q117249" start="69" end="85" title="Robbie Robertson" label="Robbie Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929352" start="139" end="149" title="roots rock" label="roots rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q600344" start="156" end="164" title="The Band" label="The Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q926142" start="195" end="217" title="The Band (album)" label="eponymous second album"/>
<link wikidata="Q356986" start="219" end="229" title="Levon Helm" label="Levon Helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="420" end="438" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q720603" start="445" end="460" title="George Stoneman" label="George Stoneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="483" end="491" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131725" start="494" end="503" title="Joan Baez" label="Joan Baez"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="542" end="549" title="Hot 100" label="Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q117249" start="816" end="832" title="Robbie Robertson" label="Robbie Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="1156" end="1164" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1199" end="1224" title="This Wheel&amp;#x27;s on Fire: Levon Helm and the Story of The Band" label="This Wheel&amp;#x27;s on Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="1450" end="1463" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1542" end="1560" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q721983" start="1646" end="1651" title="Dixie" label="Dixie"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="1708" end="1737" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q720603" start="1787" end="1802" title="George Stoneman" label="George Stoneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331047" start="1855" end="1886" title="Richmond and Danville Railroad" label="railroads of Danville, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q926142" start="2019" end="2027" title="The Band (album)" label="The Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339991" start="2119" end="2129" title="Rob Bowman (music writer)" label="Rob Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q682635" start="2590" end="2602" title="Rock of Ages (The Band album)" label="Rock of Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q814220" start="2626" end="2642" title="Before the Flood (album)" label="Before the Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="2761" end="2776" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q847599" start="2807" end="2821" title="The Last Waltz" label="The Last Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178765" start="2836" end="2863" title="The Last Waltz (soundtrack)" label="that film&amp;#x27;s soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q554422" start="3165" end="3177" title="Garth Hudson" label="Garth Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="3299" end="3312" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q286102" start="3340" end="3382" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Songs of All Time" label="list of the 500 greatest songs of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="3384" end="3399" title="Pitchfork Media" label="Pitchfork Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="3478" end="3504" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q254804" start="3619" end="3635" title="Ralph J. Gleason" label="Ralph J. Gleason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219239" start="3922" end="3946" title="The Red Badge of Courage" label="The Red Badge of Courage"/>
<link wikidata="Q840191" start="4537" end="4566" title="Lost Cause of the Confederacy" label="Lost Cause of the Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="4594" end="4606" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452495" start="4614" end="4630" title="Ta-Nehisi Coates" label="Ta-Nehisi Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290338" start="4687" end="4703" title="The Exodus" label="blues of Pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="4748" end="4761" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q89442693" start="4800" end="4811" title="Early James" label="Early James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761169" start="5293" end="5310" title="The Roanoke Times" label="The Roanoke Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="5723" end="5745" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60497" start="5764" end="5769" title="Slate (magazine)" label="Slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q131725" start="6022" end="6031" title="Joan Baez" label="Joan Baez"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="6048" end="6052" title="RIAA" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273744" start="6177" end="6197" title="Adult Contemporary (chart)" label="easy listening chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4270343" start="6238" end="6258" title="Billboard Year-End Hot 100 singles of 1971" label="No. 20 song for 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="6410" end="6423" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446871" start="6432" end="6442" title="Kurt Loder" label="Kurt Loder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="6878" end="6889" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q961338" start="6932" end="6944" title="John R. Cash (album)" label="John R. Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q16092519" start="6970" end="6982" title="Jimmy Arnold (musician)" label="Jimmy Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178999" start="7244" end="7258" title="Jimmie Haskell" label="Jimmie Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689472" start="7279" end="7296" title="Jimmy Witherspoon" label="Jimmy Witherspoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q369138" start="7344" end="7352" title="Don Rich" label="Don Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356818" start="7354" end="7365" title="Steve Young (musician)" label="Steve Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q105460" start="7367" end="7378" title="John Denver" label="John Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q507327" start="7384" end="7404" title="The Allman Brothers Band" label="Allman Brothers Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262438" start="7406" end="7420" title="Derek Warfield" label="Derek Warfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q551478" start="7426" end="7446" title="Charlie Daniels Band" label="Charlie Daniels Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q858738" start="7448" end="7459" title="Big Country" label="Big Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228414" start="7465" end="7488" title="Dave Brockie Experience" label="Dave Brockie Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q301864" start="7490" end="7500" title="Vikki Carr" label="Vikki Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q505285" start="7502" end="7515" title="Richie Havens" label="Richie Havens"/>
<link wikidata="Q378958" start="7521" end="7533" title="Black Crowes" label="Black Crowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q49888" start="7535" end="7548" title="Solomon Burke" label="Solomon Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326118" start="7550" end="7568" title="Earl Thomas Conley" label="Earl Thomas Conley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535082" start="7574" end="7591" title="Jerry Garcia Band" label="Jerry Garcia Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q292092" start="7593" end="7610" title="Sophie B. Hawkins" label="Sophie B. Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514300" start="7612" end="7626" title="Legion of Mary (band)" label="Legion of Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q139154" start="7636" end="7650" title="Zac Brown Band" label="Zac Brown Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q298559" start="7704" end="7716" title="Johnny Logan (singer)" label="Johnny Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614632" start="7754" end="7773" title="Irishman in America" label="Irishman in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q220010" start="7781" end="7793" title="Glen Hansard" label="Glen Hansard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550391" start="7802" end="7808" title="The Frames" label="Frames"/>
<link wikidata="Q914203" start="7817" end="7829" title="The Swell Season" label="Swell Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q284227" start="7847" end="7860" title="Lisa Hannigan" label="Lisa Hannigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233970" start="7913" end="7926" title="The A.V. Club" label="The A.V. Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="8125" end="8137" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q77765" start="8149" end="8164" title="Juliane Werding" label="Juliane Werding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738850" start="8295" end="8316" title="The Hard Road" label="Stopping All Stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q783243" start="8335" end="8353" title="Australian hip hop" label="Australian hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618844" start="8360" end="8373" title="Hilltop Hoods" label="Hilltop Hoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715078" start="8503" end="8514" title="MC Pressure" label="MC Pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681753" start="8628" end="8642" title="Adelaide Metro" label="Adelaide Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="8658" end="8673" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8713" end="8743" title="The Hard Road: Restrung" label="Stopping All Stations Restrung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367942" start="8764" end="8791" title="Adelaide Symphony Orchestra" label="Adelaide Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q356986" start="8828" end="8838" title="Levon Helm" label="Levon Helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q539944" start="8861" end="8871" title="Rick Danko" label="Rick Danko"/>
<link wikidata="Q554422" start="8903" end="8915" title="Garth Hudson" label="Garth Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q512191" start="8918" end="8926" title="melodica" label="melodica"/>
<link wikidata="Q228529" start="8928" end="8941" title="slide trumpet" label="slide trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q546035" start="8943" end="8957" title="Richard Manuel" label="Richard Manuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q117249" start="8983" end="8999" title="Robbie Robertson" label="Robbie Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274748" start="9063" end="9085" title="List of anti-war songs" label="List of anti-war songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631100" start="9087" end="9151" title="List of Billboard Easy Listening number ones of 1971" label="List of &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Easy Listening number ones of 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213702" start="9153" end="9172" title="List of train songs" label="List of train songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974437" start="9214" end="9230" title="Brooke Gladstone" label="Brooke Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091415" start="9328" end="9340" title="On the Media" label="On the Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551068" start="9349" end="9353" title="WNYC" label="WNYC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290413" wikidata="Q451854" url="?curid=290413" title="Time Warp (song)">
<text>&quot;Time Warp&quot; is a song featured in the 1973 rock musical &quot;The Rocky Horror Show&quot;, its 1975 film adaptation &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot;, and the 2016 TV production &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show: Let&#x27;s Do the Time Warp Again&quot;. The song title comes from a dance performed during the chorus of the song. 

==The dance==

The song is both an example and a parody of the dance song genre, with much of its lyrics consisting of instructions for performing the dance. (Example: &quot;It&#x27;s just a jump to the left / And then a step to the right / Put your hands on your hips / Bring your knees in tight.&quot;)

This dance became one of the major audience participation activities during screenings of the 1975 film &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot; and live performances of the original 1973 stage production&quot;The Rocky Horror Show&quot;. 

The song is in the key of A major.

== Placement ==
&quot;Time Warp&quot; was the fifth song in the original stage show (after &quot;Science Fiction/Double Feature&quot;, &quot;Dammit Janet&quot;, &quot;Over at the Frankenstein Place&quot; and &quot;Sweet Transvestite&quot;) where it was performed by Riff-Raff (Richard O&#x27;Brien), Magenta (Patricia Quinn), Columbia (Nell Campbell) and the Narrator (Jonathan Adams), but fourth in the film (following &quot;Over at the Frankenstein Place&quot; and preceding &quot;Sweet Transvestite&quot;). O&#x27;Brien, Quinn and Campbell reprised their roles from the stage production in the film but the Narrator, now renamed the Criminologist, was instead played by Charles Gray. In the 2016 TV production, &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show: Let&#x27;s Do the Time-Warp Again&quot;, the number was performed by Reeve Carney (Riff-Raff), Christina Milian (Magenta), Annaleigh Ashford (Columbia) and Tim Curry (the Criminologist). 

Stage productions continued to use the original placement until Richard O&#x27;Brien revised the script for the 1990 West End revival in which he moved the song to the film&#x27;s placement. For reasons of pacing, most productions now follow this order.

The song is reprised briefly at the end of the film, in flashback, and in the stage show it serves as an encore led by Dr. Frank N. Furter (played by Tim Curry in the original stage production and film).

==Charts==
===Weekly charts===


===Year-end charts===
==Certifications==


== Other appearances ==
&quot;The Hillywood Show&quot; used the song in a 2014 &quot;Doctor Who&quot; parody, which actor David Tennant (who portrayed the Fourteenth Doctor on the series) called &quot;extraordinary&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
*Patricia Quinn discusses the Time Warp on Studio 10
*Fandango Movieclips: The Rocky Horror Picture Show - The Time Warp Scene</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q451854" start="6" end="15" title="Time Warp (song)" label="Time Warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q583612" start="72" end="93" title="The Rocky Horror Show" label="The Rocky Horror Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q751921" start="132" end="161" title="The Rocky Horror Picture Show" label="The Rocky Horror Picture Show"/>
<link wikidata="" start="202" end="266" title="The Rocky Horror Picture Show: Let&amp;#x27;s Do the Time Warp Again" label="The Rocky Horror Picture Show: Let&amp;#x27;s Do the Time Warp Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="302" end="307" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q191609" start="329" end="335" title="refrain" label="chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="400" end="406" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055141" start="414" end="424" title="Novelty and fad dances" label="dance song"/>
<link wikidata="Q751921" start="767" end="796" title="The Rocky Horror Picture Show" label="The Rocky Horror Picture Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q583612" start="868" end="889" title="The Rocky Horror Show" label="The Rocky Horror Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q277793" start="925" end="932" title="A major" label="A major"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260209" start="1032" end="1062" title="Science Fiction/Double Feature" label="Science Fiction/Double Feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212690" start="1076" end="1088" title="Dammit Janet" label="Dammit Janet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113459" start="1102" end="1132" title="Over at the Frankenstein Place" label="Over at the Frankenstein Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978790" start="1149" end="1167" title="Sweet Transvestite" label="Sweet Transvestite"/>
<link wikidata="Q982182" start="1212" end="1232" title="Richard O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Richard O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q462982" start="1244" end="1258" title="Patricia Quinn" label="Patricia Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q273092" start="1271" end="1284" title="Nell Campbell" label="Nell Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703086" start="1304" end="1318" title="Jonathan Adams (British actor)" label="Jonathan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q961187" start="1608" end="1620" title="Charles Gray (actor)" label="Charles Gray"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1655" end="1719" title="The Rocky Horror Picture Show: Let&amp;#x27;s Do the Time Warp Again" label="The Rocky Horror Picture Show: Let&amp;#x27;s Do the Time-Warp Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423039" start="1755" end="1767" title="Reeve Carney" label="Reeve Carney"/>
<link wikidata="Q230501" start="1781" end="1797" title="Christina Milian" label="Christina Milian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767815" start="1809" end="1826" title="Annaleigh Ashford" label="Annaleigh Ashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q52392" start="1842" end="1851" title="Tim Curry" label="Tim Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="1992" end="2000" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q473432" start="2186" end="2195" title="flashback (literary technique)" label="flashback"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="2496" end="2506" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q214601" start="2533" end="2546" title="David Tennant" label="David Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q114834053" start="2566" end="2583" title="Fourteenth Doctor" label="Fourteenth Doctor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290417" wikidata="Q1881064" url="?curid=290417" title="Radar Love">
<text>&quot;Radar Love&quot; is a song by the Dutch rock band Golden Earring. The single version of &quot;Radar Love&quot; reached No. 9 on the &quot;Record World &quot; chart, No. 10 on &quot;Cash Box&quot;, and No. 13 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 in the United States. It hit the top 10 in many countries, including the United Kingdom singles chart, Canada, Australia, Germany, and Spain.

==Lyrics==

The song is written from the point of view of a man who has some sort of psychic connection with his lover — &quot;radar love&quot;. He senses that she urgently wants him to be with her, and in his haste he drives recklessly, causing a fatal accident, but even in the afterlife the song&#x27;s narrator and his lover still have radar love.

==Composition==
Like other famous songs of the era — &quot;Highway Star&quot;, &quot;Stairway to Heaven&quot;, &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; — &quot;Radar Love&quot; is composed as a suite with several distinctive and quite different sections, although the tonality throughout remains similar.

The intro starts with a guitar riff in four separated phrases, consisting respectively of three, three, five and three notes. The first phrase is up from C♯ minor with three power chords slightly reminiscent of Deep Purple&#x27;s &quot;Smoke on the Water&quot;. The second phrase heads down, the third is up again, higher than the previous, and the fourth leads all down to E major. According to Golden Earring bass player Rinus Gerritsen, the intro was inspired by Carlos Santana.

During the chorus, starting in C♯ minor at 1:20, the band is joined by a brass section.

The song references Brenda Lee&#x27;s &quot;Coming On Strong&quot; from 1966 as a &quot;forgotten song&quot;.

== Impact ==
According to Rustyn Rose at &quot;Metalholic&quot;, the song &quot;is a rock masterpiece, from its hooky chugging bassline, to its simple but unmistakable riffs, to its catchy anthemesque chorus. Even the jam which rides the song out is note for note classic.&quot;

The song has been chosen by many magazines and websites as a Top 10 driving song, often ranking in the top three. It was chosen as the best radio song by readers of the &quot;Washington Post&quot; in November 2001. It was the #1 driving song in Australia (&quot;Australian Musician&quot;, November 2005), beating two AC/DC songs; and in Canada (BBC Canada, March 2006). In 2011 it received a vast number of votes as the &quot;Ultimate Driving Song&quot; in a poll on PlanetRock and &quot;finished well ahead of its nearest rival, Deep Purple&#x27;s &#x27;Highway Star&#x27;.&quot;

The bassline, guitar improv, and drum solo riff was used in the late 1970s and early 1980s as part of the opening credits and theme to the long running Australian current affairs programme &quot;Four Corners&quot; produced by ABC before it segues into the official theme, Robert Maxwell&#x27;s &quot;Lost Patrol&quot;.

==Cover versions and Radar-Love.net ==
According to the radar-love.net TimeTravel, the song has been covered more than 800 times by, among others, Tribe 8, Ministry, Omen, U2, R.E.M., Ian Stuart Donaldson, Sun City Girls, Dutch group Centerfold, White Lion, Blue Man Group, Def Leppard, James Last, NWOBHM band Aragorn, Nine Pound Hammer, Oh Well, Joe Santana, the Space Lady, and the Pressure Boys. White Lion&#x27;s version charted at #59 on the Hot 100.

Goth-pop band Ghost Dance recorded a cover of the song on the B-side of their 1986 &quot;Heart Full of Soul&quot; single, itself a cover of the Yardbirds track which were then included on their 1988 compilation album &quot;Gathering Dust&quot;.

A pre-Mercyful Fate band featuring King Diamond on vocals recorded a cover of the song. It is featured on the 2001 compilation album &quot;King Diamond &amp; Black Rose 20 Years Ago&quot;.

WaveGroup Sound covered the White Lion version of the song in the 2007 video game &quot;Guitar Hero Encore: Rocks the 80s&quot;.

On August 25, 2023 the biography of the song, Radar Love 50 jaar - Biography of the Ultimate Drivin&#x27; Song, was released in the Netherlands. The book (in Dutch) captures the amazing TimeTravel of the song in 248 pages.

==In popular culture==
The song has been featured in several films including &quot;The Private Eyes&quot; (1976), &quot;Wayne&#x27;s World 2&quot; (1993), &quot;Detroit Rock City&quot; (1999), &quot;Baby Driver&quot; (2017), and &quot;The Tender Bar&quot; (2021).

It was a central piece in the 2007 &quot;Reaper&quot; series episode 7 &quot;Love, Bullets &amp; Blacktop&quot;, being featured on an 8-track cartridge.

==Chart history==

===Weekly charts===
Radar Love {1977}
White Lion 
Oh Well

===Year-end charts===

==Certifications==


==References==
==External links==
*Official &quot;Radar Love&quot; website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1881064" start="6" end="16" title="Radar Love" label="Radar Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="46" end="50" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q728049" start="56" end="70" title="Golden Earring" label="Golden Earring"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="76" end="82" title="single (music)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="144" end="157" title="Record World " label="Record World "/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="187" end="195" title="Cash Box" label="Cash Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="221" end="250" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="324" end="352" title="UK singles chart" label="United Kingdom singles chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417325" start="806" end="818" title="Highway Star (song)" label="Highway Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q192023" start="832" end="850" title="Stairway to Heaven" label="Stairway to Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q187745" start="864" end="881" title="Bohemian Rhapsody" label="Bohemian Rhapsody"/>
<link wikidata="Q203005" start="930" end="935" title="Suite (music)" label="suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="1253" end="1264" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q636399" start="1278" end="1296" title="Smoke on the Water" label="Smoke on the Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740856" start="1465" end="1480" title="Rinus Gerritsen" label="Rinus Gerritsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q819016" start="1508" end="1522" title="Carlos Santana" label="Carlos Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q230925" start="1634" end="1644" title="Brenda Lee" label="Brenda Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986612" start="1658" end="1674" title="Coming On Strong (song)" label="Coming On Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="1810" end="1814" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="2180" end="2195" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824438" start="2267" end="2286" title="Australian Musician" label="Australian Musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="2322" end="2327" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q795538" start="2350" end="2360" title="BBC Canada" label="BBC Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201164" start="2472" end="2482" title="Planet Rock (radio station)" label="PlanetRock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417325" start="2560" end="2572" title="Highway Star (song)" label="Highway Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475096" start="2782" end="2794" title="Four Corners (Australian TV program)" label="Four Corners"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600480" start="2813" end="2816" title="ABC (Australian TV channel)" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347435" start="2859" end="2873" title="Robert Maxwell (songwriter)" label="Robert Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840359" start="3054" end="3061" title="Tribe 8" label="Tribe 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q425772" start="3063" end="3071" title="Ministry (band)" label="Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023278" start="3073" end="3077" title="Omen (band)" label="Omen"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="3079" end="3081" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="3083" end="3089" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q185468" start="3091" end="3111" title="Ian Stuart Donaldson" label="Ian Stuart Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063174" start="3113" end="3127" title="Sun City Girls" label="Sun City Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037207" start="3141" end="3151" title="Centerfold (group)" label="Centerfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335689" start="3153" end="3163" title="White Lion" label="White Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q885763" start="3165" end="3179" title="Blue Man Group" label="Blue Man Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q182890" start="3181" end="3192" title="Def Leppard" label="Def Leppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q57213" start="3194" end="3204" title="James Last" label="James Last"/>
<link wikidata="Q370515" start="3206" end="3212" title="NWOBHM" label="NWOBHM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045353" start="3227" end="3244" title="Nine Pound Hammer" label="Nine Pound Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080553" start="3246" end="3253" title="Oh Well (band)" label="Oh Well"/>
<link wikidata="Q21711806" start="3268" end="3282" title="the Space Lady" label="the Space Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q485395" start="3365" end="3369" title="Gothic rock" label="Goth"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="3370" end="3373" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431352" start="3379" end="3390" title="Ghost Dance (band)" label="Ghost Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692002" start="3454" end="3472" title="Heart Full of Soul" label="Heart Full of Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q192725" start="3509" end="3518" title="The Yardbirds" label="Yardbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q647370" start="3617" end="3630" title="Mercyful Fate" label="Mercyful Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q313818" start="3646" end="3658" title="King Diamond" label="King Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3750" end="3792" title="Black Rose: 20 Years Ago" label="King Diamond &amp;amp; Black Rose 20 Years Ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975253" start="3801" end="3816" title="WaveGroup Sound" label="WaveGroup Sound"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3889" end="3922" title="Guitar Hero Encore: Rocks the 80s" label="Guitar Hero Encore: Rocks the 80s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054597" start="4238" end="4254" title="The Private Eyes (1976 film)" label="The Private Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427730" start="4275" end="4295" title="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World 2" label="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304457" start="4316" end="4333" title="Detroit Rock City (film)" label="Detroit Rock City"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016644" start="4354" end="4365" title="Baby Driver" label="Baby Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q105658212" start="4390" end="4404" title="The Tender Bar (film)" label="The Tender Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134985" start="4455" end="4473" title="Reaper (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Reaper&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q270171" start="4554" end="4571" title="8-track cartridge" label="8-track cartridge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290431" wikidata="Q401987" url="?curid=290431" title="Northbrook">
<text>Northbrook may refer to:

==Places==

===Settlements===
*Northbrook, Illinois, United States
*Northbrook, Ohio, United States
*Northbrook, Oxfordshire, a hamlet near the village of, and within the parish of, Kirtlington, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom
*Northbrook, Wiltshire, a hamlet near the village of, and within the parish of, Market Lavington, Wiltshire, United Kingdom
*Northbrook, Hampshire, a place near Micheldever, Hampshire, United Kingdom
*Northbrook (electoral division), a West Sussex County Council constituency, United Kingdom
*Northbrook, Ontario, a place in Addington Highlands, Ontario Canada
*Northbrook, Frederickton, Newfoundland and Labrador a place near Frederickton, Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada

===Northbrook Park===
*Northbrook Park, Hampshire, a historic house and grounds built in 1810, now a wedding venue in Bramley, Hampshire, United Kingdom
*Northbrook Park, London, a 9-acre public park in Grove Park, London Borough of Lewisham, United Kingdom, opened in 1903
*Northbrook Park, Devon, a park, estate and golf course in Exeter, Devon, United Kingdom
*Northbrook Park District, a district and organisation founded in 1927 which manages parks and recreation in Northbrook, Illinois, United States

===Education===
*Northbrook High School a high School in Spring Branch, Houston, Texas, United States
*Northbrook Metropolitan College a former higher education college with campuses in Worthing and Shoreham-by-Sea, West Sussex, United Kingdom
*Northbrooks Secondary School, a co-educational government secondary school in Yishun, Singapore

===Other===
*Northbrook Island, Russia
*Northbrook (river), a river, in Exeter, Devon, United Kingdom, tributary of the River Exe
*Northbrook (Metra) a railway station in Northbrook, Illinois, United States
*Northbrook Court, a shopping mall in Northbrook, Illinois, United States

==Other uses==
*Baron Northbrook, several people
*&quot;The Virgin and Child&quot; (The Northbrook Madonna)
*Northbrook Technology, now Allstate Northern Ireland, a Northern Irish technology company</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q401987" start="0" end="10" title="Northbrook" label="Northbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q570986" start="57" end="77" title="Northbrook, Illinois" label="Northbrook, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656278" start="94" end="110" title="Northbrook, Ohio" label="Northbrook, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416254" start="127" end="150" title="Northbrook, Oxfordshire" label="Northbrook, Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222078" start="250" end="271" title="Northbrook, Wiltshire" label="Northbrook, Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="374" end="395" title="Northbrook, Hampshire" label="Northbrook, Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698939" start="410" end="421" title="Micheldever" label="Micheldever"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262560" start="450" end="481" title="Northbrook (electoral division)" label="Northbrook (electoral division)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681184" start="542" end="561" title="Northbrook, Ontario" label="Northbrook, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="611" end="662" title="Northbrook, Frederickton, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Northbrook, Frederickton, Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499215" start="676" end="715" title="Frederickton, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Frederickton, Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q26589401" start="748" end="774" title="Northbrook Park, Hampshire" label="Northbrook Park, Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q110621564" start="879" end="902" title="Northbrook Park, London" label="Northbrook Park, London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1000" end="1022" title="Northbrook Park, Devon" label="Northbrook Park, Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q134672" start="1058" end="1064" title="Exeter" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q570986" start="1089" end="1113" title="Northbrook Park District" label="Northbrook Park District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057724" start="1251" end="1273" title="Northbrook High School" label="Northbrook High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017181" start="1337" end="1368" title="Northbrook Metropolitan College" label="Northbrook Metropolitan College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053845" start="1479" end="1507" title="Northbrooks Secondary School" label="Northbrooks Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459264" start="1589" end="1606" title="Northbrook Island" label="Northbrook Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1616" end="1634" title="Northbrook (river)" label="Northbrook (river)"/>
<link wikidata="Q134672" start="1648" end="1654" title="Exeter" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057721" start="1707" end="1725" title="Northbrook (Metra)" label="Northbrook (Metra)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14687980" start="1784" end="1800" title="Northbrook Court" label="Northbrook Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862682" start="1874" end="1890" title="Baron Northbrook" label="Baron Northbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3842417" start="1908" end="1965" title="The Virgin and Child (The Northbrook Madonna)" label="&amp;quot;The Virgin and Child&amp;quot; (The Northbrook Madonna)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733287" start="1967" end="1988" title="Northbrook Technology" label="Northbrook Technology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290436" wikidata="Q299492" url="?curid=290436" title="Williamston">
<text>Williamston is the name of several places in the United States of America:
*Williamston, Michigan
*Williamston, North Carolina
*Williamston, South Carolina</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3308171" start="76" end="97" title="Williamston, Michigan" label="Williamston, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027072" start="99" end="126" title="Williamston, North Carolina" label="Williamston, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034377" start="128" end="155" title="Williamston, South Carolina" label="Williamston, South Carolina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290437" wikidata="Q1144825" url="?curid=290437" title="Righteousness">
<text>Righteousness is the quality or state of &quot;being morally right or justifiable&quot; rooted in religious or divine law with a broader spectrum of moral correctness, justice, and virtuous living as dictated by a higher authority or set of spiritual beliefs. Rectitude. often a synonym for righteousness, is about personal moral values and the internal compass that guides an individual’s decisions and actions. It can be found in Indian, Chinese, and Abrahamic religions and traditions, among others, as a theological concept. For example, from various perspectives in Zoroastrianism, Hinduism, Buddhism, Islam, Christianity, Confucianism, Taoism, Judaism it is an attribute that implies that a person&#x27;s actions are justified, and can have the connotation that the person has been &quot;judged&quot; as living a moral life, relative to the religion’s doctrines.

William Tyndale (translator of the Bible into English in 1526) remodeled the word after an earlier word , which would have yielded modern English *&quot;rightwise&quot; or *&quot;rightways&quot;. He used it to translate the Hebrew root , which appears over five hundred times in the Hebrew Bible, and the Greek word (), which appears more than two hundred times in the New Testament.

Etymologically, it comes from
Old English , from &#x27;right&#x27; + &#x27;manner, state, condition&#x27; (as opposed to , &quot;wrongful&quot;). The change in the ending in the 16th century was due to association with words such as bounteous.

==Ethics or moral philosophy==
Ethics is a major branch of philosophy which encompasses principles which lead to right conduct. Rushworth Kidder states that &quot;standard definitions of ethics have typically included such phrases as &#x27;the science of the ideal human character&#x27; or &#x27;the science of moral duty&#x27;&quot;. Richard William Paul and Linda Elder define ethics as &quot;a set of concepts and principles that guide us in determining what behavior helps or harms sentient creatures&quot;. The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy states that the word ethics is &quot;commonly used interchangeably with &#x27;morality&#x27; ... and sometimes it is used more narrowly to mean the moral principles of a particular tradition, group or individual&quot;.

==Abrahamic and Abrahamic-inspired religions==

===Christianity===

In the New Testament, the word &quot;righteousness&quot;, a translation for the Greek word , is used in the sense of &#x27;being righteous before others&#x27; (e.g. Matthew 5:20) or &#x27;being righteous before God&#x27; (e.g. Romans 1:17). William Lane Craig argues that we should think of God as the &quot;paradigm, the locus, the source of all moral value and standards&quot;. In Matthew&#x27;s account of the Baptism of Jesus, Jesus tells the prophet &quot;it is fitting for us to fulfill all righteousness&quot; as Jesus requests that John perform the rite for him. The Sermon on the Mount contains the memorable commandment &quot;Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His righteousness&quot;.

A secondary meaning of the Greek word is &#x27;justice&#x27;, which is used to render it in a few places by a few Bible translations, e.g. in Matthew 6:33 in the New English Bible.

Jesus asserts the importance of righteousness by saying in Matthew 5:20, &quot;For I tell you that unless your righteousness surpasses that of the Pharisees and the teachers of the law, you will certainly not enter the kingdom of heaven&quot;.

However, Paul the Apostle speaks of two ways, at least in theory, to achieve righteousness: through the Law of Moses (or Torah), and through faith in the atonement made possible through the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ (). However he repeatedly emphasizes that faith is the effective way. For example, just a few verses earlier, he states the Jews did not attain the law of righteousness because they sought it not by faith, but by works. The New Testament speaks of a salvation founded on God&#x27;s righteousness, as exemplified throughout the history of salvation narrated in the Old Testament (). Paul writes to the Romans that righteousness comes by faith: &quot;... a righteousness that is by faith from first to last, just as it is written: &#x27;The righteous will live by faith&#x27;&quot; ().

In the New Revised Standard Version has a footnote that the original word has the meaning of &#x27;benevolence&#x27;, and the Messianic Jewish commentary of David Stern affirms the Jewish practice of &#x27;doing &#x27; as a charity, in referring to the and passages.

 speaks of the relationship between works of righteousness and faith, saying that &quot;faith without works is dead&quot;. Righteous acts according to James include works of charity () as well as avoiding sins against the Law of Moses ().

 describes Lot as a righteous man.

====Type of saints====
In the Eastern Orthodox Church, &quot;Righteous&quot; is a type of saint who is regarded as a holy person under the Old Covenant (Old Testament Israel). The word is also sometimes used for married saints of the New Covenant (the Church). According to Orthodox theology, the Righteous saints of the Old Covenant were not able to enter into heaven until after the death of Jesus on the cross (), but had to await salvation in the Bosom of Abraham (see: Harrowing of Hell).

===Islam===
Righteousness is mentioned several times in the Quran. The Quran says that a life of righteousness is the only way to go to Heaven.


===Judaism===
Righteousness is one of the chief attributes of God as portrayed in the Hebrew Bible. Its chief meaning concerns ethical conduct (for example, ; ; ; ). In the Book of Job, the title character is introduced as &quot;a good and righteous man&quot;. The Book of Wisdom calls on rulers of the world to embrace righteousness.

===Mandaeism===
An early self-appellation for Mandaeans is meaning &#x27;elect of righteousness&#x27; or &#x27;the chosen righteous&#x27;, a term found in the Book of Enoch and Genesis Apocryphon II, 4. In addition to righteousness, also refers to alms or almsgiving.

==East Asian religions==

===Yi (Confucianism)===
, (), literally &quot;justice, or justness, righteousness or rightness, meaning&quot;, is an important concept in Confucianism. It involves a moral disposition for the good in life, with the sustainable intuition, purpose, and sensibility to do good competently with no expectation of reward.

 resonates with Confucian philosophy&#x27;s orientation towards the cultivation of reverence or benevolence () and skillful practice ().

 represents moral acumen that goes beyond simple rule-following, as it is based on empathy, it involves a balanced understanding of a situation, and it incorporates the &quot;creative insights&quot; and grounding necessary to apply virtues through deduction (Yin and Yang) and reason &quot;with no loss of purpose and direction for the total good of fidelity. represents this ideal of totality as well as a decision-generating ability to apply a virtue properly and appropriately in a situation.&quot; 

In application, is a &quot;complex principle&quot; that includes:

# skill in crafting actions which have moral fitness according to a given concrete situation
# the wise recognition of such fitness
# the intrinsic satisfaction that comes from that recognition.

==Indian religions==
There might not be a single-word translation for in English, but it can be translated as righteousness, religion, faith, duty, law, and virtue. Connotations of include rightness, good, natural, morality, righteousness, and virtue. In common parlance, means &quot;right way of living&quot; and &quot;path of rightness&quot;. It encompasses ideas such as duty, rights, character, vocation, religion, customs and all behavior considered appropriate, correct or &quot;morally upright&quot;. It is explained as a law of righteousness and equated to (truth): &quot;...when a man speaks the Truth, they say, &#x27;He speaks the Dharma&#x27;; and if he speaks Dharma, they say, &#x27;He speaks the Truth!&#x27; For both are one&quot;
The importance of to Indian sentiments is illustrated by the government of India&#x27;s decision in 1947 to include the Ashoka Chakra, a depiction of the ( the &quot;wheel of dharma&quot;), as the central motif on its flag.

===Hinduism===
In Hindu philosophy and religion, major emphasis is placed on individual practical morality. In the Sanskrit epics, this concern is omnipresent. Including duties, rights, laws, conduct, virtues, and &quot;right way of living&quot;. The Sanskrit epics contain themes and examples where right prevails over wrong, good over evil.

In an inscription attributed to the Indian Emperor Ashoka from , in Sanskrit, Aramaic, and Greek text, appears a Greek rendering for the Sanskrit word : the word This suggests was a central concept in India at that time, and meant not only religious ideas, but ideas of right, of good, and of one&#x27;s duty.

The &quot;Ramayana&quot; is one of the two great Indian epics. It tells about life in India around and offers models in . The hero, Rama, lived his whole life by the rules of ; this is why he is considered heroic. When Rama was a young boy, he was the perfect son. Later he was an ideal husband to his faithful wife, Sita, and a responsible ruler of Aydohya. Each episode of Ramayana presents life situations and ethical questions in symbolic terms. The situation is debated by the characters, and finally right prevails over wrong, good over evil. For this reason, in Hindu Epics, the good, morally upright, law-abiding king is referred to as .

In &quot;Mahabharata&quot;, the other major Indian epic, similarly, is central, and it is presented with symbolism and metaphors. Near the end of the epic, the god Yama, referred to as in the text, is portrayed as taking the form of a dog to test the compassion of Yudhishthira, who is told he may not enter paradise with such an animal, but who refuses to abandon his companion, for which decision he is then praised by . The value and appeal of the &quot;Mahabharata&quot; is not as much in its complex and rushed presentation of metaphysics in the 12th book, claims Daniel H.H. Ingalls, because Indian metaphysics is more eloquently presented in other Sanskrit scriptures. The appeal of Mahabharata, like Ramayana, is in its presentation of a series of moral problems and life situations, to which there are usually three answers given, according to Ingalls: one answer is of Bhima, which is the answer of brute force, an individual angle representing materialism, egoism, and self; the second answer is of Yudhishthira, which is always an appeal to piety and gods, of social virtue and of tradition; the third answer is of introspective Arjuna, which falls between the two extremes, and who, claims Ingalls, symbolically reveals the finest moral qualities of man. The Epics of Hinduism are a symbolic treatise about life, virtues, customs, morals, ethics, law, and other aspects of dharma. There is extensive discussion of at the individual level in the Epics of Hinduism, observes Ingalls; for example, on free will versus destiny, when and why human beings believe in either, ultimately concluding that the strong and prosperous naturally uphold free will, while those facing grief or frustration naturally lean towards destiny. The Epics of Hinduism illustrate various aspects of , they are a means of communicating with metaphors.

In Hinduism, signifies behaviors that are considered to be in accord with , the order that makes life and universe possible, and includes duties, rights, laws, conduct, virtues, and &quot;right way of living&quot;. The concept of was already in use in the historical Vedic religion, and its meaning and conceptual scope has evolved over several millennia. 

=== Secular ===

The ancient Tamil moral text of &quot;Tirukkural&quot; is solely based on , the Tamil term for . The antonym of is .

=== Buddhism ===
In Buddhism means cosmic law and order, but is also applied to the teachings of the Buddha. In Buddhist philosophy, / is also the term for &quot;phenomena&quot;. Dharma refers not only to the sayings of the Buddha, but also to the later traditions of interpretation and addition that the various schools of Buddhism have developed to help explain and to expand upon the Buddha&#x27;s teachings. For others still, they see the as referring to the &quot;truth&quot;, or the ultimate reality of &quot;the way that things really are&quot; ().

===Jainism===
Tattvartha Sutra mentions with the meaning of &quot;righteous&quot;. These are forbearance, modesty, straightforwardness, purity, truthfulness, self-restraint, austerity, renunciation, non-attachment, and celibacy.

===Sikhism===
For Sikhs, the word means the path of righteousness and proper religious practice. For Sikhs, the word (Punjabi: , ) means the path of righteousness and proper religious practice. Guru Granth Sahib in hymn 1353 connotes as duty. The 3HO movement in Western culture, which has incorporated certain Sikh beliefs, defines Sikh broadly as all that constitutes religion, moral duty, and way of life.

==Persian religions==

===Zoroastrianism===
In Zoroastrianism, is an important tenet of the Zoroastrian religion with a complex and nuanced range of meaning. It is commonly summarized in accord with its contextual implications of &#x27;truth&#x27; and &#x27;right(eousness)&#x27;, &#x27;order&#x27; and &#x27;right working&#x27;.

From an early age, Zoroastrians are taught to pursue righteousness by following the Threefold Path of : , , (Good Thoughts, Good Words, Good Deeds).

One of the most sacred mantras in the religion is the Ashem Vohu, which has been translated as an &quot;Ode to Righteousness&quot;. There are many translations, that differ due to the complexity of Avestan and the concepts involved (for other translations, see: Ashem Vohu).

&quot;Righteousness is the best good and it is happiness. Happiness is to her/him who is righteous, for the sake of the best righteousness&quot;.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1144825" start="0" end="13" title="Righteousness" label="Righteousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651597" start="432" end="438" title="Indian religions" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482612" start="440" end="447" title="Religion in China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="453" end="462" title="Abrahamic religions" label="Abrahamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="508" end="519" title="Theology" label="theological"/>
<link wikidata="Q151885" start="520" end="527" title="concept" label="concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="571" end="585" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="587" end="595" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="597" end="605" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="607" end="612" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="614" end="626" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q10889441" start="628" end="640" title="Religious Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="642" end="648" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="650" end="657" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q937228" start="667" end="676" title="Property (philosophy)" label="attribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q219639" start="870" end="885" title="William Tyndale" label="William Tyndale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462802" start="887" end="910" title="Tyndale Bible" label="translator of the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649537" start="1001" end="1015" title="modern English" label="modern English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="1094" end="1100" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="1153" end="1165" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1175" end="1180" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="1239" end="1252" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="1531" end="1537" title="Ethics" label="Ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380889" start="1628" end="1644" title="Rushworth Kidder" label="Rushworth Kidder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2072" end="2078" title="Ethics#Defining ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2504" end="2516" title="Matthew 5:20" label="Matthew 5:20"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2566" end="2577" title="Romans 1:17" label="Romans 1:17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233528" start="2580" end="2598" title="William Lane Craig" label="William Lane Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q825" start="2630" end="2633" title="God in Christianity" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q217048" start="2752" end="2768" title="Baptism of Jesus" label="Baptism of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51640" start="2914" end="2933" title="Sermon on the Mount" label="Sermon on the Mount"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3180" end="3192" title="Matthew 6:33" label="Matthew 6:33"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007452" start="3200" end="3217" title="New English Bible" label="New English Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="3220" end="3225" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3279" end="3291" title="Matthew 5:20" label="Matthew 5:20"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="3474" end="3490" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310137" start="3501" end="3509" title="dual-covenant theology" label="two ways"/>
<link wikidata="Q837443" start="3569" end="3581" title="Law of Moses" label="Law of Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="3586" end="3591" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410500" start="3606" end="3611" title="faith" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="3619" end="3628" title="Atonement in Christianity" label="atonement"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="3665" end="3686" title="resurrection of Jesus" label="resurrection of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="4058" end="4071" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714976" start="4712" end="4728" title="Good works" label="works of charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790386" start="4752" end="4756" title="Christian views on sin" label="sins"/>
<link wikidata="Q40574" start="4798" end="4801" title="Lot (biblical person)" label="Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="4853" end="4876" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642184" start="4905" end="4918" title="List of Eastern Orthodox saint titles" label="type of saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915332" start="4962" end="4974" title="Old Covenant" label="Old Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672123" start="5057" end="5069" title="New Covenant" label="New Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="5208" end="5222" title="death of Jesus" label="death of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="5230" end="5235" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q330942" start="5274" end="5290" title="Bosom of Abraham" label="Bosom of Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540642" start="5297" end="5314" title="Harrowing of Hell" label="Harrowing of Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="5378" end="5383" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5512" end="5529" title="God#Specific attributes" label="attributes of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="5550" end="5562" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="5591" end="5598" title="ethics" label="ethical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577" start="5637" end="5648" title="Book of Job" label="Book of Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q179962" start="5654" end="5669" title="Job (biblical figure)" label="title character"/>
<link wikidata="Q202135" start="5729" end="5743" title="Book of Wisdom" label="Book of Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="5846" end="5855" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q220890" start="5959" end="5972" title="Book of Enoch" label="Book of Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825474" start="5977" end="5995" title="Genesis Apocryphon" label="Genesis Apocryphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q931406" start="6048" end="6052" title="alms" label="alms"/>
<link wikidata="Q931406" start="6056" end="6066" title="almsgiving" label="almsgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189320" start="6141" end="6148" title="justice" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803691" start="6191" end="6198" title="meaning (non-linguistic)" label="meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="6233" end="6245" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15290" start="6287" end="6291" title="good" label="good"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318107" start="6496" end="6505" title="Reverence (emotion)" label="reverence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196421" start="6509" end="6520" title="Ren (philosophy)" label="benevolence"/>
<link wikidata="Q182263" start="6634" end="6641" title="empathy" label="empathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="6783" end="6789" title="virtue" label="virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="6810" end="6822" title="Yin and yang" label="Yin and Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119376" start="6901" end="6909" title="fidelity" label="fidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706268" start="7360" end="7383" title="Untranslatability" label="single-word translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q779929" start="8185" end="8198" title="Ashoka Chakra" label="Ashoka Chakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079293" start="8308" end="8324" title="Hindu philosophy" label="Hindu philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="8329" end="8337" title="Hinduism" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193297" start="8405" end="8418" title="Sanskrit epic" label="Sanskrit epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193297" start="8541" end="8554" title="Sanskrit epic" label="Sanskrit epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="9601" end="9612" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q983067" start="9857" end="9869" title="Yudhishthira" label="Yudhishthira"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200625" start="10161" end="10180" title="Daniel H. H. Ingalls Sr." label="Daniel H.H. Ingalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651886" start="10471" end="10476" title="Bhima" label="Bhima"/>
<link wikidata="Q983067" start="10602" end="10614" title="Yudhishthira" label="Yudhishthira"/>
<link wikidata="Q185790" start="10733" end="10739" title="Arjuna" label="Arjuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="11435" end="11443" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194497" start="11688" end="11713" title="historical Vedic religion" label="historical Vedic religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="11819" end="11824" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167085" start="11845" end="11855" title="Tirukkural" label="Tirukkural"/>
<link wikidata="Q131779" start="11908" end="11915" title="antonym" label="antonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001079" start="12037" end="12056" title="Buddhist philosophy" label="Buddhist philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483247" start="12087" end="12096" title="phenomena" label="phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q222516" start="12238" end="12257" title="schools of Buddhism" label="schools of Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778761" start="12496" end="12512" title="Tattvartha Sutra" label="Tattvartha Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="12813" end="12817" title="Sikh" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="12830" end="12837" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q203249" start="12906" end="12923" title="Guru Granth Sahib" label="Guru Granth Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033134" start="12959" end="12962" title="3HO" label="3HO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="13169" end="13183" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16050040" start="13657" end="13667" title="Ashem Vohu" label="Ashem Vohu"/>
<link wikidata="Q29572" start="13801" end="13808" title="Avestan" label="Avestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16050040" start="13865" end="13875" title="Ashem Vohu" label="Ashem Vohu"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290438" wikidata="Q48872" url="?curid=290438" title="Eaton Corporation">
<text>Eaton Corporation plc is an American-Irish-domiciled multinational power management company, with a primary administrative center in Beachwood, Ohio. Eaton has more than 85,000 employees and sells products to customers in more than 175 countries.

==History==
In 1911, Joseph O. Eaton, brother-in-law Henning O. Taube and Viggo V. Torbensen, incorporated the Torbensen Gear and Axle Co. in Bloomfield, New Jersey. With financial backing from Torbensen&#x27;s mother, the company was set to manufacture Torbensen&#x27;s patented internal-gear truck axle. In 1914, the company moved to Cleveland, Ohio, to be closer to its core business, the automotive industry.

The Torbensen Axle Company incorporated in Ohio in 1916, succeeding the New Jersey corporation. A year later, Republic Motor Truck Company, Torbensen&#x27;s largest customer bought out the company. But Eaton and Torbensen were not content and bowed out of Republic to form the Eaton Axle Company in 1919. A year later, in 1920, Eaton Axle Company merged with Standard Parts. Standard Parts went in receivership later the same year and was later liquidated. In 1923, Eaton bought the Torbensen Axle Co. back from Republic and changed the name to the Eaton Axle and Spring Company.

Eaton officers believed the quickest way to grow the business was through acquisitions and began buying companies in the automotive industry. By 1932, the diversified company changed its name to Eaton Manufacturing Company. In 1937, Eaton became international by opening a manufacturing plant in Canada. In 1958 Eaton Corporation acquired Fuller Manufacturing. The company name changed once again in 1965 to Eaton Yale &amp; Towne Inc. after the acquisition of Yale &amp; Towne Manufacturing Co. in 1963. Stockholders approved the change to the company&#x27;s current name in 1971. In 1978, Eaton Corporation acquired Samuel Moore &amp; Company, Kenway Systems, and Cutler-Hammer.

==Current work==
Eaton&#x27;s businesses are divided into the following sectors:

===Electrical===
The electrical sector&#x27;s products include circuit breakers, switchgear, busway, UPS systems, power distribution units, panel boards, load centers, motor controls, meters, sensors, relays, PLCs, HMIs, and inverters. The main markets for the Electrical Americas and Electrical Rest of World segments are industrial, institutional, government, utility, commercial, residential, information technology and original equipment manufacturer customers.

===Aerospace===
For the aerospace industry, Eaton manufactures and markets a line of systems and components for hydraulic, fuel, motion control, pneumatic systems and engines.

===Mobility ===

The Mobility Group comprises the company&#x27;s Vehicle and eMobility segments, including the Roadranger division providing:
* Eaton clutches
* Eaton automated and mechanical transmissions
* Eaton hybrid power systems: mounted between the UltraShift automated manual transmission and clutch is an electric motor/generator, connected to a power inverter using lithium-ion batteries, controlled with an electronic control module. The system has a fail-safe that reverts to conventional engine-powered operation should some fault occur.
* Roadranger synthetic lubricants
* Eaton MD mobile diagnostics

The truck segment is involved in the design, manufacture and marketing of powertrain systems and other components for commercial vehicle markets. Key products include manual and automated transmissions, clutches, drive-line components, and hybrid power.

Eaton&#x27;s automotive segment produces products such as superchargers, engine valves, valve train components, cylinder heads, locking and limited-slip differentials, heavy-duty drive-line components, fuel, emissions, and safety controls, transmission and engine controls, spoilers, exterior moldings, plastic components, and fluid connectors.

The eMobility sector combines elements of Eaton&#x27;s electrical and vehicle businesses to deliver electric vehicles to passenger car, commercial vehicle and off-highway OEMs.

==Acquisitions and divestments==
In one of Eaton&#x27;s largest acquisitions, the company purchased the Westinghouse Distribution and Controls Business Unit in 1994. The acquisition included all of the Westinghouse electrical distribution and control product business and also included stipulations that the Westinghouse name cannot be used by anyone else on these types of products for years. Today, Eaton Electrical manufactures electrical distribution and control products branded &quot;Eaton&quot; or &quot;Cutler-Hammer&quot;, which can replace Westinghouse products in commercial and industrial applications.

Eaton spun off its semiconductor manufacturing equipment business as Axcelis Technologies in 2000.

In 2003, Eaton&#x27;s Electrical Distribution and Control business (formerly known as Cutler-Hammer) acquired the electrical division of Delta plc. This acquisition brought Delta&#x27;s brands Holec, MEM, Tabula, Bill and Elek under the Eaton nameplate with the previous Westinghouse divisions and gave the company manufacturing facilities to meet IEC standards, one of the steps to become a global company and developing a worldwide standard.

Soon after this acquisition, Eaton entered a joint venture with Caterpillar Inc. and purchased 51% of I &amp; S operations, now known as Intelligent Switchgear Organization, LLC. This was followed in 2004 by the acquisition of Powerware. The Powerware brand is known for the design and production of medium to large Uninterruptible Power System (UPS) devices. After several years of co-branding UPS products &quot;Eaton|Powerware&quot; the company is switching to the single brand Eaton for all UPS products including; BladeUPS, 9355, 9390, 9395, and 9E.

In 2006, Eaton entered the data center power distribution market. Initial products were internally developed PDU&#x27;s and RPP&#x27;s under the Powerware brand and included the PowerXpert metering system. A Powerware brand Static Transfer Switch was added to the portfolio through a brand-label relationship with Cyberex. To complete the power distribution portfolio Eaton released a line of rack power distribution products under its Powerware brand called ePDU. It acquired Aphel Technologies Ltd., a manufacturer of power distribution product for data centers based in Coventry, UK. Shortly after, it added Pulizzi Engineering Inc., a manufacturer of mission critical power distribution based in Santa Ana, California. In late 2007, it acquired the MGE Office Protection Systems division of Schneider Electric, as a result of Schneider&#x27;s acquisition of APC. A Taiwanese manufacturer, Phoenixtec, was also acquired giving the company the highest share in the Chinese single-phase UPS market.

On 21 May 2012, Eaton announced that they had agreed to purchase Ireland-based Cooper Industries in a cash-and-stock deal valued at about $11.46 billion. The new company is called Eaton Corporation plc and is incorporated in Ireland. Then-Chairman and CEO of Eaton Alexander Cutler headed the new corporation. Cooper shareholders received $39.15 in cash and 0.77479 of a share in the newly created company for each Cooper share held. This is worth $72 per share based on Eaton&#x27;s closing share price of $42.40 on 18 May 2012, and is 29% above Cooper&#x27;s closing stock price. Eaton Corporation plc completed its acquisition of Cooper Industries on 30 Nov 2012. The $13 billion acquisition of Cooper (US$5.4B Sales revenue (2011)), became the largest in Eaton&#x27;s (US$16B Sales Revenue (2011)) 101-year history.

On 17 Mar 2021, Eaton completed the acquisition of Tripp Lite for $1.65 billion. President and COO of Electrical Sector, Eaton Uday Yadav said &quot;The acquisition of Tripp Lite will enhance the breadth of our edge computing and distributed IT product portfolio and expand our single-phase UPS business.&quot; The acquisition will further Eaton&#x27;s access to the consumer market in which Tripp Lite has a strong position.

Eaton&#x27;s hydraulics business, manufacturing systems and components for the agriculture, construction, mining, forestry, utility, material handling, machine tools, molding, power generation, primary metals, and oil and gas markets, was acquired by Danfoss in August 2021 for $3.3 billion.

==Headquarters==
From 1920s-1964 Eaton was based on East 140th Street in Cleveland, Ohio. In 1964, the company moved its headquarters into the new Erieview Tower where it remained until 1983. In that year, Eaton Corporation moved into a 28-story Cleveland office tower which was renamed for it. Eaton relocated to its new 580,000 square foot facility, named Eaton Center, in Beachwood, Ohio in early 2013. They reincorporated, as a means of reducing their U.S. corporate tax burden, in Ireland as part of the Cooper merger involved establishing a registered head office in Dublin, Ireland but operational headquarters remain in Beachwood.

== Lawsuits and other issues ==

=== Racial harassment ===
In 1995, Eaton Corp had to pay $1.25M in restitution to a former employee who had been subject to racial harassment. Incidents included food being thrown on his desk, food being thrown through the roof of his car, use of the word &quot;nigger&quot;, and the presence of neo-Nazi flyers at Eaton Corp. The employee developed psychological problems and slipped into homelessness shortly after being fired.

In 2020, an employee sued Eaton Corp for retaliation and facilitating a climate of racial harassment. After a profane outburst from a fellow worker, the plaintiff was assigned to work and train under a supervisor who abused him psychologically. The supervisor made frequent use of &quot;nigger&quot;, made reference to slavery and lynching, and claimed his job was to get rid of Black workers. The employee informed management of his hostile work environment, but management responded by disciplining the plaintiff himself.

=== Long-term benefits ===
Back when Eaton Corp was struggling with bankruptcy, various employees on long-term benefits suddenly found themselves terminated. Eaton had failed to insure the plan that the employees had nonetheless paid for. This led to numerous suits against Eaton.

=== Tax avoidance ===
In 2012, the acquisition of Cooper Industries made it possible for Eaton Corp to become an Irish company, which would sharply lower its corporate tax rate. The move was later denounced by both President Obama and President Donald Trump.

=== Triumph Group ===
In 2004, Eaton Corp sued Triumph Group for trade secrets theft, but when it was discovered that the company&#x27;s lawyers were paying former Hinds County District Attorney Ed Peters to improperly influence then-Hinds County Circuit Judge Bobby DeLaughter, the defendants countersued. In 2014, Eaton Corp paid $135M to Triumph Group and $13M to six former employees to settle the long-running legal dispute. Judge Bobby DeLaughter was sentenced to 18 months in prison.

==Corporate recognition and rankings==

Recognitions include the following:
* Ranked #4 in &quot;100 Best Corporate Citizens&quot; of Corporate Responsibility Magazine in 2013, also ranking in Top 50 for Six Consecutive Years.
* Named to Thomson Reuters Top 100 Innovators List, 2011 - 2012 - 2013.

== See also ==
*Cooper Industries
*Eagle Electric
*Powerware
*Corporation tax in the Republic of Ireland#Corporate tax inversions

==References==

*&quot;The History of Eaton Corporation 1911–1985&quot;
*Securities and Exchange Commission

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48872" start="0" end="21" title="Eaton Corporation" label="Eaton Corporation plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q812890" start="133" end="148" title="Beachwood, Ohio" label="Beachwood, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6285961" start="269" end="284" title="Joseph Oriel Eaton II" label="Joseph O. Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q648622" start="390" end="412" title="Bloomfield, New Jersey" label="Bloomfield, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="584" end="599" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314406" start="772" end="800" title="Republic Motor Truck Company" label="Republic Motor Truck Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q211058" start="2070" end="2086" title="Circuit breaker" label="circuit breakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273786" start="2088" end="2098" title="switchgear" label="switchgear"/>
<link wikidata="Q21155319" start="2100" end="2106" title="Bus duct" label="busway"/>
<link wikidata="Q207696" start="2108" end="2119" title="Uninterruptible power supply" label="UPS systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q844861" start="2121" end="2145" title="Electric power distribution" label="power distribution units"/>
<link wikidata="Q239001" start="2147" end="2159" title="Control panel (engineering)" label="panel boards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128622" start="2161" end="2173" title="Distribution board" label="load centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188674" start="2216" end="2220" title="Programmable logic controller" label="PLCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="2222" end="2226" title="User interface" label="HMIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q324963" start="2232" end="2241" title="Power inverter" label="inverters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392940" start="3113" end="3122" title="fail-safe" label="fail-safe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079988" start="3580" end="3593" title="Supercharger" label="superchargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193137" start="3675" end="3688" title="Differential (mechanical device)" label="differentials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501625" start="3796" end="3804" title="Spoiler (car)" label="spoilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q267558" start="4039" end="4043" title="Original equipment manufacturer" label="OEMs"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="4150" end="4162" title="Westinghouse Electric Corporation" label="Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570432" start="4681" end="4718" title="Semiconductor device fabrication" label="semiconductor manufacturing equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830196" start="4731" end="4751" title="Axcelis Technologies" label="Axcelis Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q193858" start="5110" end="5113" title="International Electrotechnical Commission" label="IEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="5252" end="5265" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q459965" start="5271" end="5287" title="Caterpillar Inc." label="Caterpillar Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q16947249" start="5434" end="5443" title="Powerware" label="Powerware"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331338" start="5726" end="5734" title="Eaton BladeUPS" label="BladeUPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="6336" end="6344" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49053" start="6558" end="6576" title="Schneider Electric" label="Schneider Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q466448" start="6625" end="6628" title="APC by Schneider Electric" label="APC"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="6829" end="6836" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129806" start="6843" end="6860" title="Cooper Industries" label="Cooper Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q18121598" start="7029" end="7045" title="Alexander Cutler" label="Alexander Cutler"/>
<link wikidata="Q17036192" start="7636" end="7646" title="Tripp Lite" label="Tripp Lite"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="8025" end="8035" title="hydraulics" label="hydraulics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159510" start="8263" end="8270" title="Danfoss" label="Danfoss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388371" start="8452" end="8466" title="Erieview Tower" label="Erieview Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q812890" start="8680" end="8695" title="Beachwood, Ohio" label="Beachwood, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455718" start="9240" end="9246" title="nigger" label="nigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="9274" end="9282" title="neo-Nazi" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129806" start="10266" end="10283" title="Cooper Industries" label="Cooper Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q645011" start="10374" end="10392" title="Corporate tax" label="corporate tax rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="10431" end="10446" title="Barack Obama" label="President Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="10451" end="10473" title="Donald Trump" label="President Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q15507516" start="10523" end="10536" title="Triumph Group" label="Triumph Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141267" start="11206" end="11221" title="Thomson Reuters" label="Thomson Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129806" start="11284" end="11301" title="Cooper Industries" label="Cooper Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325072" start="11303" end="11317" title="Eagle Electric" label="Eagle Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947249" start="11319" end="11328" title="Powerware" label="Powerware"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11330" end="11397" title="Corporation tax in the Republic of Ireland#Corporate tax inversions" label="Corporation tax in the Republic of Ireland#Corporate tax inversions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290441" wikidata="Q515591" url="?curid=290441" title="Cramér's conjecture">
<text>In number theory, Cramér&#x27;s conjecture, formulated by the Swedish mathematician Harald Cramér in 1936, is an estimate for the size of gaps between consecutive prime numbers: intuitively, that gaps between consecutive primes are always small, and the conjecture quantifies asymptotically just how small they must be. It states that
:formula_1
where &quot;pn&quot; denotes the &quot;n&quot;th prime number, &quot;O&quot; is big O notation, and &quot;log&quot; is the natural logarithm. While this is the statement explicitly conjectured by Cramér, his heuristic actually supports the stronger statement
:formula_2
and sometimes this formulation is called Cramér&#x27;s conjecture. However, this stronger version is not supported by more accurate heuristic models, which nevertheless support the first version of Cramér&#x27;s conjecture.

The strongest form of all, which was never claimed by Cramér but is the one used in experimental verification computations and the plot in this article, is simply
:formula_3

None of the three forms has yet been proven or disproven.

==Conditional proven results on prime gaps==
Cramér gave a conditional proof of the much weaker statement that
:formula_4
on the assumption of the Riemann hypothesis. The best known unconditional bound is
:formula_5
due to Baker, Harman, and Pintz.

In the other direction, E. Westzynthius proved in 1931 that prime gaps grow more than logarithmically. That is,
:formula_6
His result was improved by R. A. Rankin, who proved that
:formula_7
Paul Erdős conjectured that the left-hand side of the above formula is infinite, and this was proven in 2014 by Kevin Ford, Ben Green, Sergei Konyagin, and Terence Tao, and independently by James Maynard. The two sets of authors eliminated one of the factors of formula_8 later that year, showing that, infinitely often,

:formula_9

where formula_10 is some constant.

== Heuristic justification==
Cramér&#x27;s conjecture is based on a probabilistic model—essentially a heuristic—in which the probability that a number of size &quot;x&quot; is prime is 1/log &quot;x&quot;. This is known as the Cramér random model or Cramér model of the primes.

In the Cramér random model,
:formula_11
with probability one. However, as pointed out by Andrew Granville, Maier&#x27;s theorem shows that the Cramér random model does not adequately describe the distribution of primes on short intervals, and a refinement of Cramér&#x27;s model taking into account divisibility by small primes suggests that the limit should not be 1, but a constant formula_12 (), where formula_13 is the Euler–Mascheroni constant. János Pintz has suggested that the limit sup may be infinite, and similarly Leonard Adleman and Kevin McCurley write
:&quot;As a result of the work of H. Maier on gaps between consecutive primes, the exact formulation of Cramér&#x27;s conjecture has been called into question [...] It is still probably true that for every constant formula_14, there is a constant formula_15 such that there is a prime between formula_16 and formula_17.&quot;

Similarly, Robin Visser writes
:&quot;In fact, due to the work done by Granville, it is now widely believed that Cramér&#x27;s conjecture is false. Indeed, there [are] some theorems concerning short intervals between primes, such as Maier&#x27;s theorem, which contradict Cramér&#x27;s model.&quot;
(internal references removed).

==Related conjectures and heuristics==

Daniel Shanks conjectured the following asymptotic equality, stronger than Cramér&#x27;s conjecture, for record gaps:
formula_18

J.H. Cadwell has proposed the formula for the maximal gaps:
formula_19
which is formally identical to the Shanks conjecture but suggests a lower-order term.

Marek Wolf has proposed the formula for the maximal gaps formula_20
expressed in terms of the prime-counting function
formula_21:
:formula_22
where formula_23 and formula_24 is the twin primes constant; see , . This is again formally equivalent to the Shanks conjecture but suggests lower-order terms
:formula_25.

Thomas Nicely has calculated many large prime gaps. He measures the quality of fit to Cramér&#x27;s conjecture by measuring the ratio
:formula_26

He writes, &quot;For the largest known maximal gaps, formula_27 has remained near 1.13.&quot;

==See also==
*Prime number theorem
*Legendre&#x27;s conjecture and Andrica&#x27;s conjecture, much weaker but still unproven upper bounds on prime gaps
*Firoozbakht&#x27;s conjecture
*Maier&#x27;s theorem on the numbers of primes in short intervals for which the model predicts an incorrect answer

==References==
* 

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="3" end="16" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q515591" start="18" end="42" title="Cramér&amp;#x27;s conjecture" label="Cramér&amp;#x27;s conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q471777" start="84" end="97" title="Harald Cramér" label="Harald Cramér"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377044" start="138" end="176" title="prime gap" label="gaps between consecutive prime numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q319141" start="254" end="264" title="conjecture" label="conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q752718" start="276" end="290" title="asymptotics" label="asymptotically"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="395" end="407" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="426" end="440" title="big O notation" label="big O notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q204037" start="469" end="486" title="natural logarithm" label="natural logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q201413" start="554" end="563" title="heuristic" label="heuristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q923592" start="925" end="937" title="Experimental mathematics" label="experimental"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="972" end="992" title="#Related conjectures and heuristics" label="plot in this article"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159270" start="1134" end="1151" title="conditional proof" label="conditional proof"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1164" end="1170" title="List of mathematical jargon#weak" label="weaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q205966" start="1222" end="1240" title="Riemann hypothesis" label="Riemann hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572848" start="1305" end="1311" title="Glyn Harman" label="Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q963230" start="1317" end="1322" title="János Pintz" label="Pintz"/>
<link wikidata="Q381352" start="1475" end="1487" title="R. A. Rankin" label="R. A. Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q173746" start="1516" end="1526" title="Paul Erdős" label="Paul Erdős"/>
<link wikidata="Q48969701" start="1628" end="1638" title="Kevin Ford (mathematician)" label="Kevin Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q792628" start="1640" end="1649" title="Ben Green (mathematician)" label="Ben Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453591" start="1651" end="1666" title="Sergei Konyagin" label="Sergei Konyagin"/>
<link wikidata="Q295981" start="1672" end="1683" title="Terence Tao" label="Terence Tao"/>
<link wikidata="Q19655060" start="1706" end="1719" title="James Maynard (mathematician)" label="James Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246860" start="1954" end="1967" title="Probabilistic number theory" label="probabilistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q201413" start="1988" end="1997" title="heuristic" label="heuristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q578985" start="2210" end="2225" title="Almost sure convergence" label="probability one"/>
<link wikidata="Q504907" start="2254" end="2270" title="Andrew Granville" label="Andrew Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735549" start="2272" end="2292" title="Maier&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Maier&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q273023" start="2588" end="2613" title="Euler–Mascheroni constant" label="Euler–Mascheroni constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q963230" start="2615" end="2626" title="János Pintz" label="János Pintz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076611" start="2650" end="2659" title="Limit superior and limit inferior" label="limit sup"/>
<link wikidata="Q918650" start="2691" end="2706" title="Leonard Adleman" label="Leonard Adleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5709706" start="2766" end="2774" title="Helmut Maier" label="H. Maier"/>
<link wikidata="Q925184" start="3430" end="3443" title="Daniel Shanks" label="Daniel Shanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q251922" start="3812" end="3835" title="prime-counting function" label="prime-counting function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3899" end="3919" title="Twin prime#First Hardy–Littlewood conjecture" label="twin primes constant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4033" end="4046" title="Thomas Nicely#Chronology" label="Thomas Nicely"/>
<link wikidata="Q386292" start="4289" end="4309" title="Prime number theorem" label="Prime number theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812503" start="4311" end="4337" title="Legendre&amp;#x27;s conjecture" label="Legendre&amp;#x27;s conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548146" start="4342" end="4367" title="Andrica&amp;#x27;s conjecture" label="Andrica&amp;#x27;s conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452148" start="4428" end="4457" title="Firoozbakht&amp;#x27;s conjecture" label="Firoozbakht&amp;#x27;s conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735549" start="4459" end="4479" title="Maier&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Maier&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290445" wikidata="Q292610" url="?curid=290445" title="Williamstown">
<text>Williamstown or Williamtown is the name of several places in the world:

==Australia==
*Williamtown, New South Wales
**RAAF Base Williamtown, New South Wales
*Williamstown, South Australia
*Williamstown, Victoria
**Williamstown railway line
**Williamstown railway station, Melbourne
**Williamstown Beach railway station
*Williamstown, Western Australia, a suburb of Kalgoorlie
*Electoral district of Williamstown, an electoral district in Victoria

==Cameroon==
*Williamstown, Bimbia, a historical village in the kingdom of Bimbia, now no longer in existence

==Canada==
*Williamstown, Ontario
*the historical name of Strange, Ontario

==Ireland==
*Williamstown, Ballyloughloe, townland in Ballyloughloe civil parish, barony of Clonlonan, County Westmeath
*Williamstown, County Dublin
*Williamstown, County Galway, a village 
* Williamstown, County Limerick, a townland 
*Williamstown, County Roscommon
*Williamstown, Foyran, a townland in Foyran civil parish, barony of Fore, County Westmeath
*Williamstown, Mayne, a townland in Mayne civil parish, barony of Fore, County Westmeath
*Williamstown, Piercetown, a townland in Piercetown civil parish, barony of Rathconrath, County Westmeath

==United Kingdom==
*Williamstown, Rhondda Cynon Taf, Wales

==United States==
*Williamstown, Indiana
*Williamstown, alternative name for Frytown, Iowa
*Williamstown, Kansas
*Williamstown, Kentucky
*Williamstown, Massachusetts, a New England town
**Williamstown (CDP), Massachusetts, the main village in the town
*Williamstown, New Jersey
*Williamstown, New York
*Williamstown, Ohio
*Williamstown, Pennsylvania
*Williamstown, Vermont, a New England town
**Williamstown (CDP), Vermont, the main village in the town
*Williamstown, West Virginia
*Williamstown, Wisconsin 
*Williamstown Township, Michigan

==See also==
*Williamston (disambiguation)
*Williamson (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q292610" start="0" end="12" title="Williamstown" label="Williamstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q292610" start="16" end="27" title="Williamstown" label="Williamtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581289" start="88" end="116" title="Williamtown, New South Wales" label="Williamtown, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q955268" start="119" end="140" title="RAAF Base Williamtown" label="RAAF Base Williamtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581297" start="159" end="188" title="Williamstown, South Australia" label="Williamstown, South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012058" start="190" end="212" title="Williamstown, Victoria" label="Williamstown, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q55509933" start="215" end="240" title="Williamstown railway line" label="Williamstown railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021315" start="243" end="282" title="Williamstown railway station, Melbourne" label="Williamstown railway station, Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021294" start="285" end="319" title="Williamstown Beach railway station" label="Williamstown Beach railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q21880824" start="321" end="352" title="Williamstown, Western Australia" label="Williamstown, Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356136" start="378" end="412" title="Electoral district of Williamstown" label="Electoral district of Williamstown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="463" end="483" title="Williamstown, Bimbia" label="Williamstown, Bimbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913711" start="524" end="530" title="Bimbia" label="Bimbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q597323" start="572" end="593" title="Williamstown, Ontario" label="Williamstown, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621316" start="618" end="634" title="Strange, Ontario" label="Strange, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="649" end="676" title="Williamstown, Ballyloughloe" label="Williamstown, Ballyloughloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q22083866" start="690" end="703" title="Ballyloughloe" label="Ballyloughloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448591" start="757" end="784" title="Blackrock, County Dublin" label="Williamstown, County Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470115" start="786" end="813" title="Williamstown, County Galway" label="Williamstown, County Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q104313286" start="828" end="857" title="Williamstown, County Limerick" label="Williamstown, County Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="872" end="902" title="Williamstown, County Roscommon" label="Williamstown, County Roscommon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="904" end="924" title="Williamstown, Foyran" label="Williamstown, Foyran"/>
<link wikidata="Q22083979" start="940" end="946" title="Foyran (civil parish)" label="Foyran"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="995" end="1014" title="Williamstown, Mayne" label="Williamstown, Mayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084140" start="1030" end="1035" title="Mayne, County Westmeath (civil parish)" label="Mayne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1084" end="1108" title="Williamstown, Piercetown" label="Williamstown, Piercetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084197" start="1124" end="1134" title="Piercetown, County Westmeath (civil parish)" label="Piercetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021291" start="1210" end="1241" title="Williamstown, Rhondda Cynon Taf" label="Williamstown, Rhondda Cynon Taf"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021285" start="1269" end="1290" title="Williamstown, Indiana" label="Williamstown, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876842" start="1327" end="1334" title="Frytown" label="Frytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021288" start="1342" end="1362" title="Williamstown, Kansas" label="Williamstown, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306982" start="1364" end="1386" title="Williamstown, Kentucky" label="Williamstown, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q983837" start="1388" end="1415" title="Williamstown, Massachusetts" label="Williamstown, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021292" start="1438" end="1471" title="Williamstown (CDP), Massachusetts" label="Williamstown (CDP), Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085623" start="1503" end="1527" title="Williamstown, New Jersey" label="Williamstown, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708429" start="1529" end="1551" title="Williamstown, New York" label="Williamstown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021290" start="1553" end="1571" title="Williamstown, Ohio" label="Williamstown, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184928" start="1573" end="1599" title="Williamstown, Pennsylvania" label="Williamstown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350079" start="1601" end="1622" title="Williamstown, Vermont" label="Williamstown, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167792" start="1645" end="1672" title="Williamstown (CDP), Vermont" label="Williamstown (CDP), Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526491" start="1704" end="1731" title="Williamstown, West Virginia" label="Williamstown, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886627" start="1733" end="1756" title="Williamstown, Wisconsin" label="Williamstown, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996522" start="1759" end="1790" title="Williamstown Township, Michigan" label="Williamstown Township, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q299492" start="1806" end="1834" title="Williamston (disambiguation)" label="Williamston (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q248196" start="1836" end="1863" title="Williamson (disambiguation)" label="Williamson (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290448" wikidata="Q861845" url="?curid=290448" title="Kernicterus">
<text>Kernicterus is a bilirubin-induced brain dysfunction. The term was coined in 1904 by Christian Georg Schmorl. Bilirubin is a naturally occurring substance in the body of humans and many other animals, but it is neurotoxic when its concentration in the blood is too high, a condition known as hyperbilirubinemia. Hyperbilirubinemia may cause bilirubin to accumulate in the grey matter of the central nervous system, potentially causing irreversible neurological damage. Depending on the level of exposure, the effects range from clinically unnoticeable to severe brain damage and even death.

When hyperbilirubinemia increases past a mild level, it leads to jaundice, raising the risk of progressing to kernicterus. When this happens in adults, it is usually because of liver problems. Newborns are especially vulnerable to hyperbilirubinemia-induced neurological damage, because in the earliest days of life, the still-developing liver is heavily exercised by the breakdown of fetal hemoglobin as it is replaced with adult hemoglobin and the blood–brain barrier is not as developed. Mildly elevated serum bilirubin levels are common in newborns, and neonatal jaundice is not unusual, but bilirubin levels must be carefully monitored in case they start to climb, in which case more aggressive therapy is needed, usually via light therapy but sometimes even via exchange transfusion.

==Classification==

===Acute bilirubin encephalopathy (ABE)===
ABE is an acute state of elevated bilirubin in the central nervous system. Clinically, it encompasses a wide range of symptoms. These include lethargy, decreased feeding, hypotonia or hypertonia, a high-pitched cry, spasmodic torticollis, opisthotonus, setting sun sign, fever, seizures, and even death. If the bilirubin is not rapidly reduced, ABE quickly progresses to chronic bilirubin encephalopathy.

===Chronic bilirubin encephalopathy (CBE)===
CBE is a chronic state of severe bilirubin-induced neurological lesions. Reduction of bilirubin in this state will not reverse the sequelae. Clinically, manifestations of CBE include: 
# movement disorders – dyskinetic CP with often spasticity. 60% have severe motor disability (unable to walk).
# auditory dysfunction – auditory neuropathy (ANSD)
# visual/oculomotor impairments (nystagmus, strabismus, impaired upward or downward gaze, and/or cortical visual impairment). In rare cases, decreased visual acuity(blindness) can occur.
# dental enamel hypoplasia/dysplasia of the deciduous teeth,
# gastroesophageal reflux,
# impaired digestive function.
# slightly decreased intellectual function: Although most individuals (approximately 85%) with kernicterus fall in normal or dull-normal range.
# epilepsy is uncommon.
These impairments are associated with lesions in the basal ganglia, auditory nuclei of the brain stem, and oculomotor nuclei of the brain stem. Cortex and white matter are subtly involved. Cerebellum may be involved. Severe cortical involvement is uncommon.

===Subtle bilirubin encephalopathy (SBE)===
SBE is a chronic state of mild bilirubin-induced neurological dysfunction (BIND). Clinically, this may result in neurological, learning and movement disorders, isolated hearing loss and auditory dysfunction.
* In the past it was thought that kernicterus (KI) often causes an intellectual disability. This was assumed due to difficulty with hearing which is typically not detected in a normal audiogram, accompanied by impairments of speech with choreoathetosis. With advances in technology this has proven to not be the case, as those living with KI have repeatedly demonstrated their intelligence using Augmentative Communication devices. Although most individuals with kernicteric cerebral palsy have normal intelligence, some children with mild choreoathetosis develop dull normal intelligence or mild intellectual disability even without auditory dysfunction.

==Causes==
In the vast majority of cases, kernicterus is associated with unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia during the neonatal period. The blood–brain barrier is not fully functional in neonates and therefore bilirubin is able to cross into the central nervous system. Moreover, neonates have much higher levels of bilirubin in their blood due to:
# Rapid breakdown of fetal red blood cells immediately prior to birth, with subsequent replacement by normal adult human red blood cells. This breakdown of fetal red blood cells releases large amounts of bilirubin.
# Severe hemolytic disease of the newborn. Many children who survive exhibit permanent mental impairment or damage to motor areas of the brain because of precipitation of bilirubin in neurons.
# Neonates have a limited ability to metabolize and excrete bilirubin. The sole pathway for bilirubin elimination is through the uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase isoform 1A1 (UGT1A1) enzyme, which performs a reaction called &quot;glucuronidation&quot;. This reaction adds a large sugar to the bilirubin, which makes the compound more water-soluble, so it can be more readily excreted via the urine and/or the feces. The UGT1A1 enzyme is not active in appreciable amounts until several months after birth. Apparently, this is a developmental compromise since the maternal liver and placenta perform glucuronidation for the fetus.
# Administration of aspirin to neonates and infants. Aspirin displaces bilirubin from serum albumin, thus generating an increased level of free bilirubin which can cross the developing blood brain barrier. This can be life-threatening.

Bilirubin is known to accumulate in the gray matter of neurological tissue where it exerts direct neurotoxic effects. It appears that its neurotoxicity is due to mass-destruction of neurons by apoptosis and necrosis.

==Risk factors==
* Premature birth
* Rh incompatibility
* Polycythemia – often present in neonates
* Sulfonamides (e.g. co-trimoxazole) – displaces bilirubin from serum albumin
* Crigler–Najjar syndrome, type I
* G6PD deficiency
* Bruising
Gilbert&#x27;s syndrome and G6PD deficiency occurring together especially increases the risk for kernicterus.

==Diagnosis==
In neonates with kernicterus, the Moro reflex may be absent or symmetrically reduced.

==Prevention==
Measuring the serum bilirubin is helpful in evaluating a baby&#x27;s risk for developing kernicterus. These numbers can then be plotted on the Bhutani nomogram. In neonates with hyperbilirubinemia, light therapy may be effective in reducing the serum bilirubin level. More severe cases may require the use of exchange transfusion.

==Treatment==
Currently, no effective treatment exists for kernicterus. Future therapies may include neuroregeneration. A handful of patients have undergone deep brain stimulation and experienced some benefit. Drugs such as baclofen, clonazepam, gabapentin, and artane are often used to manage movement disorders associated with kernicterus. Proton pump inhibitors are also used to help with reflux. Cochlear implants and hearing aids have also been known to improve the hearing loss that can come with kernicterus (auditory neuropathy – ANSD).

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q861845" start="0" end="11" title="Kernicterus" label="Kernicterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q104219" start="17" end="26" title="bilirubin" label="bilirubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="35" end="40" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q74580" start="85" end="108" title="Christian Georg Schmorl" label="Christian Georg Schmorl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338704" start="211" end="221" title="neurotoxicity" label="neurotoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686031" start="231" end="244" title="concentration" label="concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="252" end="257" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="292" end="310" title="bilirubin#Hyperbilirubinemia" label="hyperbilirubinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q646150" start="372" end="383" title="grey matter" label="grey matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="391" end="413" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="448" end="460" title="neurology" label="neurological"/>
<link wikidata="Q720026" start="562" end="574" title="brain damage" label="brain damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="657" end="665" title="jaundice" label="jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q970208" start="769" end="783" title="liver failure" label="liver problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="785" end="793" title="Infant" label="Newborns"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="930" end="935" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496436" start="977" end="993" title="fetal hemoglobin" label="fetal hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008082" start="1017" end="1033" title="hemoglobin A" label="adult hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="1042" end="1061" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q110084" start="1099" end="1104" title="serum (blood)" label="serum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755487" start="1150" end="1167" title="neonatal jaundice" label="neonatal jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q179661" start="1292" end="1299" title="therapy" label="therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q243570" start="1323" end="1336" title="light therapy" label="light therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q886468" start="1360" end="1380" title="exchange transfusion" label="exchange transfusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q104219" start="1480" end="1489" title="bilirubin" label="bilirubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753547" start="1617" end="1626" title="hypotonia" label="hypotonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q574942" start="1630" end="1640" title="hypertonia" label="hypertonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152510" start="1662" end="1683" title="spasmodic torticollis" label="spasmodic torticollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756015" start="1685" end="1697" title="opisthotonus" label="opisthotonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503804" start="1699" end="1715" title="setting sun sign" label="setting sun sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546328" start="2105" end="2115" title="dyskinetic" label="dyskinetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820036" start="2218" end="2237" title="auditory neuropathy" label="auditory neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q220989" start="2278" end="2287" title="nystagmus" label="nystagmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q179951" start="2289" end="2299" title="strabismus" label="strabismus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568160" start="2448" end="2458" title="hypoplasia" label="hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128996" start="2459" end="2468" title="dysplasia" label="dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q281524" start="2476" end="2491" title="deciduous teeth" label="deciduous teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q223591" start="2495" end="2518" title="gastroesophageal reflux" label="gastroesophageal reflux"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="2697" end="2705" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q464210" start="2772" end="2785" title="basal ganglia" label="basal ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="2810" end="2820" title="brain stem" label="brain stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q950852" start="2826" end="2843" title="oculomotor nuclei" label="oculomotor nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="3191" end="3203" title="hearing loss" label="hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693493" start="3467" end="3482" title="choreoathetosis" label="choreoathetosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="4024" end="4043" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q743545" start="4457" end="4489" title="hemolytic disease of the newborn" label="hemolytic disease of the newborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18216" start="5301" end="5308" title="aspirin" label="aspirin"/>
<link wikidata="Q646150" start="5558" end="5569" title="Grey matter" label="gray matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338704" start="5656" end="5669" title="neurotoxicity" label="neurotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q625506" start="5755" end="5770" title="Premature birth" label="Premature birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q743545" start="5773" end="5791" title="Rh incompatibility" label="Rh incompatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q933716" start="5794" end="5806" title="Polycythemia" label="Polycythemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q411398" start="5837" end="5849" title="Sulfonamide (medicine)" label="Sulfonamides"/>
<link wikidata="Q898623" start="5856" end="5870" title="co-trimoxazole" label="co-trimoxazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140000" start="5915" end="5946" title="Crigler–Najjar syndrome, type I" label="Crigler–Najjar syndrome, type I"/>
<link wikidata="Q848343" start="5949" end="5964" title="G6PD deficiency" label="G6PD deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q574491" start="5967" end="5975" title="Bruising" label="Bruising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383576" start="6135" end="6146" title="Moro reflex" label="Moro reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q721129" start="6354" end="6362" title="nomogram" label="nomogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q243570" start="6401" end="6414" title="light therapy" label="light therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q886468" start="6512" end="6532" title="exchange transfusion" label="exchange transfusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335079" start="6636" end="6653" title="neuroregeneration" label="neuroregeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q618076" start="6692" end="6714" title="deep brain stimulation" label="deep brain stimulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q413717" start="6759" end="6767" title="baclofen" label="baclofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q407988" start="6769" end="6779" title="clonazepam" label="clonazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q410352" start="6781" end="6791" title="gabapentin" label="gabapentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991856" start="6797" end="6803" title="Trihexyphenidyl" label="artane"/>
<link wikidata="Q421704" start="6877" end="6899" title="Proton pump inhibitors" label="Proton pump inhibitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q724965" start="6935" end="6952" title="Cochlear implants" label="Cochlear implants"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290458" wikidata="Q3398327" url="?curid=290458" title="Erín Moure">
<text>Erín Moure (born 1955 in Calgary, Alberta) is a Canadian poet and translator with 18 books of poetry, a coauthored book of poetry, a volume of essays, a book of articles on translation, a poetics, and two memoirs. 

She has translated or co-translated 21 books of poetry and two of biopoetics from French, Spanish, Galician, Portuguese, and Ukrainian, by poets such as Nicole Brossard (with Robert Majzels), Andrés Ajens, Chantal Neveu, Rosalía de Castro, Chus Pato, Uxío Novoneyra, Lupe Gómez (with Rebeca Lema Martínez and on her own), Fernando Pessoa, and Yuri Izdryk (with Roman Ivashkiv). 

Three of her own books have been translated; one each in German, Galician, and French. Her work has received the Governor General’s Award twice, Pat Lowther Memorial Award, A. M. Klein Prize twice, and has been a three-time finalist for the Griffin Prize and three-time finalist in the USA for a Best Translated Book Award (Poetry). 

Her latest literary work is &quot;The Elements&quot; (2019) and &quot;Theophylline: an a-poretic migration&quot; will appear in 2023. Her work is rooted in a philosophical mix that accepts mystery, not always immediately accessible. 

She has won several prizes, including the Governor General&#x27;s Award twice.

==Early and personal life==

Her mother was born in 1924 in present-day western Ukraine, and emigrated to Canada in 1929. Her father, born in Ottawa, Ontario in 1925 was a great-grandson of the painter George Théodore Berthon. Erín Moure is the oldest of three, having two younger brothers.

In 1975, Moure moved to Vancouver, British Columbia, where she took her second year classes at the University of British Columbia in philosophy. After only one academic year, she left the University of British Columbia and got a job at Via Rail Canada where she continued to write poetry. This is where she learned French. 

She learned Galician in the early 21st century in order to translate the poetry of Chus Pato. She also translates from Portuguese, Spanish and English.

She lives in Montreal, Quebec.

== Writing and style ==
During an interview in the early 1990s, she has cited four major influences which led her to become a writer, other than the work of other writers or poets: &quot;Landscape of cars, her mother going to work, her mother teaching her to read, and in a small way losing her sense of touch.&quot;

Many years ago, Melissa Jacques wrote, &quot;Erin Moure&#x27;s poetry is fragmented, meta-critical, and explicitly deconstructive. Folding everyday events and ordinary people into complex and often irresolvable philosophical dilemmas, Moure challenges the standards of accessibility and common sense. Not surprisingly, her work has met with a mixed response. Critics are often troubled by the difficult and therefore alienating nature of the writing; even amongst Moure&#x27;s advocates, the issues of accessibility and political efficacy are recurrent themes.&quot;

Moure has been nominated for and won several literary awards for her writing and her translation. These include the Pat Lowther Memorial Award, the Governor General&#x27;s Award for poetry, the A. M. Klein Prize for Poetry, the Best Translated Book Award for poetry, and the Nelson Ball Prize.

Her most recent poetry book, &quot;The Elements&quot;, appeared in 2019.

==Awards and honours==

*1988 Governor General&#x27;s Award for English-language poetry for the volume &quot;Furious.&quot;
*2014 Best Translated Book Award, poetry, shortlist for &quot;White Piano&quot; by Nicole Brossard, from the French
* Griffin Poetry Prize biography
*2017 Harvard University 2017 WPR Creative fellowship, RESONANCE: A MODERNISM with Erin Moure
*2021 Governor General&#x27;s Award for French to English translation - &quot;This Radiant Life&quot; (Chantal Neveu, &quot;La vie radieuse&quot;)

== Works of poetry ==

* &quot;Empire, York Street&quot;, Toronto: House of Anansi Press, 1979 (nominated for a Governor General&#x27;s Award)
* &quot;The Whisky Vigil&quot;, Madeira Park, BC: Harbour Publishing, 1981
* &quot;Wanted Alive&quot;, Toronto: House of Anansi Press, 1983
* &quot;Domestic Fuel&quot;, Toronto: House of Anansi Press, 1985 (winner of the Pat Lowther Award)
* &quot;Furious&quot;, Toronto: House of Anansi Press, 1988 (winner of the 1988 Governor General&#x27;s Award for poetry)
* &quot;WSW&quot;, Montreal: Véhicule Press, 1989 (winner of the A. M. Klein Prize for Poetry
* &quot;Sheepish Beauty, Civilian Love&quot;, Montreal: Véhicule Press, 1992
* &quot;The Green Word: Selected Poems: 1973–1992&quot;, Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1994
* &quot;Search Procedures&quot;, Toronto: House of Anansi Press, 1996 (nominated for a Governor General&#x27;s Award)
* &quot;A Frame of the Book&quot;, Toronto: House of Anansi Press, 1999
* &quot;Pillage Laud&quot;, Montreal: Moveable Type Books, 1999
* &quot;O Cidadán&quot;, Toronto: House of Anansi Press, 2002 (nominated for a Governor General&#x27;s Award)
* &quot;Little Theatres&quot;, Toronto: House of Anansi Press, 2005 (winner of the A. M. Klein Prize for Poetry, nominated for a Governor General&#x27;s Award, nominated for the Pat Lowther Award, shortlisted for the 2006 Canadian Griffin Poetry Prize)
* &quot;O Cadoiro&quot;, Toronto: House of Anansi Press, 2007
* &quot;Expeditions of a Chimæra&quot; (collaboration with Oana Avasilichioaei), Toronto: Book*hug Press, 2009 (shortlisted for the 2011 A. M. Klein Prize for Poetry)
* &quot;O Resplandor&quot;, Toronto: House of Anansi Press, 2010 (shortlisted for the 2011 A. M. Klein Prize for Poetry)
* &quot;The Unmemntioable&quot;, Toronto: House of Anansi Press, 2012
* &quot;Insecession&quot; a dual book with Chus Pato&#x27;s &quot;Secession&quot;, Toronto: Book*hug Press, 2014
* &quot;Kapusta&quot;, Toronto: House of Anansi Press, 2015
*&quot;The Elements&quot;, Toronto: House of Anansi Press, 2019

== Translations from other languages ==
* &quot;Installations&quot; – 2000, translation with Robert Majzels from French of Nicole Brossard&#x27;s &quot;Installations&quot;
* &quot;Sheep&#x27;s Vigil by a Fervent Person&quot; translation from Portuguese of Fernando Pessoa / Alberto Caeiro&#x27;s &quot;O Guardador de Rebanhos&quot;- 2001 (shortlisted for the 2002 Canadian Griffin Poetry Prize)
* &quot;Museum of Bone and Water&quot; – 2003, translation with Robert Majzels from French of Nicole Brossard&#x27;s &quot;Musée de l&#x27;os et de l&#x27;eau&quot;
* &quot;Notebook of Roses and Civilization&quot; – 2007, translation with Robert Majzels from French of Nicole Brossard&#x27;s &quot;Cahier de roses &amp; de civilisation&quot; (nominated for a Governor General&#x27;s Award; shortlisted for the 2008 Canadian Griffin Poetry Prize)
* &quot;Charenton&quot; – 2007, translation from Galician of Chus Pato&#x27;s &quot;Charenton&quot;
* &quot;Quase Flanders, Quase Extremadura&quot; – 2008, translation from Spanish of excerpts from the poetry of Andrés Ajens
* &quot;m-Talá&quot; – 2009, translation from Galician of Chus Pato&#x27;s &quot;m-Talá&quot;
* &quot;Hordes of Writing&quot; – 2011, translation from Galician of Chus Pato&#x27;s &quot;Hordas de escritura&quot;
* &quot;Just Like Her&quot; – 2011, translation from French of Louise Dupré&#x27;s &quot;Tout come elle&quot;
* &quot;White Piano&quot; – 2013, translation with Robert Majzels from French of Nicole Brossard&#x27;s &quot;Piano blanc&quot;
* &quot;Galician Songs&quot; – 2013, translation from Galician of Rosalia de Castro&#x27;s &quot;Cantares Gallegos&quot;
* &quot;Secession&quot; – 2014, translation from Galician of Chus Pato&#x27;s &quot;Secesión&quot;
* &quot;Flesh of Leviathan&quot; – 2016, translation from Galician of Chus Pato&#x27;s &quot;Carne de Leviatán&quot;
* &quot;New Leaves&quot; – 2016, translation from Galician of Rosalia de Castro&#x27;s &quot;Follas Novas&quot;
* &quot;My Dinosaur&quot; – 2016, translation from French of François Turcot&#x27;s &quot;Mon dinosaure&quot;
*&quot;Paraguayan Sea&quot; – 2017, translated from Portunhol and Guarani to Frenglish and Guarani of Wilson Bueno&#x27;s &quot;Mar paraguayo&quot;
*&quot;Camouflage&quot; – 2019, translated from Galician of Lupe Gómez&#x27;s &quot;Camuflaxe&quot;
*&quot;The Uplands: Book of the Courel and other poems&quot; – 2020, translated from Galician of Uxío Novoneyra&#x27;s &quot;Os Eidos&quot; and other poems
*&quot;This Radiant Life&quot; – 2020, translated from French of Chantal Neveu&#x27;s &quot;La vie radieuse&quot;
*&quot;The Face of the Quartzes&quot; – 2021, translated from Galician of Chus Pato&#x27;s &quot;Un libre favor&quot;

== Essays, Letters and Memoirs ==
* &quot;Two Women Talking: Correspondence 1985–1987&quot; – 1994 (with Bronwen Wallace)
* &quot;My Beloved Wager&quot; essays – 2009
* &quot;Sitting Shiva on Minto Avenue, by Toots&quot;, Vancouver: New Star Books, 2017
* &quot;A Century in the North Peace: Life and Times of Anne and John Callison&quot;, Montreal: Zat-So Productions, 2018

==See also==

*Canadian literature
*Canadian poetry
*List of Canadian poets

==References==
==External links==
* Archives of Erin Moure (Erin Mouré fonds, R11781) are held at Library and Archives Canada</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3398327" start="0" end="10" title="Erín Moure" label="Erín Moure"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="25" end="32" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q283256" start="1208" end="1237" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="1388" end="1394" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="1396" end="1403" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101958" start="1448" end="1471" title="George Théodore Berthon" label="George Théodore Berthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="1562" end="1571" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="1637" end="1667" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="1726" end="1756" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q876720" start="1774" end="1789" title="Via Rail Canada" label="Via Rail Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="1875" end="1883" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="2029" end="2037" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405798" start="3333" end="3390" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award for English-language poetry" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award for English-language poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896822" start="3433" end="3459" title="Best Translated Book Award" label="Best Translated Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341018" start="3510" end="3525" title="Nicole Brossard" label="Nicole Brossard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3582" end="3629" title="Harvard University 2017 WPR Creative fellowship" label="Harvard University 2017 WPR Creative fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382835" start="3676" end="3739" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award for French to English translation" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award for French to English translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q110127904" start="3748" end="3765" title="This Radiant Life" label="This Radiant Life"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3773" end="3786" title=":fr:Chantal Neveu" label="Chantal Neveu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405742" start="3930" end="3959" title="1979 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143676" start="4182" end="4199" title="Pat Lowther Award" label="Pat Lowther Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405758" start="4276" end="4321" title="1988 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="1988 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award for poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014750" start="4388" end="4416" title="Quebec Writers&amp;#x27; Federation Awards" label="A. M. Klein Prize for Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405770" start="4677" end="4706" title="1996 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405778" start="4923" end="4952" title="2002 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014750" start="5037" end="5065" title="A. M. Klein Prize for Poetry" label="A. M. Klein Prize for Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405783" start="5083" end="5112" title="2005 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143676" start="5132" end="5149" title="Pat Lowther Award" label="Pat Lowther Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359628" start="5185" end="5205" title="Griffin Poetry Prize" label="Griffin Poetry Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q42531328" start="5328" end="5347" title="Oana Avasilichioaei" label="Oana Avasilichioaei"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014750" start="5406" end="5434" title="A. M. Klein Prize for Poetry" label="A. M. Klein Prize for Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014750" start="5527" end="5555" title="A. M. Klein Prize for Poetry" label="A. M. Klein Prize for Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311831" start="5670" end="5679" title="Chus Pato" label="Chus Pato"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347292" start="5958" end="5972" title="Robert Majzels" label="Robert Majzels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341018" start="5988" end="6003" title="Nicole Brossard" label="Nicole Brossard"/>
<link wikidata="Q173481" start="6121" end="6136" title="Fernando Pessoa" label="Fernando Pessoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758050" start="6139" end="6153" title="Alberto Caeiro" label="Alberto Caeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359628" start="6238" end="6258" title="Griffin Poetry Prize" label="Griffin Poetry Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347292" start="6324" end="6338" title="Robert Majzels" label="Robert Majzels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341018" start="6354" end="6369" title="Nicole Brossard" label="Nicole Brossard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347292" start="6499" end="6513" title="Robert Majzels" label="Robert Majzels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341018" start="6529" end="6544" title="Nicole Brossard" label="Nicole Brossard"/>
<link wikidata="Q283256" start="6619" end="6648" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359628" start="6684" end="6704" title="Griffin Poetry Prize" label="Griffin Poetry Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311831" start="6767" end="6776" title="Chus Pato" label="Chus Pato"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6918" end="6930" title="Andrés Ajens" label="Andrés Ajens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311831" start="6989" end="6998" title="Chus Pato" label="Chus Pato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311831" start="7094" end="7103" title="Chus Pato" label="Chus Pato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263734" start="7206" end="7218" title="Louise Dupré" label="Louise Dupré"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341018" start="7334" end="7349" title="Nicole Brossard" label="Nicole Brossard"/>
<link wikidata="Q464264" start="7447" end="7464" title="Rosalía de Castro" label="Rosalia de Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311831" start="7563" end="7572" title="Chus Pato" label="Chus Pato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311831" start="7671" end="7680" title="Chus Pato" label="Chus Pato"/>
<link wikidata="Q464264" start="7780" end="7797" title="Rosalía de Castro" label="Rosalia de Castro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7891" end="7906" title="François Turcot" label="François Turcot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8042" end="8054" title="Wilson Bueno" label="Wilson Bueno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394915" start="8148" end="8158" title="Lupe Gómez" label="Lupe Gómez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052784" start="8285" end="8299" title="Uxío Novoneyra" label="Uxío Novoneyra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8409" end="8422" title="Chantal Neveu" label="Chantal Neveu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311831" start="8532" end="8541" title="Chus Pato" label="Chus Pato"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974121" start="8682" end="8697" title="Bronwen Wallace" label="Bronwen Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723523" start="8968" end="8987" title="Canadian literature" label="Canadian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030855" start="8989" end="9004" title="Canadian poetry" label="Canadian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q945695" start="9006" end="9028" title="List of Canadian poets" label="List of Canadian poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q913250" start="9128" end="9155" title="Library and Archives Canada" label="Library and Archives Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290461" wikidata="Q4840835" url="?curid=290461" title="Badger (occupation)">
<text>A badger was, in English, a term of uncertain derivation (possibly derived from bagger, a bag or person carrying one) for a dealer in food or victuals which he had purchased in one place and carried for sale in another place. The Oxford English Dictionary gives the earliest entry as being from Bristol in 1500, but there were bager(s)gates at York in 1243 and in Lincoln by 1252. It continued in use until the 19th century in Great Britain.

The term &quot;badger&quot; was specifically applied to those dealing in grain for food, but was also applied generically to food commodity dealers. These included those dealing in grain for brewing (maltsters) or meal for bread-making (mealmen), while others specialised in butter and cheese. Other grains, beans, peas or even vetch were traded in years when wheat and barley prices were high. The legislation also referred to kidders, drovers of livestock, laders, and carriers.

The primary statutes were the Forestallers Act 1551 (5 &amp; 6 Edw. 6. c. 14), &#x27;An Act against Regrators, Forestallers and Ingrossers&#x27;, 1552, and the Corn, etc. Act 1562 (5 Eliz. 1, c. 12), &#x27;An Act touching Badgers of Corn, and Drovers of Cattle to be licensed&#x27;, 1563. These prescribed penalties against the offences of engrossing (speculative accumulation), forestalling (buying produce before it was offered in market), and regrating (buying and re-selling within the same market or within four miles). They required badgers to be licensed by three justices of the peace at quarter sessions and required them to be married householders, of 30 years of age or more, and a resident in the county for at least three years. Household servants or retainers could not be badgers. In some counties justices seem to have regularly imposed limits on licences, specifying the markets where badgers could buy or sell, the quantities they could buy or the number of packhorses they could use for carrying goods between markets.

The preamble to the statute of 1562 declared that many people took up the trade of badgering seeking only to live easily and to leave their honest labour. As with much of the Tudor regulatory legislation enforcement this may better reflect the fears of central government than the reality of the trade. Although there were complaints about abuses by badgers, enforcement action was variable. There are few surviving records of licensing before the Civil War, and it may not have been comprehensive. In that period most prosecutions for breaching the statutes were brought by common informers, whose reputation was poor. The licensing system is best seen as one of the powers which were available to the county justices of the peace, which they used when local conditions required or when ordered to so by the Privy Council. The legislation was repealed in 1772, but forestalling remained a common law offence until 1844.

The contribution made by badgers to the provisioning of provincial cities and industrial towns is hard to calculate. However, they must have been significant, as local justices complained when neighbouring justices or over-zealous informers restricted their activities. There are also records of local communities petitioning the justices for a nominated person to be licensed specifically to buy grain to supply their market.

The term is now obsolete.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4840835" start="2" end="8" title="Badger (occupation)" label="badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="17" end="24" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762621" start="124" end="150" title="Vendor" label="dealer in food or victuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="295" end="302" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="344" end="348" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="364" end="371" title="Lincoln, Lincolnshire" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="427" end="440" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q127604535" start="880" end="887" title="Droving" label="drovers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="955" end="976" title="Forestallers Act 1551" label="Forestallers Act 1551"/>
<link wikidata="Q123603963" start="978" end="994" title="5 &amp;amp; 6 Edw. 6" label="5 &amp;amp; 6 Edw. 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604062" start="1085" end="1104" title="Corn, etc. Act 1562" label="Corn, etc. Act 1562"/>
<link wikidata="Q127433566" start="1106" end="1115" title="5 Eliz. 1" label="5 Eliz. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604062" start="1265" end="1275" title="engrossing (law)" label="engrossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="1496" end="1517" title="justice of the peace" label="justices of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269253" start="1521" end="1537" title="quarter sessions" label="quarter sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="2412" end="2421" title="English Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="2674" end="2695" title="justice of the peace" label="justices of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="2854" end="2864" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q282744" start="3330" end="3338" title="obsolete" label="obsolete"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290462" wikidata="Q638105" url="?curid=290462" title="Badger">
<text>Badgers are medium-sized short-legged omnivores in the superfamily Musteloidea. Badgers are a polyphyletic rather than a natural taxonomic grouping, being united by their squat bodies and adaptions for fossorial activity rather than by their ancestral relationships: Musteloidea contains several families, only two of which (the &quot;weasel family&quot; Mustelidae and the &quot;skunk family&quot; Mephitidae) include badgers; moreover, both of these families also include various other animals that are not badgers.

The fifteen species of mustelid badgers are grouped in four subfamilies: four species of Melinae (genera &quot;Meles&quot; and &quot;Arctonyx&quot;) including the European badger, five species of Helictidinae (genus &quot;Melogale&quot;) or ferret-badger, the honey badger or ratel Mellivorinae (genus &quot;Mellivora&quot;), and the American badger Taxideinae (genus &quot;Taxidea&quot;). Badgers include the most basal mustelids; the American badger is the most basal of all, followed successively by the ratel and the Melinae; the estimated split dates are about 17.8, 15.5 and 14.8 million years ago, respectively.

The two species of Asiatic stink badgers of the genus &quot;Mydaus&quot; were formerly included within Melinae (and thus Mustelidae), but more recent genetic evidence indicates these are actually members of the skunk family (Mephitidae).

Badger mandibular condyles connect to long cavities in their skulls, which gives resistance to jaw dislocation and increases their bite grip strength. This in turn limits jaw movement to hinging open and shut, or sliding from side to side, but it does not hamper the twisting movement possible for the jaws of most mammals.

Badgers have rather short, wide bodies, with short legs for digging. They have elongated, weasel-like heads with small ears. Their tails vary in length depending on species; the stink badger has a very short tail, while the ferret-badger&#x27;s tail can be long, depending on age. They have black faces with distinctive white markings, grey bodies with a light-coloured stripe from head to tail, and dark legs with light-coloured underbellies. They grow to around in length, including tail.

The European badger is one of the largest; the American badger, the hog badger, and the honey badger are generally a little smaller and lighter. Stink badgers are smaller still, and ferret-badgers are the smallest of all. They weigh around , while some Eurasian badgers weigh around .

== Etymology ==
The word &quot;badger&quot;, originally applied to the European badger (&quot;Meles meles&quot;), comes from earlier &quot;bageard&quot; (16th century), presumably referring to the white mark borne like a badge on its forehead. Similarly, a now archaic synonym was &quot;bauson&quot; &#x27;badger&#x27; (1375), a variant of &quot;bausond&quot; &#x27;striped, piebald&#x27;, from Old French &quot;bausant&quot;, &quot;baucent&quot; &#x27;id.&#x27;.

The less common name &quot;brock&quot; (Old English: &quot;brocc&quot;), (Scots: &quot;brock&quot;) is a Celtic loanword (cf. Gaelic &quot;broc&quot; and Welsh &quot;broch&quot;, from Proto-Celtic &quot;*brokkos&quot;) meaning &quot;grey&quot;. The Proto-Germanic term was &quot;*þahsuz&quot; (cf. German &quot;Dachs&quot;, Dutch &quot;das&quot;, Norwegian svin&quot;toks&quot;; Early Modern English &quot;dasse&quot;), probably from the PIE root &quot;*tek&#x27;-&quot; &quot;to construct,&quot; so the badger would have been named after its digging of setts (tunnels); the Germanic term &quot;*þahsuz&quot; became &quot;taxus&quot; or &quot;taxō&quot;, -&quot;ōnis&quot; in Latin glosses, replacing &quot;mēlēs&quot; (&quot;marten&quot; or &quot;badger&quot;), and from these words the common Romance terms for the animal evolved (Italian &quot;tasso&quot;, French &quot;taisson&quot;—&quot;blaireau&quot; is now more common—Catalan &quot;toixó&quot;, Spanish &quot;tejón&quot;, Portuguese &quot;texugo&quot;).

A male European badger is a boar, a female is a sow, and a young badger is a cub. However, in North America the young are usually called kits, while the terms male and female are generally used for adults. A collective name suggested for a group of colonial badgers is a cete, but badger colonies are more often called clans. A badger&#x27;s home is called a sett.

== Classification ==

The following list shows where the various species with the common name of badger are placed in the Mustelidae and Mephitidae classifications. The list is polyphyletic and the species commonly called badgers do not form a valid clade.
* Family Mustelidae
** Subfamily Melinae
*** Genus &quot;Arctonyx&quot;
**** Northern hog badger, &quot;Arctonyx albogularis&quot;
****Greater hog badger, &quot;Arctonyx collaris&quot;
****Sumatran hog badger, &quot;Arctonyx hoevenii&quot;
*** Genus &quot;Meles&quot;
**** Japanese badger, &quot;Meles anakuma&quot;
**** Asian badger, &quot;Meles leucurus&quot;
**** European badger, &quot;Meles meles&quot;
****Caucasian badger, &quot;Meles canescens&quot;
** Subfamily Helictidinae
*** Genus &quot;Melogale&quot;
**** Burmese ferret-badger, &quot;Melogale personata&quot;
**** Javan ferret-badger, &quot;Melogale orientalis&quot;
**** Chinese ferret-badger, &quot;Melogale moschata&quot;
****Formosan ferret-badger, &quot;Melogale subaurantiaca&quot;
**** Bornean ferret-badger, &quot;Melogale everetti&quot;
**** Vietnam ferret-badger, &quot;Melogale cucphuongensis&quot;
** Subfamily Mellivorinae
*** Honey badger, &quot;Mellivora capensis&quot;
** Subfamily Taxidiinae:
*** †&quot;Chamitataxus avitus&quot;
*** †&quot;Pliotaxidea nevadensis&quot;
*** †&quot;Pliotaxidea garberi&quot;
*** American badger, &quot;Taxidea taxus&quot;
* Family Mephitidae
** Subfamily Mydainae
*** Genus &quot;Mydaus&quot;
**** Indonesian or Sunda stink badger (&quot;teledu&quot;), &quot;Mydaus javanensis&quot;
**** Palawan stink badger, &quot;Mydaus marchei&quot;

== Distribution ==
Badgers are found in much of North America, Great Britain, Ireland and most of the rest of Europe as far north as southern Scandinavia. They live as far east as Japan, Korea and China. The Javan ferret-badger lives in Indonesia, and the Bornean ferret-badger lives in Malaysia. The honey badger is found in most of sub-Saharan Africa, the Arabian Desert, southern Levant, Turkmenistan, Pakistan and India.

==Behaviour==

The behaviour of badgers differs by family, but all shelter underground, living in burrows called setts, which may be very extensive. Some are solitary, moving from home to home, while others are known to form clans called cetes. Cete size is variable from two to 15.

Badgers can run or gallop at for short periods of time. Some species, notably the honey badger, can climb well. In March 2024, scientists released footage of a wild Asian badger climbing a tree to a height of 2.5 m in South Korea. Badgers are nocturnal.

In North America, coyotes sometimes eat badgers and vice versa, but the majority of their interactions seem to be mutual or neutral. American badgers and coyotes have been seen hunting together in a cooperative fashion.

== Diet ==
The diet of the Eurasian badger consists largely of earthworms (especially &quot;Lumbricus terrestris&quot;), insects, grubs, and the eggs and young of ground-nesting birds. They also eat small mammals, amphibians, reptiles and birds, as well as roots and fruit. In Britain, they are the main predator of hedgehogs, which have demonstrably lower populations in areas where badgers are numerous, so much so that hedgehog rescue societies do not release hedgehogs into known badger territories. They are occasional predators of domestic chickens, and are able to break into enclosures that a fox cannot. In southern Spain, badgers feed to a significant degree on rabbits.

American badgers are fossorial carnivores – i.e. they catch a significant proportion of their food underground, by digging. They can tunnel after ground-dwelling rodents at speed.

The honey badger of Africa consumes honey, porcupines, and even venomous snakes (such as the puff adder); they climb trees to gain access to honey from bees&#x27; nests.

Badgers have been known to become intoxicated with alcohol after eating rotting fruit.

== Relation with humans ==

=== Hunting ===

Hunting badgers for sport has been common in many countries. The Dachshund (German for &quot;badger hound&quot;) dog breed was bred for this purpose. Badger-baiting was formerly a popular blood sport. Although badgers are normally quite docile, they fight fiercely when cornered. This led people to capture and box badgers and then wager on whether a dog could succeed in removing the badger from its refuge. In England, opposition from naturalists led to its ban under the Cruelty to Animals Act 1835 and the Protection of Badgers Act 1992 (c. 51) made it an offence to kill, injure, or take a badger or to interfere with a sett unless under license from a statutory authority. The Hunting Act 2004 further banned fox hunters from blocking setts during their chases.

Badgers have been trapped commercially for their pelts, which have been used for centuries to make shaving brushes, a purpose to which it is particularly suited owing to its high water retention. Virtually all commercially available badger hair now comes from mainland China, though, which has farms for the purpose. The Chinese supply three grades of hair to domestic and foreign brush makers. Village cooperatives are also licensed by the national government to hunt and process badgers to avoid their becoming a crop nuisance in rural northern China. The European badger is also used as trim for some traditional Scottish clothing. The American badger is also used for paintbrushes and as trim for some Native American garments.

=== Culling ===

Controlling the badger population is prohibited in many European countries since badgers are listed in the Berne Convention, but they are not otherwise the subject of any international treaty or legislation. Many badgers in Europe were gassed during the 1960s and 1970s to control rabies.

Until the 1980s, badger culling in the United Kingdom was undertaken in the form of gassing, allegedly to control the spread of bovine tuberculosis (bTB). Limited culling resumed in 1998 as part of a 10-year randomised trial cull, which was considered by John Krebs and others to show that culling was ineffective. Some groups called for a selective cull, whilst others favoured a programme of vaccination. Wales and Northern Ireland are currently conducting field trials of a badger vaccination programme. In 2012 the government authorised a limited cull led by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. However it was later deferred and a wide range of reasons given. In August 2013 a full culling programme began, whereby it was expected that about 5,000 badgers would be killed over six weeks in West Somerset and Gloucestershire using a mixture of controlled shooting and free shooting (some badgers were to be trapped in cages first). The cull caused many protests, with emotional, economic and scientific reasons being cited. The badger is considered an iconic species of the British countryside and it has been claimed by shadow ministers that &quot;The government&#x27;s own figures show it will cost more than it saves...&quot;, and Lord Krebs, who led the Randomised Badger Culling Trial in the 1990s, said the two pilots &quot;will not yield any useful information&quot;.

=== Badger gates ===

When protecting woodlands from deer and rabbit, installing fences in badger territory can be problematic. Because badgers are persistent and strong, if fences are placed across their &quot;runs&quot;—established foraging and travel paths—they may well dig through or under, damaging the fence and leaving openings that rabbits can get through. Ideally, badger runs should be identified before fence construction begins. The gateways are constructed in stages over time to ensure that badgers are using the manmade openings instead of damaging the new fence: starting with leaving a cut opening in the fence at ground level, later laying a floor (threshold), later still framing the opening, and eventually hanging a small free-swinging door that is heavy enough that rabbits don&#x27;t seem to learn how to push them open. The recommended door size is 18 by 25 cm and weighs about 1.1 kg.

With a special license, badger fencing and one-way gates may be installed to exclude resident badgers from an area being developed.

=== Traditional medicine ===
Badgers have been used in traditional medicine in Europe, Asia and Africa. 

=== Food ===
Although rarely eaten today in the United States or the United Kingdom, badgers were once a primary meat source for the diets of Native Americans and European colonists. Badgers were also eaten in Britain during World War II and the 1950s. In some areas of Russia, the consumption of badger meat is still widespread. Shish kebabs made from badger, along with dog meat and pork, are a major source of trichinosis outbreaks in the Altai Region of Russia. In Croatia badger meat is rarely eaten, but when it is, it is usually smoked, dried, or served in goulash. In France, badger meat was used in the preparation of several dishes, such as &quot;Blaireau au sang&quot;, and it was a relatively common ingredient in countryside cuisine. Badger meat was eaten in some parts of Spain until recently.

=== Pets ===

Badgers are sometimes kept as pets. Keeping a badger as a pet or offering one for sale is an offence in the United Kingdom under the 1992 Protection of Badgers Act.

== In popular culture ==

In Europe during the medieval period, accounts of badgers in bestiaries described badgers as working together to dig holes under mountains. They were said to lie down at the entrance of the hole holding a stick in their mouths, while other badgers piled dirt on their bellies. Two badgers would then take hold of the stick in the badger&#x27;s mouth, and drag the animal loaded with dirt away, almost in the fashion of a wagon. The moralizing component of bestiaries often took precedence over their function as natural history texts, and this description of badgers most likely reflects an allegorical exemplar rather than what everyday people in the Middle Ages might or might not have believed about how badgers behave in the wild.

The 19th-century poem &quot;The Badger&quot; by John Clare describes a badger hunt and badger-baiting. The character Frances in Russell Hoban&#x27;s children&#x27;s books, beginning with &quot;Bedtime for Frances&quot; (1948–1970), is depicted as a badger. Trufflehunter is a heroic badger in the &quot;Chronicles of Narnia&quot; book &quot;Prince Caspian&quot; (1951) by C. S. Lewis.

Badger characters are featured in author Brian Jacques&#x27; &quot;Redwall&quot; series (1986–2011), they are depicted as feared warriors most often falling under the title of Badger Lord or Badger Mother. A badger character is featured in &quot;The Immortals&quot; (1992–1996) by Tamora Pierce and &quot;The Badger&quot; is a comic book hero created by Mike Baron. The badger is the emblem of the Hufflepuff house of the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry in the J. K. Rowling&#x27;s &quot;Harry Potter&quot; book series (1997–2007), it is chosen as such because the badger is an animal that is often underestimated, because it lives quietly until attacked, but which, when provoked, can fight off animals much larger than itself, which resembles the Hufflepuff house in several ways.

Many other stories featuring badgers as characters include Kenneth Grahame&#x27;s children&#x27;s novel &quot;The Wind in the Willows&quot; (1908), Beatrix Potter&#x27;s &quot;The Tale of Mr. Tod&quot; (1912; featuring badger Tommy Brock), the Rupert Bear adventures by Mary Tourtel (appearing since 1920), T. H. White&#x27;s Arthurian fantasy novels &quot;The Once and Future King&quot; (1958, written 1938–41) and &quot;The Book of Merlyn&quot; (1977), &quot;Fantastic Mr. Fox&quot; (1970) by Roald Dahl, Richard Adams&#x27;s &quot;Watership Down&quot; (1972), Colin Dann&#x27;s &quot;The Animals of Farthing Wood&quot; (1979), and Erin Hunter&#x27;s &quot;Warriors&quot; (appearing since 2003). In the historic novel &quot;Incident at Hawk&#x27;s Hill&quot; (1971) by Allan W. Eckert a badger is one of the main characters.

Badgers are also featured in films and animations: a flash video called &quot;Badgers&quot; shows a cete doing calisthenics. The 1973 Disney animated film &quot;Robin Hood&quot; depicts the character of Friar Tuck as a badger. In the &quot;Doctor Snuggles&quot; series, Dennis the handyman was a badger.

In Europe, badgers were traditionally used to predict the length of winter.

The badger is the state animal of the U.S. state of Wisconsin, though this is a reference to the state&#x27;s early miners rather than the animal itself, and Bucky Badger is the mascot of the athletic teams at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. The badger is also the official mascot of Brock University in St. Catharines, Ontario, Canada; The University of Sussex, England; and St Aidan&#x27;s College at the University of Durham.

In 2007, the appearance of honey badgers around the British base at Basra, Iraq, fueled rumours among the locals that British forces deliberately released &quot;man-eating&quot; and &quot;bear-like&quot; badgers to spread panic. These allegations were denied by the British army and the director of Basra&#x27;s veterinary hospital.

On 28 August 2013, the PC video game &quot;Shelter&quot; was released by developers Might and Delight in which players control a mother badger protecting her cubs.

An internet meme (&quot;Badger, badger, badger&quot;) appeared viral in the early years of YouTube, later initiating other versions of the animation.

As a sub-series of the &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&quot; franchise, Sticks the Badger is one of the main characters of the &quot;Sonic Boom&quot; series.

== References ==
== External links ==
* Badgerland – The Definitive On-Line Guide to Badgers in the UK
* Durham County Badger Group 
* WildlifeOnline – Natural History of Badgers
* Badger Facts
* www.ontariobadgers.org – Information about American Badgers
* Local dutch badger group
* Badger-Coyote Associations 
* YouTube video of examples of Badger scratching trees</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q638105" start="0" end="7" title="Badger" label="Badgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q164509" start="38" end="46" title="omnivore" label="omnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="55" end="66" title="superfamily (taxonomy)" label="superfamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670845" start="67" end="78" title="Musteloidea" label="Musteloidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q217743" start="94" end="106" title="polyphyletic" label="polyphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850019" start="202" end="211" title="fossorial" label="fossorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q25437" start="355" end="365" title="Mustelidae" label="Mustelidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q83244" start="399" end="409" title="Mephitidae" label="Mephitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="531" end="538" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q27066" start="682" end="697" title="European badger" label="European badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366503" start="760" end="773" title="ferret-badger" label="ferret-badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q173128" start="779" end="791" title="honey badger" label="honey badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q232129" start="853" end="868" title="American badger" label="American badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="934" end="939" title="Basal (phylogenetics)" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507049" start="1166" end="1178" title="stink badger" label="stink badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q43604020" start="1350" end="1355" title="skunk" label="skunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q718041" start="1385" end="1403" title="mandibular condyle" label="mandibular condyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="1693" end="1699" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27066" start="2552" end="2567" title="European badger" label="European badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="2986" end="2997" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="3020" end="3025" title="Scots Language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="3051" end="3057" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="3058" end="3066" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="3072" end="3078" title="Goidelic languages" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="3100" end="3105" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q653649" start="3130" end="3142" title="Proto-Celtic" label="Proto-Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="3195" end="3209" title="Proto-Germanic" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="3244" end="3250" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="3270" end="3275" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="3293" end="3302" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472196" start="3325" end="3345" title="Early Modern English" label="Early Modern English"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="3384" end="3387" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="PIE"/>
<link wikidata="Q111029" start="3388" end="3392" title="Root (linguistics)" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q968149" start="3500" end="3504" title="sett" label="sett"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3622" end="3627" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132324" start="3628" end="3633" title="Gloss (annotation)" label="gloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q26533" start="3672" end="3678" title="marten" label="marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="3741" end="3748" title="Romance languages" label="Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="3779" end="3786" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3806" end="3812" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="3873" end="3880" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="3900" end="3907" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="3927" end="3937" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q217743" start="4503" end="4515" title="polyphyletic" label="polyphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="4576" end="4581" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q25437" start="4592" end="4602" title="Mustelidae" label="Mustelidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11906411" start="4640" end="4648" title="Arctonyx" label="Arctonyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q19717139" start="4660" end="4679" title="Northern hog badger" label="Northern hog badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q744382" start="4718" end="4736" title="Greater hog badger" label="Greater hog badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q19717143" start="4772" end="4791" title="Sumatran hog badger" label="Sumatran hog badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345042" start="4839" end="4844" title="Meles (genus)" label="Meles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576038" start="4856" end="4871" title="Japanese badger" label="Japanese badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q728454" start="4904" end="4916" title="Asian badger" label="Asian badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q27066" start="4950" end="4965" title="European badger" label="European badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q107473331" start="4995" end="5011" title="Caucasian badger" label="Caucasian badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366503" start="5054" end="5066" title="Helictidinae" label="Helictidinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366503" start="5083" end="5091" title="Melogale" label="Melogale"/>
<link wikidata="Q844662" start="5103" end="5124" title="Burmese ferret-badger" label="Burmese ferret-badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q912020" start="5162" end="5181" title="Javan ferret-badger" label="Javan ferret-badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q332414" start="5220" end="5241" title="Chinese ferret-badger" label="Chinese ferret-badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q107473188" start="5277" end="5299" title="Formosan ferret-badger" label="Formosan ferret-badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q690765" start="5341" end="5362" title="Bornean ferret-badger" label="Bornean ferret-badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748756" start="5399" end="5420" title="Vietnam ferret-badger" label="Vietnam ferret-badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q13564654" start="5471" end="5483" title="Mellivorinae" label="Mellivorinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q173128" start="5488" end="5500" title="Honey badger" label="Honey badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q232129" start="5546" end="5556" title="Taxidiinae" label="Taxidiinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q16745574" start="5569" end="5588" title="Chamitataxus avitus" label="Chamitataxus avitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q232129" start="5676" end="5691" title="American badger" label="American badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q83244" start="5728" end="5738" title="Mephitidae" label="Mephitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507049" start="5752" end="5760" title="Mydainae" label="Mydainae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507049" start="5777" end="5783" title="Mydaus" label="Mydaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q570548" start="5809" end="5827" title="Sunda stink badger" label="Sunda stink badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q922103" start="5885" end="5905" title="Palawan stink badger" label="Palawan stink badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="5983" end="5996" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="5998" end="6011" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="6013" end="6020" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="6077" end="6088" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="6115" end="6120" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="6122" end="6127" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="6132" end="6137" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="6172" end="6181" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="6222" end="6230" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="6269" end="6287" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q208299" start="6293" end="6307" title="Arabian Desert" label="Arabian Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="6318" end="6324" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="6326" end="6338" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="6340" end="6348" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="6353" end="6358" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q968149" start="6474" end="6478" title="sett" label="sett"/>
<link wikidata="Q281601" start="6606" end="6615" title="Group size measures" label="Cete size"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370000" start="6664" end="6670" title="Gait" label="gallop"/>
<link wikidata="Q173128" start="6727" end="6739" title="honey badger" label="honey badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q728454" start="6810" end="6822" title="Asian badger" label="Asian badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="6888" end="6897" title="Nocturnality" label="nocturnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="6918" end="6924" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q124378" start="7184" end="7193" title="earthworm" label="earthworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q30092" start="7213" end="7233" title="Lumbricus terrestris" label="Lumbricus terrestris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="7242" end="7248" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="7251" end="7256" title="Larva" label="grubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="7299" end="7303" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="7326" end="7332" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="7335" end="7344" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="7347" end="7354" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="7360" end="7364" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q41500" start="7378" end="7382" title="root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="7388" end="7393" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120" start="7437" end="7445" title="hedgehog" label="hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850019" start="7824" end="7833" title="fossorial" label="fossorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="7834" end="7843" title="carnivore" label="carnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="8020" end="8025" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223829" start="8027" end="8037" title="porcupines" label="porcupines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="8057" end="8062" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q369667" start="8077" end="8087" title="Bitis arietans" label="puff adder"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="8206" end="8213" title="Ethanol" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q29099" start="8353" end="8362" title="Dachshund" label="Dachshund"/>
<link wikidata="Q39367" start="8401" end="8410" title="dog breed" label="dog breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840830" start="8438" end="8452" title="Badger-baiting" label="Badger-baiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929372" start="8476" end="8487" title="blood sport" label="blood sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189913" start="8762" end="8789" title="Cruelty to Animals Act 1835" label="Cruelty to Animals Act 1835"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8798" end="8828" title="Protection of Badgers Act 1992" label="Protection of Badgers Act 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604698" start="8946" end="8965" title="statutory authority" label="statutory authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638187" start="8971" end="8987" title="Hunting Act 2004" label="Hunting Act 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q133333" start="9003" end="9011" title="fox hunt" label="fox hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q199990" start="9156" end="9169" title="shaving brush" label="shaving brush"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="9317" end="9331" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998487" start="9673" end="9690" title="Scottish dress" label="Scottish clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q193897" start="9729" end="9739" title="paintbrush" label="paintbrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="9763" end="9778" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q375083" start="9914" end="9930" title="Convention on the conservation of European wildlife and natural habitats" label="Berne Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q39222" start="10088" end="10094" title="rabies" label="rabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840863" start="10114" end="10150" title="badger culling in the United Kingdom" label="badger culling in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10225" end="10244" title="Tuberculosis#Other animals" label="bovine tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q336513" start="10352" end="10362" title="John Krebs" label="John Krebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044721" start="10664" end="10714" title="Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs" label="Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="10916" end="10924" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q23165" start="10929" end="10944" title="Gloucestershire" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q303329" start="11241" end="11257" title="Shadow Cabinet" label="shadow ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12872" end="12884" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q20655532" start="12977" end="12988" title="Shish kebab" label="Shish kebab"/>
<link wikidata="Q495146" start="13060" end="13071" title="trichinosis" label="trichinosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5942" start="13089" end="13101" title="Altai Region" label="Altai Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="13116" end="13123" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q205762" start="13211" end="13218" title="goulash" label="goulash"/>
<link wikidata="Q830560" start="13723" end="13733" title="bestiaries" label="bestiaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q981572" start="14446" end="14456" title="John Clare" label="John Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840830" start="14485" end="14499" title="badger-baiting" label="badger-baiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353673" start="14526" end="14539" title="Russell Hoban" label="Russell Hoban"/>
<link wikidata="Q483412" start="14701" end="14721" title="The Chronicles of Narnia" label="Chronicles of Narnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218950" start="14739" end="14753" title="Prince Caspian" label="Prince Caspian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="14770" end="14781" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q468851" start="14825" end="14838" title="Brian Jacques" label="Brian Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247790" start="14851" end="14858" title="Redwall" label="Redwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741505" start="15030" end="15043" title="The Immortals (series)" label="The Immortals"/>
<link wikidata="Q443681" start="15065" end="15078" title="Tamora Pierce" label="Tamora Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285895" start="15138" end="15148" title="Mike Baron" label="Mike Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q174097" start="15182" end="15192" title="Hufflepuff" label="Hufflepuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q174097" start="15206" end="15248" title="Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry" label="Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="15256" end="15269" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="15283" end="15295" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q314897" start="15638" end="15653" title="Kenneth Grahame" label="Kenneth Grahame"/>
<link wikidata="Q936276" start="15689" end="15712" title="The Wind in the Willows" label="The Wind in the Willows"/>
<link wikidata="Q214565" start="15727" end="15741" title="Beatrix Potter" label="Beatrix Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263059" start="15755" end="15774" title="The Tale of Mr. Tod" label="The Tale of Mr. Tod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377323" start="15823" end="15834" title="Rupert Bear" label="Rupert Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q453410" start="15886" end="15897" title="T. H. White" label="T. H. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195086" start="15936" end="15960" title="The Once and Future King" label="The Once and Future King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719275" start="16001" end="16019" title="The Book of Merlyn" label="The Book of Merlyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320903" start="16040" end="16057" title="Fantastic Mr. Fox" label="Fantastic Mr. Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161" start="16074" end="16084" title="Roald Dahl" label="Roald Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q313289" start="16086" end="16099" title="Richard Adams" label="Richard Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q936801" start="16113" end="16127" title="Watership Down" label="Watership Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108416" start="16142" end="16152" title="Colin Dann" label="Colin Dann"/>
<link wikidata="Q904684" start="16166" end="16194" title="The Animals of Farthing Wood (book)" label="The Animals of Farthing Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q641740" start="16213" end="16224" title="Erin Hunter" label="Erin Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q739702" start="16238" end="16246" title="Warriors (novel series)" label="Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014563" start="16305" end="16333" title="Incident at Hawk&amp;#x27;s Hill" label="Incident at Hawk&amp;#x27;s Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q524567" start="16350" end="16365" title="Allan W. Eckert" label="Allan W. Eckert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135858" start="16460" end="16471" title="flash video" label="flash video"/>
<link wikidata="Q799007" start="16485" end="16492" title="Badgers (animation)" label="Badgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471790" start="16518" end="16530" title="calisthenics" label="calisthenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047410" start="16541" end="16547" title="Walt Disney Animation Studios" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q19090" start="16568" end="16578" title="Robin Hood (1973 film)" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074170" start="16610" end="16620" title="Friar Tuck" label="Friar Tuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233879" start="16647" end="16662" title="Doctor Snuggles" label="Doctor Snuggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311" start="16780" end="16786" title="winter" label="winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="16841" end="16850" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983579" start="16947" end="16959" title="Bucky Badger" label="Bucky Badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="17003" end="17034" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin–Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q923624" start="17078" end="17094" title="Brock University" label="Brock University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161297" start="17131" end="17155" title="The University of Sussex" label="The University of Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q458393" start="17201" end="17221" title="University of Durham" label="University of Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="17292" end="17303" title="Basra, Iraq" label="Basra, Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="17581" end="17583" title="Personal computer" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277884" start="17601" end="17608" title="Shelter (video game)" label="Shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10585120" start="17642" end="17659" title="Might and Delight" label="Might and Delight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927074" start="17726" end="17739" title="internet meme" label="internet meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q799007" start="17747" end="17769" title="Badgers (animation)" label="Badger, badger, badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030329" start="17786" end="17791" title="Viral video" label="viral"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="17814" end="17821" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046812" start="17897" end="17937" title="Sonic the Hedgehog (series)" label="&amp;quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17939" end="17956" title="List of Sonic the Hedgehog characters#Sticks the Badger" label="Sticks the Badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711878" start="17994" end="18023" title="Sonic Boom (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Sonic Boom&amp;quot; series"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290463" wikidata="Q332799" url="?curid=290463" title="Patricia Hewitt">
<text>Dame Patricia Hope Hewitt (born 2 December 1948) is a British government adviser and former politician, who was the Secretary of State for Health from 2005 to 2007. A member of the Labour Party, she had previously been the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry from 2001 to 2005.

Hewitt&#x27;s political career began in the 1970s, as a high-profile left-winger and supporter of Tony Benn. She was even classified by MI5 as an alleged communist sympathiser. After nine years as General Secretary of the National Council for Civil Liberties, she became press secretary to Neil Kinnock, whom she assisted in the modernisation of the Labour Party. In 1997, she became the first female MP for Leicester West, a safe Labour seat in the East Midlands, which she represented for thirteen years.

In 2001 she joined Blair&#x27;s cabinet, the first of the 1997 intake of MPs to do so, as President of the Board of Trade and Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, before becoming Health Secretary in 2005. During her tenure, the ban on smoking in public places became legally enforceable. In March 2010, Hewitt was suspended from the Parliamentary Labour Party over the question of political lobbying irregularities, alleged on the Channel 4 &quot;Dispatches&quot; programme.

She is a former school governor at the Kentish Town Primary School.

In November 2022, British Chancellor of the Exchequer, Jeremy Hunt, announced that Hewitt would serve in an advisory role to the then Conservative Government.

== Early life ==
Hewitt was born in Canberra, Australia. She is the daughter of Sir Lenox Hewitt, a leading Australian civil servant and later chairman of Qantas, and the former Hope Tillyard. Her maternal grandfather was entomologist Robert John Tillyard.

Hewitt was privately educated at Canberra Church of England Girls&#x27; Grammar School and the Australian National University. She then studied for a degree in English Literature at Newnham College, Cambridge, where she graduated BA (later promoted to MA). She became a visiting fellow at Nuffield College, Oxford. She speaks French and is a keen gardener.

In 1970, Hewitt married David Julian Gibson-Watt, second son of David Gibson Watt, Conservative MP for Hereford, and Diana Hambro. The couple divorced in 1978. Originally a Conservative, by the time of her divorce she had moved to the left, becoming a committed feminist. MI5 classified her as a &quot;Communist sympathiser&quot; in the 1970s because of her relationship with William (Bill) Jack Birtles, a radical lawyer. In 1981, she married Birtles in Camden; they have a daughter (born September 1986) and a son (born February 1988). In 1971, she became Age Concern&#x27;s Press and Public Relations Officer, before joining the National Council for Civil Liberties (now Liberty), initially as a women&#x27;s rights officer in 1973, and for nine years from 1974 as the general secretary.

In 1990, the Council of Europe ruled that MI5 surveillance of both Hewitt and the NCCL legal officer, Harriet Harman, had breached the European Convention of Human Rights.

== Pre-Parliamentary career ==
Hewitt joined the Labour Party in the 1970, and was initially a follower of Tony Benn; she publicly condemned those left-wing MPs who abstained in the deputy leadership election of 1981, giving Denis Healey a narrow victory. She was selected as the Labour candidate in Leicester East constituency at the 1983 general election, following the defection of the sitting Labour MP, Tom Bradley, to the Social Democratic Party. Bradley stood for the SDP at the election, but it was the Conservative candidate, Peter Bruinvels, who defeated Hewitt, who came second, by just 933 votes.

Following her defeat in Leicester, she became press secretary to the Leader of the Opposition, Neil Kinnock. In this role she was a key player in the first stages of the &#x27;modernisation&#x27; of the Labour Party and, along with Clive Hollick, helped set up the Institute for Public Policy Research and was its deputy director 1989–1994.

Following Labour&#x27;s defeat in 1992, Hewitt was asked by the new Labour leader, John Smith, to help establish the Commission on Social Justice, of which she became deputy chair. She became head of research with Andersen Consulting, remaining in the post during the period 1994–1997.

Hewitt was elected to the House of Commons as the first female MP for Leicester West at the 1997 general election, following the retirement of the Labour MP Greville Janner. She was elected with a majority of 12,864 and remained the constituency MP until stepping down in 2010. She made her maiden speech on 3 July 1997. Leicester West is a safe Labour seat, with a majority of 9,070 votes in the 2005 general election.

== Parliamentary career ==
In 1997, Hewitt was a member of the social security select committee for a year, before becoming a member of Tony Blair&#x27;s government in his first reshuffle in 1998, as the Economic Secretary to the Treasury. She was promoted in 1999 to become a Minister of State for Small Business and E-Commerce at the Department of Trade and Industry, and created the Social Enterprise Unit for similar new companies. While in office Hewitt initiated a White Paper on telecommunications and broadcasting, jointly published by the DTI and DCMS; this proposed the merger of seven or more different regulators to create a single converged regulator, OFCOM. Hewitt was then responsible for appointing its first chairman, Lord Currie.

She joined the Blair Cabinet for the first time following the 2001 general election as the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry and Minister for Women and Equality. She spent four years in this post and was seen as a fairly effective Trade and Industry Secretary despite controversial policies affecting her own constituency. However, she was seen as lacking leadership, particularly on consumer issues. Hewitt was then moved sideways to Health Secretary in May 2005.

== Secretary of State for Trade and Industry==
Hewitt became a member of the Privy Council in 2001 and was Secretary of State for Trade and Industry from June 2001 until May 2005. During her time at the DTI, Hewitt introduced the &quot;say on pay&quot; laws, which require public companies to hold an annual shareholders&#x27; vote on the Remuneration Committee report on senior executive pay.

Hewitt defended outsourcing public sector support jobs to countries such as India in May 2004, arguing that outsourcing supported poorer communities in India and opposing protectionist proposals.

In September 2005, a Judicial Review found Hewitt &quot;guilty of unlawful sex discrimination&quot; when she employed a female applicant for a DTI position ahead of a significantly stronger male candidate. The judge ruled that Malcolm Hanney had lost out to a candidate ranked third by the interview panel and that the failure to appoint him was &quot;in breach of the code of practice for ministerial appointments to public bodies&quot;. Hewitt had quoted the Code of Practice on Public Appointments, which said: &quot;Ministers will wish to balance boards in terms of diversity as well as skills and experience&quot;, although the panel had clearly stated that Mr Hanney was &quot;much the strongest candidate&quot;. The DTI apologised and Hanney was awarded £17,967.17 costs. However, the appointment was not overturned, and Hewitt herself did not apologise and claimed not to have realised she had been in breach of the law. Rod Liddle, writing in &quot;The Times,&quot; juxtaposed Hewitt&#x27;s claim with the fact that Hewitt&#x27;s department was itself responsible for the Sex Discrimination Act, suggesting that she believed the purpose of sex discrimination legislation &quot;was intended to be of benefit only to women&quot;, rather than &quot;maltreated job applicants ... foolish enough to be born with a penis&quot;.

Hewitt was criticised for a 2003 report by the Women and Equality unit, which was run by Hewitt, in which it was suggested that there was a &quot;real problem&quot; with mothers who stayed at home to bring up their children.

== Secretary of State for Health ==
Hewitt was appointed Secretary of State for Health following the 2005 general election, having previously been tipped for the Work and Pensions department. She had a turbulent two years in office, during which several difficult issues arose, such as the controversy over the Medical Training Application Service computer system and her decision to allow women with early breast cancer to have access to trastuzumab (Herceptin), for which it was not at that time a licensed indication and in the absence of NICE guidance. However, she also achieved several pieces of Labour&#x27;s 2005 manifesto legislation during her time in office, including persuading MPs to vote for a complete smoking ban in public places in England in 2006.

In April 2006, Hewitt made a speech in which she quoted the foreword to the 2014 NHS Annual Report by Nigel Crisp, the then current NHS chief executive, stating the NHS had had &quot;its best year ever&quot;, and citing a reduction in waiting times for hospital treatment. However, this claim came at a time when thousands of jobs were being cut across the country, as a number of NHS trusts attempted to cope with budget deficits. This comment did not go down well, and at the Royal College of Nursing&#x27;s 2006 Congress in Bournemouth, Hewitt was heckled and booed by health workers. Delegates at the conference called for a halt to job cuts and bed closures, part of planned NHS reforms aimed at improving the effectiveness of the service, predicting that the number of posts lost could reach 13,000, and said that a work to rule was possible. The BMA chairman, James Johnson, claimed that 2006 was actually one of the worst years on record, and that &quot;2006 has been full of bleak moments for the NHS – job losses, training budgets slashed, trusts delaying operations in order to save money, and hospital closures announced at the same time as new PFI developments. Added to this the government&#x27;s fixation with introducing the private sector into primary care which risks destabilising the well-respected UK system of general practice.&quot;

In January 2007, Hewitt criticised the pay of general practitioners (GPs), which had increased to an average of £106,000 per annum, as a result of the contract the Government had implemented in 2004. Her department claimed that GPs had unfairly taken money out of their practices, when the new contract was actually intended to increase investment in practices, although statements from Lord Warner in 2004 appeared to contradict this claim. He said that &quot;The better services GPs provide, the more pay they will receive, as rewards will be directly linked with patients&#x27; experiences.&quot;

On 17 March 2007 over 12,000 doctors went to London to take part in a march, objecting to the &#x27;Medical Training Application Service&#x27; (MTAS), a job application system for junior doctors, which was subsequently investigated by the Department of Health, and the programme &#x27;Modernising Medical Careers&#x27;, for revealing the personal data of applicants. The Conservative Leader of the Opposition, David Cameron, joined the march and gave a speech.

On 23 May 2007, Hewitt survived a vote of no confidence in the House of Commons led by the Conservatives, winning by 63 votes. A number of her cabinet colleagues joined her on the front bench to express solidarity. Despite this, pressure continued to mount on her to resign as Health Secretary. As Blair had already announced his imminent resignation for 27 June, it was widely expected Hewitt would step down.

On 3 April 2007, Hewitt apologised on BBC Radio 4&#x27;s &quot;Today&quot; programme, saying that the application scheme had caused terrible anxiety for junior doctors. However, the change offered by the Government to the scheme was not accepted by the BMA, and she was accused by Andrew Lansley, the Conservative Shadow Minister for Health, of failing to express genuine regret. Hewitt also made another apology on 1 May 2007 in the House of Commons, after the suspension of the MTAS website, owing to security breaches, which she called &quot;utterly deplorable&quot;.

Front-line health workers also lobbied against Hewitt, sending her petitions opposing cuts to the NHS and privatisation plans, which the Department of Health wanted to follow up. Andy Belfield of East Midlands Unison stated that waiting list reductions achieved before the 2005 election were now at risk, owing to expansion of private sector involvement. A survey from October 2006 showed that only 37% of workers from the Department of Health were confident in the leadership provided by Hewitt, compared with 57% across Whitehall.

Despite the criticism, Hewitt managed to balance the books of the NHS, which had previously been in huge debt. After having vowed to resign should the NHS complete another year with debts, Hewitt ensured that the Health Service ended 2006/2007 with a £510 million surplus. However, to do this she was forced to cut 17,000 jobs, cut public health spending, although that had previously been at a high level, and reduce study budgets for NHS staff. By June 2007, although the overall budget was balanced, one in five NHS hospital trusts were still in debt.

As Health Secretary, Hewitt lobbied hard for a complete ban on smoking in public places, which came into force on 1 July 2007. Her predecessor, John Reid, had been in favour of limiting the Government&#x27;s proposed smoking ban as much as possible, and Labour&#x27;s 2005 election manifesto had included only a limited pledge, proposing only to ban smoking in places where food was served. Even though he had been moved to Secretary of State for Defence, Reid was the main opponent of her proposals, and a leading figure in the decision of the Cabinet to grant an exemption for private clubs and pubs that did not serve food. However, the exemption in the Cabinet proposals did not find favour with MPs, and the Government gave them a free vote on the issue. Hewitt voted with the rebels to defeat the Cabinet&#x27;s partial ban, which was replaced by the outright ban that she had always wanted. Sir Liam Donaldson described the ban as &quot;a momentous move, which would prevent the deaths of both smokers and non-smokers.&quot; In June 2010, it was announced that there had been a 2.4% fall in heart attack admissions in the year following the ban. She also called for a tax increase on alcopops, although none ultimately took place. She also introduced the NHS Choices website.

Hewitt was known as a reliable Blairite within the cabinet and voted loyally with the Government in Parliament. However, she once notably broke ranks on the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Question Time&quot;, expressing her concern about Government plans to introduce ID cards. She ruled herself out of the Deputy Leadership of the Labour Party, declaring her support for Harriet Harman, who was the successful candidate. On 27 June 2007 it was announced that Hewitt would not be Health Secretary in Gordon Brown&#x27;s new cabinet, an announcement that had been widely expected.

==Retirement from the cabinet==
On 27 June 2007, with the appointment of Gordon Brown as Prime Minister, Hewitt announced her retirement from frontline politics, citing &#x27;personal reasons&#x27;. On resigning from the cabinet, Hewitt was asked by the Prime Minister to head an EU manifesto group, developing European policy for the next general election manifesto.

==After cabinet – consultancies and directorships==
In January 2008, Hewitt was appointed special consultant to the world&#x27;s largest chemists, Alliance Boots. Such an appointment was controversial, given Hewitt&#x27;s former role as Health Minister, resulting in objections to her appointment by members of a Parliamentary committee. Hewitt also become the special adviser to private equity company Cinven, which paid £1.4 billion for Bupa&#x27;s UK hospitals.

Hewitt joined the BT Group board as a non-executive director on 24 March 2008. and retired from the position in 2015, after six years as a director and five as senior independent director and chair of the remuneration committee.

In July 2009, Hewitt joined the UK India Business Council as its chair and was reappointed to the role in 2014. She stepped down from this role in 2017.

In July 2017, Hewitt was appointed the chair of the NHS Sustainability and Transformation Plan (STP) Oversight Board for Norfolk and Waveney. In this capacity she also attends the Health and Wellbeing Board, Norfolk.

==Stepping down and suspension from Parliamentary Labour Party==
In May 2009, &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; reported that Hewitt had claimed £920 in legal fees when she had moved out of a flat in her constituency, stayed in hotels, and then rented another flat in Leicester. Claims for furniture included £194 for blinds delivered to her London home. In June 2009 Hewitt announced that she would be stepping down from the House of Commons. She said she was leaving the Commons for personal reasons as she wanted to spend more time with her family.

On 6 January 2010, she and fellow ex-minister Geoff Hoon jointly called for a secret ballot on the future of the leadership of Gordon Brown. The following day Hoon said that it appeared to have failed and was &quot;over&quot;. Brown later referred to the call for a secret ballot as a &quot;form of silliness&quot;.

In March 2010, Hewitt was suspended from the Parliamentary Labour Party over the question of political lobbying irregularities, alleged in the Channel 4 &quot;Dispatches&quot; programme.

At the 2010 general election Hewitt was succeeded as MP for Leicester West by Liz Kendall, who had been her Special Adviser (SpAd) during her time in Cabinet.

==&quot;Dispatches&quot; Lobbyist investigation ==

Hewitt was one of the MPs named in the 2010 sting operation into political lobbying in the Channel 4 &quot;Dispatches&quot; programme, in which she appeared to claim that she had been paid £3,000 a day to help a client obtain a key seat on a Government advisory group. On 22 March 2010, Hewitt, along with Geoff Hoon and Stephen Byers, was suspended from the Parliamentary Labour Party over the allegations. Hoon and Byers were both banned from the House of Commons for five and two years respectively, but no further action was taken against Hewitt for her part in the &quot;Cash for Access&quot; affair.

== Later career ==
Since September 2020, Hewitt has been an adviser to the British Board of Trade.

In November 2022, the British Chancellor of the Exchequer, Jeremy Hunt, announced that Hewitt would serve in an advisory role to the Conservative Government on NHS administration.

==PIE and the NCCL controversy==
In February 2014, the NCCL&#x27;s connection with the Paedophile Information Exchange, an affiliated group during Hewitt&#x27;s period as the pressure group&#x27;s general secretary, gained media attention, to which Harriet Harman and her partner Jack Dromey also responded. A document in Hewitt&#x27;s name stated: &quot;NCCL proposes that the age of consent should be lowered to 14, with special provision for situations where the partners are close in age or where the consent of a child over ten can be proved&quot;. The document also called for incest to be legalised. On 27 February 2014, Hewitt in a statement apologised and took responsibility for the &quot;mistakes&quot; made, saying that she and the NCCL had been &quot;naive&quot; about PIE, while insisting that she had never &quot;supported or condoned the vile crimes of child abusers&quot;.

== Publications ==
* &quot;Your Rights&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1973, Age Concern Books, Age Concern England, 
* &quot;Danger Women at Work: Conference Report&quot; Edited by Patricia Hewitt, National Council for Civil Liberties, 
* &quot;Equality for Women: Comments on Labour&#x27;s Proposals for an Anti-Discrimination Law&quot;, Edited by Patricia Hewitt, National Council for Civil Liberties, 
* &quot;Step-by-Step Guide to Rights for Women&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1975, National Council for Civil Liberties, 
* &quot;Your Rights&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1976, Age Concern Books, Age Concern England, 
* &quot;Your Rights: For Pensioners&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1976, Age Concern Books, Age Concern England, 
* &quot;Civil Liberties&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1977
* &quot;The Privacy Report&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1977
* &quot;Privacy: The Information Gatherers&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1978, National Council for Civil Liberties, 
* &quot;Your Rights at Work&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1978, National Council for Civil Liberties, 
* &quot;Computers, Records and the Right to Privacy&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1979, Input Two-Nine, 
* &quot;Income Tax and Sex Discrimination: Practical Guide&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1979, Civil Liberties Trust, 
* &quot;Your Rights at Work&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1980, National Council for Civil Liberties, 
* &quot;Prevention of Terrorism Act: The Case for Repeal&quot; by Catherine Scorer and Patricia Hewitt, 1981, National Council for Civil Liberties, 
* &quot;The Abuse of Power: Civil Liberties in the United Kingdom&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1981, Blackwell Publishers, 
* &quot;A Fair Cop: Reforming the Police Complaints Procedure&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1982, Civil Liberties Trust, 
* &quot;Race Relations: A Practical Guide to the Law on Race Discrimination&quot; by Paul Gordon, John Wright, Patricia Hewitt, 1982, Civil Liberties Trust, 
* &quot;Your Rights: For Pensioners&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1982, Age Concern England, 
* &quot;Your Rights at Work&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1983, National Council for Civil Liberties, 
* &quot;Your Rights: For Pensioners&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1984, Age Concern England, 
* &quot;The New Prevention of Terrorism Act: The Case for Repeal&quot; by Catherine Scorer, Sarah Spencer, Patricia Hewitt, 1985, Civil Liberties Trust, 
* &quot;Your Rights: For Pensioners&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1986, Age Concern England, 
* &quot;A Cleaner, Faster London: Road Pricing, Transport Policy and the Environment&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1989, Institute for Public Policy Research, 
* &quot;Women&#x27;s Votes: The Key to Winning&quot; Edited by Patricia Hewitt and Deborah Mattinson, 1989, Fabian Society, 
* &quot;Your Rights: A Guide to Money Benefits for Retired People&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1989, Age Concern England, 
* &quot;The Family Way: A New Approach to Policy-Making&quot; by Anna Coote, Harriet Harman, Patricia Hewitt, 1990, Institute for Public Policy Research, 
* &quot;Your Second Baby&quot; by Patricia Hewitt and Wendy Rose-Neil, 1990, HarperCollins, 
* &quot;Next Left: An Agenda for the 1990s&quot; by Tessa Blackstone, James Cornford, David Miliband and Patricia Hewitt, 1992, Institute for Public Policy Research, 
* &quot;About Time: Revolution in Work and Family Life&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1993, Rivers Oram Press, 
* &quot;Social Justice, Children and Families&quot; by Patricia Hewitt and Penelope Leach, 1993, Institute for Public Policy Research, 
* &quot;A British Bill of Rights&quot; by Anthony Lester, Patricia Hewitt et al., 1996, Institute for Public Policy Research, 
* &quot;The Politics of Attachment: Towards a Secure Society&quot; by Sebastian Kraemer, preface by Patricia Hewitt, 1996, Free Association Books Ltd, 
* &quot;Defence for the 21st Century: Towards a Post Cold-War Force Structure&quot; by Malcolm Chalmer, foreword by Patricia Hewitt, 1997, Fabian Society, 
* &quot;Information Age Government: Delivering the Blair Revolution&quot; by Liam Byrne, foreword by Patricia Hewitt, 1997, Fabian Society, 
* &quot;Pebbles in the Sand&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 1998, Dorrance Publishing Co., 
* &quot;Winning for Women&quot; by Harriet Harman and Deborah Mattinson, foreword by Patricia Hewitt, 2000, Fabian Society, 
* &quot;Unfinished Business: The New Agenda for the Workplace&quot; by Patricia Hewitt, 2004, Institute for Public Policy Research, 
* &quot;The Future of the NHS&quot;(contributed a chapter) edited by Dr Michelle Tempest, xpl Publishing, 

== References ==

== External links ==

* Patricia Hewitt official site
* 10 Downing Street – Patricia Hewitt official biography
* Guardian Unlimited Politics – Ask Aristotle: Patricia Hewitt MP
* TheyWorkForYou.com – Patricia Hewitt MP





|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q332799" start="0" end="25" title="Patricia Hewitt" label="Dame Patricia Hope Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397406" start="116" end="145" title="Secretary of State for Health" label="Secretary of State for Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="181" end="193" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858507" start="223" end="264" title="Secretary of State for Trade and Industry" label="Secretary of State for Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="383" end="392" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="421" end="424" title="MI5" label="MI5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189606" start="507" end="543" title="National Council for Civil Liberties" label="National Council for Civil Liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q317258" start="575" end="587" title="Neil Kinnock" label="Neil Kinnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075920" start="693" end="707" title="Leicester West" label="Leicester West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398544" start="711" end="727" title="Safe seat" label="safe Labour seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q47994" start="735" end="748" title="East Midlands" label="East Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q30765571" start="812" end="832" title="Second Blair ministry" label="Blair&amp;#x27;s cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037814" start="883" end="914" title="President of the Board of Trade" label="President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858507" start="919" end="960" title="Secretary of State for Trade and Industry" label="Secretary of State for Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282550" start="1246" end="1256" title="Dispatches (TV programme)" label="Dispatches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432361" start="1291" end="1306" title="school governor" label="school governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q149782" start="1314" end="1326" title="Kentish Town" label="Kentish Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="1370" end="1397" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q333533" start="1399" end="1410" title="Jeremy Hunt" label="Jeremy Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="1540" end="1548" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523167" start="1584" end="1600" title="Lenox Hewitt" label="Sir Lenox Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="1659" end="1665" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q326396" start="1739" end="1759" title="Robert John Tillyard" label="Robert John Tillyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031254" start="1795" end="1848" title="Canberra Girls&amp;#x27; Grammar School" label="Canberra Church of England Girls&amp;#x27; Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q127990" start="1857" end="1887" title="Australian National University" label="Australian National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247589" start="1944" end="1970" title="Newnham College, Cambridge" label="Newnham College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758457" start="2051" end="2075" title="Nuffield College, Oxford" label="Nuffield College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234119" start="2184" end="2201" title="David Gibson-Watt, Baron Gibson-Watt" label="David Gibson Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="2382" end="2390" title="feminist" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="2392" end="2395" title="MI5" label="MI5"/>
<link wikidata="Q392140" start="2678" end="2689" title="Age Concern" label="Age Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="2707" end="2723" title="Public Relations" label="Public Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189606" start="2794" end="2801" title="Liberty (pressure group)" label="Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="2819" end="2838" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="2925" end="2942" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="3047" end="3082" title="European Convention of Human Rights" label="European Convention of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="3192" end="3201" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q332360" start="3310" end="3322" title="Denis Healey" label="Denis Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077463" start="3385" end="3412" title="Leicester East (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Leicester East constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q918466" start="3420" end="3441" title="1983 United Kingdom general election" label="1983 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815034" start="3493" end="3504" title="Tom Bradley (UK politician)" label="Tom Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q40052" start="3513" end="3536" title="Social Democratic Party (UK)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173015" start="3620" end="3635" title="Peter Bruinvels" label="Peter Bruinvels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388151" start="3741" end="3756" title="press secretary" label="press secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741536" start="3764" end="3788" title="Leader of the Opposition (United Kingdom)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q317258" start="3790" end="3802" title="Neil Kinnock" label="Neil Kinnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101965" start="3927" end="3940" title="Clive Hollick" label="Clive Hollick"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994949" start="3960" end="3996" title="Institute for Public Policy Research" label="Institute for Public Policy Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q332377" start="4120" end="4130" title="John Smith (Labour Party leader)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q338825" start="4251" end="4270" title="Andersen Consulting" label="Andersen Consulting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="4350" end="4366" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075920" start="4394" end="4408" title="Leicester West" label="Leicester West"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="4416" end="4437" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546121" start="4481" end="4496" title="Greville Janner" label="Greville Janner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735422" start="4615" end="4628" title="maiden speech" label="maiden speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q16877182" start="4808" end="4823" title="Department of Social Security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447672" start="4824" end="4840" title="Select committee (United Kingdom)" label="select committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="4881" end="4891" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254471" start="4923" end="4932" title="reshuffle" label="reshuffle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4949" end="4983" title="Secretary to the Treasury#Economic Secretaries to the Treasury, 1947-present" label="Economic Secretary to the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632935" start="5022" end="5039" title="Minister of State" label="Minister of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q584148" start="5081" end="5113" title="Department of Trade and Industry (United Kingdom)" label="Department of Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071015" start="5131" end="5148" title="Social Enterprise" label="Social Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="5410" end="5415" title="OFCOM" label="OFCOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174122" start="5480" end="5491" title="Lord Currie of Marylebone" label="Lord Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q112014" start="5515" end="5522" title="Cabinet of the United Kingdom" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="5556" end="5577" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858507" start="5585" end="5626" title="Secretary of State for Trade and Industry" label="Secretary of State for Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315134" start="5631" end="5662" title="Minister for Women and Equality" label="Minister for Women and Equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="6045" end="6058" title="Privy Council (United Kingdom)" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429065" start="6204" end="6214" title="say on pay" label="say on pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q61515" start="6379" end="6390" title="outsourcing" label="outsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="6534" end="6547" title="protectionist" label="protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="6581" end="6596" title="Judicial Review" label="Judicial Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075814" start="6635" end="6653" title="Occupational sexism" label="sex discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356281" start="7489" end="7499" title="Rod Liddle" label="Rod Liddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="7518" end="7527" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458377" start="7641" end="7663" title="Sex Discrimination Act 1975" label="Sex Discrimination Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q38126150" start="8062" end="8088" title="housewife" label="mothers who stayed at home"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397406" start="8175" end="8204" title="Secretary of State for Health" label="Secretary of State for Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q428598" start="8219" end="8240" title="2005 United Kingdom general election" label="2005 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806443" start="8429" end="8465" title="Medical Training Application Service" label="Medical Training Application Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q412616" start="8557" end="8568" title="trastuzumab" label="trastuzumab"/>
<link wikidata="Q751734" start="8836" end="8847" title="smoking ban" label="smoking ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q785236" start="8988" end="8999" title="Nigel Crisp" label="Nigel Crisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373981" start="9364" end="9395" title="Royal College of Nursing" label="Royal College of Nursing&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806443" start="10944" end="10980" title="Medical Training Application Service" label="Medical Training Application Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044742" start="11083" end="11103" title="Department of Health (United Kingdom)" label="Department of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889118" start="11129" end="11156" title="Modernising Medical Careers" label="Modernising Medical Careers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="11215" end="11227" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="11254" end="11267" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="11340" end="11361" title="vote of no confidence" label="vote of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="11369" end="11385" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="11397" end="11410" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="11756" end="11767" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353208" start="11781" end="11786" title="Today (BBC Radio 4)" label="Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q333276" start="11999" end="12013" title="Andrew Lansley" label="Andrew Lansley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="12019" end="12031" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q303329" start="12032" end="12047" title="Shadow Minister" label="Shadow Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="12152" end="12168" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="12812" end="12821" title="Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q333461" start="13524" end="13533" title="John Reid, Baron Reid of Cardowan" label="John Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q751734" start="13597" end="13608" title="smoking ban" label="smoking ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q46337" start="13662" end="13671" title="manifesto" label="manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747647" start="13804" end="13834" title="Secretary of State for Defence" label="Secretary of State for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949254" start="14282" end="14296" title="Liam Donaldson" label="Liam Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571448" start="14571" end="14578" title="alcopop" label="alcopop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905758" start="14695" end="14703" title="Blairite" label="Blairite"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="14821" end="14824" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581397" start="14838" end="14851" title="Question Time (television)" label="Question Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q47988" start="14918" end="14926" title="ID cards" label="ID cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q234182" start="15022" end="15036" title="Harriet Harman" label="Harriet Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="15150" end="15162" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="15304" end="15316" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q676238" start="15747" end="15761" title="Alliance Boots" label="Alliance Boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092600" start="16003" end="16009" title="Cinven" label="Cinven"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="16084" end="16092" title="BT Group" label="BT Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864886" start="16328" end="16353" title="UK India Business Council" label="UK India Business Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="16571" end="16578" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16630" end="16665" title="Health and Wellbeing Board, Norfolk" label="Health and Wellbeing Board, Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="16752" end="16771" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q332385" start="17265" end="17275" title="Geoff Hoon" label="Geoff Hoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="17346" end="17358" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282550" start="17695" end="17705" title="Dispatches (TV series)" label="Dispatches"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="17731" end="17752" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q750260" start="17802" end="17813" title="Liz Kendall" label="Liz Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574785" start="17832" end="17854" title="Special adviser (United Kingdom)" label="Special Adviser (SpAd)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283446" start="17980" end="17995" title="sting operation" label="sting operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="18027" end="18036" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282550" start="18043" end="18053" title="Dispatches (TV programme)" label="Dispatches"/>
<link wikidata="Q332385" start="18242" end="18252" title="Geoff Hoon" label="Geoff Hoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q332837" start="18257" end="18270" title="Stephen Byers" label="Stephen Byers"/>
<link wikidata="Q887543" start="18626" end="18640" title="Board of Trade" label="Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q333533" start="18702" end="18713" title="Jeremy Hunt" label="Jeremy Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152303" start="18911" end="18942" title="Paedophile Information Exchange" label="Paedophile Information Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q234182" start="19073" end="19087" title="Harriet Harman" label="Harriet Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q302244" start="19104" end="19115" title="Jack Dromey" label="Jack Dromey"/>
<link wikidata="Q327538" start="19202" end="19216" title="age of consent" label="age of consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q127683" start="19407" end="19413" title="incest" label="incest"/>
<link wikidata="Q62495653" start="21142" end="21158" title="Catherine Scorer" label="Catherine Scorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q115917105" start="22611" end="22621" title="Anna Coote" label="Anna Coote"/>
<link wikidata="Q234182" start="22623" end="22637" title="Harriet Harman" label="Harriet Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406249" start="22846" end="22862" title="Tessa Blackstone" label="Tessa Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q272670" start="22880" end="22894" title="David Miliband" label="David Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499747" start="23454" end="23476" title="Free Association Books" label="Free Association Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q269697" start="23716" end="23726" title="Liam Byrne" label="Liam Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298728" start="23840" end="23863" title="Dorrance Publishing Co." label="Dorrance Publishing Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q234182" start="23901" end="23915" title="Harriet Harman" label="Harriet Harman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24193" end="24212" title="Michelle Tempest" label="Dr Michelle Tempest"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290464" wikidata="Q730571" url="?curid=290464" title="Asinius">
<text>Asinius is the nomen of the plebeian [[Asinia gens]] of ancient Rome. Local tradition holds that the Italian town of Assignano derives its name from the gens, as well as the French town of Assignan.
* Gaius Asinius Pollio, orator, poet, historian, consul 40 BC
* Gaius Asinius Gallus Saloninus, consul 8 BC, died 30, father of Asinius Celer
* Gaius Asinius Pollio, consul 23
* Marcus Asinius Agrippa, consul 25
* Marcus Asinius Marcellus, consul 54
* Marcus Asinius Pollio Verrucosus, consul 81
* Marcus Asinius Atratinus, consul 89
* Gaius Asinius Frugi, monet. of Phrygia between 98 and 116
* Marcus Asinius Marcellus, the Younger, consul 104, son of Marcus Asinius Marcellus
* Gaius Asinius Rufus, notable in Lydia 134/135, senator 136
* Gaius Asinius Protimus Quadratus, proconsul of Achaea ca. 211 or 220 – son of the above
* Gaius Asinius Quadratus, historian of 3rd century – who may be identical with Gaius Asinius Quadratus Protimus
* Gaius Asinius Lepidus Praetextatus, consul of AD 242.

==Others==
There were several others with this name that were not part of the Asinia gens:
* Herius Asinius, Celtic commander of the 1st century BCE</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q730571" start="0" end="7" title="Asinius" label="Asinius"/>
<link wikidata="Q272851" start="15" end="20" title="Roman naming conventions" label="nomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="28" end="36" title="plebeian" label="plebeian"/>
<link wikidata="Q730571" start="37" end="52" title="Asinius" label="[[Asinia gens]]"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117" end="126" title="Assignano" label="Assignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073444" start="189" end="197" title="Assignan" label="Assignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q319273" start="201" end="221" title="Gaius Asinius Pollio (consul 40 BC)" label="Gaius Asinius Pollio"/>
<link wikidata="Q450708" start="263" end="293" title="Gaius Asinius Gallus Saloninus" label="Gaius Asinius Gallus Saloninus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234657" start="343" end="363" title="Gaius Asinius Pollio (consul 23)" label="Gaius Asinius Pollio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236482" start="377" end="399" title="Marcus Asinius Agrippa" label="Marcus Asinius Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219183" start="413" end="437" title="Marcus Asinius Marcellus" label="Marcus Asinius Marcellus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="451" end="483" title="Marcus Asinius Pollio Verrucosus" label="Marcus Asinius Pollio Verrucosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866649" start="497" end="521" title="Marcus Asinius Atratinus" label="Marcus Asinius Atratinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517407" start="535" end="554" title="Gaius Asinius Frugi" label="Gaius Asinius Frugi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219183" start="595" end="632" title="Marcus Asinius Marcellus, the Younger" label="Marcus Asinius Marcellus, the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517410" start="680" end="699" title="Gaius Asinius Rufus" label="Gaius Asinius Rufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517412" start="741" end="773" title="Gaius Asinius Protimus Quadratus" label="Gaius Asinius Protimus Quadratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q563283" start="831" end="854" title="Gaius Asinius Quadratus" label="Gaius Asinius Quadratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q764874" start="1092" end="1106" title="Herius Asinius" label="Herius Asinius"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290466" wikidata="Q226994" url="?curid=290466" title="Williams County">
<text>Williams County is the name of some counties in the United States of America

* Williams County, North Dakota 
* Williams County, Ohio</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28496" start="80" end="109" title="Williams County, North Dakota" label="Williams County, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q483923" start="113" end="134" title="Williams County, Ohio" label="Williams County, Ohio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290468" wikidata="Q356206" url="?curid=290468" title="Stowe">
<text>Stowe may refer to:

==Places==
===United Kingdom===
*Stowe, Buckinghamshire, a civil parish and former village
**Stowe House
**Stowe School
*Stowe, Cornwall, in Kilkhampton parish
*Stowe, Herefordshire, in the List of places in Herefordshire
*Stowe, Lichfield, Staffordshire
*Stowe, Lincolnshire, a hamlet in Barholm and Stowe parish
*Stowe, Shropshire, a small village and civil parish
*Stowe-by-Chartley, Staffordshire, a village and civil parish
*Stowe Pool, a reservoir in Lichfield, Staffordshire
*Stowe, a corner of the Silverstone Circuit

===United States===
*Stowe Township, Pennsylvania
*Stowe, Pennsylvania, a census-designated place
*Stowe, Vermont, a town
**Stowe Mountain Resort ski area
**Stowe Recreation Path
*Lake Stowe, Vermont
*Stowe, West Virginia, an unincorporated community

===Elsewhere===
*Stowe, Alberta, Canada
*Stowe, Dominica

==People==
*Barry Stowe (born 1957), American businessman
*Calvin Ellis Stowe (1802–1886), American biblical scholar, husband of Harriet Beecher Stowe
*Dorothy Stowe (1920–2010), social activist, environmentalist and a founder of Greenpeace
*Emily Stowe (1831–1903), women&#x27;s rights activist and the first female doctor in Canada
*Hal Stowe (born 1937), American baseball player
*Harriet Beecher Stowe (1811–1896), American abolitionist and author
*Harry Stovey (1856–1937), American Major League Baseball player born Harry Duffield Stowe
*Irving Stowe (1915–1974), American lawyer, activist and a founder of Greenpeace; husband of Dorothy Stowe
*John Stowe (born 1966), American Catholic bishop
*Kenneth Stowe (1927–2015), British senior civil servant
*Leland Stowe (1899–1994), Pulitzer Prize-winning American journalist
*Lyman Maynard Stowe (1914–1965), American physician and academic administrator
*Madeleine Stowe (born 1958), American actress
*Marilyn Stowe (born 1957), English solicitor
*Otto Stowe (born 1949), former National Football League wide receiver
*Reid Stowe (born 1952), American artist and sailor
*Tyronne Stowe (born 1965), American retired National Football League linebacker
*William Stowe (rower) (1940–2016), American rower
*William Henry Stowe (1825–1855), British scholar and journalist
*William McFerrin Stowe (1913–1988), American bishop of the Methodist and United Methodist Churches

==Other uses==
*Stowe Open, a defunct tennis tournament
*Stowe, Southern Railway (UK) SR V &quot;Schools&quot; class locomotive no. 928

==See also==
*Stowe manuscripts, a collection in the British Library
**Stowe Missal, an Irish illuminated manuscript
**Stowe Breviary, an illuminated manuscript
*Ælfnoth of Stowe (died 700), English hermit and martyr
*Sir Thomas Temple, 1st Baronet, of Stowe (1567-c. 1637), English landowner and Member of Parliament
*Stow (disambiguation)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q356206" start="0" end="5" title="Stowe" label="Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003761" start="54" end="76" title="Stowe, Buckinghamshire" label="Stowe, Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352431" start="114" end="125" title="Stowe House" label="Stowe House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620697" start="128" end="140" title="Stowe School" label="Stowe School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245937" start="142" end="157" title="Stowe, Cornwall" label="Stowe, Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="182" end="202" title="Stowe, Herefordshire" label="Stowe, Herefordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633738" start="211" end="242" title="List of places in Herefordshire" label="List of places in Herefordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207371" start="244" end="260" title="Stowe, Lichfield" label="Stowe, Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="277" end="296" title="Stowe, Lincolnshire" label="Stowe, Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860665" start="310" end="327" title="Barholm and Stowe" label="Barholm and Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3877706" start="336" end="353" title="Stowe, Shropshire" label="Stowe, Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903605" start="389" end="406" title="Stowe-by-Chartley" label="Stowe-by-Chartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371861" start="451" end="461" title="Stowe Pool" label="Stowe Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q171402" start="527" end="546" title="Silverstone Circuit" label="Silverstone Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182063" start="569" end="597" title="Stowe Township, Pennsylvania" label="Stowe Township, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182454" start="599" end="618" title="Stowe, Pennsylvania" label="Stowe, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q550498" start="647" end="661" title="Stowe, Vermont" label="Stowe, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620695" start="672" end="693" title="Stowe Mountain Resort" label="Stowe Mountain Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620698" start="705" end="726" title="Stowe Recreation Path" label="Stowe Recreation Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477849" start="728" end="738" title="Lake Stowe" label="Lake Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714333" start="749" end="769" title="Stowe, West Virginia" label="Stowe, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="824" end="831" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q784" start="848" end="856" title="Dominica" label="Dominica"/>
<link wikidata="Q21229906" start="870" end="881" title="Barry Stowe" label="Barry Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024381" start="917" end="935" title="Calvin Ellis Stowe" label="Calvin Ellis Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298647" start="1010" end="1023" title="Dorothy Stowe" label="Dorothy Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q155506" start="1100" end="1111" title="Emily Stowe" label="Emily Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640940" start="1193" end="1202" title="Hal Stowe" label="Hal Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q102513" start="1242" end="1263" title="Harriet Beecher Stowe" label="Harriet Beecher Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563080" start="1311" end="1323" title="Harry Stovey" label="Harry Stovey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007715" start="1402" end="1414" title="Irving Stowe" label="Irving Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19570170" start="1509" end="1519" title="John Stowe" label="John Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390720" start="1559" end="1572" title="Kenneth Stowe" label="Kenneth Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520804" start="1616" end="1628" title="Leland Stowe" label="Leland Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q106342008" start="1686" end="1705" title="Lyman Maynard Stowe" label="Lyman Maynard Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q209098" start="1766" end="1781" title="Madeleine Stowe" label="Madeleine Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763636" start="1813" end="1826" title="Marilyn Stowe" label="Marilyn Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109841" start="1859" end="1869" title="Otto Stowe" label="Otto Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309993" start="1930" end="1940" title="Reid Stowe" label="Reid Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861677" start="1982" end="1995" title="Tyronne Stowe" label="Tyronne Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018898" start="2063" end="2084" title="William Stowe (rower)" label="William Stowe (rower)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012177" start="2114" end="2133" title="William Henry Stowe" label="William Henry Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015405" start="2179" end="2201" title="William McFerrin Stowe" label="William McFerrin Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q954590" start="2295" end="2305" title="Stowe Open" label="Stowe Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392909" start="2365" end="2395" title="SR V Schools class" label="SR V &amp;quot;Schools&amp;quot; class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620699" start="2430" end="2447" title="Stowe manuscripts" label="Stowe manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352434" start="2487" end="2499" title="Stowe Missal" label="Stowe Missal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620689" start="2535" end="2549" title="Stowe Breviary" label="Stowe Breviary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8077303" start="2578" end="2594" title="Ælfnoth of Stowe" label="Ælfnoth of Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529284" start="2634" end="2674" title="Sir Thomas Temple, 1st Baronet, of Stowe" label="Sir Thomas Temple, 1st Baronet, of Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q402502" start="2735" end="2756" title="Stow (disambiguation)" label="Stow (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290469" wikidata="Q1406643" url="?curid=290469" title="The Joy of Painting">
<text>The Joy of Painting is an American half-hour instructional television show. Created and hosted by painter Bob Ross, it ran from January 11, 1983, to May 17, 1994. In most episodes, Ross taught techniques for landscape oil painting, completing a painting in each session. Occasionally, episodes featured a guest artist who would demonstrate a different painting technique. The program followed the same format as its predecessor from 1974 to 1982, &quot;The Magic of Oil Painting&quot;, hosted by Ross&#x27;s mentor Bill Alexander. In 2024, new episodes featuring paintings Ross had completed before his death and hosted by Nicholas Hankins were released.

==Production==
The show was aired and produced by non-commercial, public television stations. The first season aired in early 1983 and was produced by WNVC in Falls Church, Virginia. Starting in the second season in late 1983, the show was produced by WIPB in Muncie, Indiana, until its end in 1994, and later by Blue Ridge Public Television in Roanoke, Virginia. The show is currently being distributed by American Public Television. Reruns began syndication at PBS stations in the United States in 1992, under the moniker &quot;The Best of The Joy of Painting&quot;, featuring a collection of Bob Ross&#x27;s favorite paintings from past seasons. By the early 1990s, nearly 300 episodes of &quot;The Joy of Painting&quot; were on the air in the United States on PBS and in Canada on CBC Television. &quot;The Joy of Painting&quot; would later begin broadcasting in different places around the world, such as Mexico, Costa Rica, Colombia, the United Kingdom, Latin America, Greece, the Netherlands, Germany, Switzerland, Austria, Turkey, Iran, South Korea, Australia, and Japan.

In 2022, Joan Kowalski, an executive at Ross&#x27; holding company and daughter of business partners Walt and Annette Kowalski, and WDSC-TV commissioned a pilot based on a painting that was unfinished for a 32nd season that was planned when Ross died before production began. Bob Ross Art Workshop and Gallery instructor Nicholas Hankins hosted the pilot, which was well-received that a full 13-episode run was filmed in March and June 2023. Originally intended to be filmed as &quot;The Best of the Joy of Painting with Bob Ross,&quot; WDSC and Bob Ross, Inc. used the seven paintings by Ross from the unfinished season and six new paintings by Hankins to finish the season. The new series is distributed with PBS and American Public Television under the title &quot;The Joy of Painting with Nicholas Hankins: Bob Ross&#x27;s Unfinished Season&quot;.

==Format==
At the beginning of each episode, the canvas was blank. Most episodes would begin with either a blank white canvas, or less often, a canvas pre-painted with black gesso; this blank canvas would be coated with a thin coat of liquid white paint (for a white canvas; Ross used Bill Alexander&#x27;s proprietary Magic White in earlier seasons before going to a generic name later on) or a dark color (for black). If a painting was expected to take longer than the half-hour time slot, the earliest steps would be prepared before the episode started as Ross gave a cursory explanation of his canvas preparation. For shorter paintings, Ross would fill time by showing off animals such as his pet squirrel Peapod or videos of him at a nature preserve, or footage of Ross at a public event. Within the first few minutes of each show, the blank canvas has turned into a landscape, seascape and winter scenery, using the wet-on-wet technique, in which the painter adds still-wet paint, rather than waiting for each layer of paint to dry. Combining this method with the use of two-inch and other types of brushes, as well as painting knives, allowed him to paint trees, water, clouds, mountains, seascapes and winter scenery in a matter of seconds. The paintings featured colors that Ross had on the show, such as titanium white, phthalo green, phthalo blue, Prussian blue, midnight black, dark sienna, van dyke brown, burnt umber (discontinued in later seasons), alizarin crimson, sap green, cadmium yellow, yellow ochre, Indian yellow and bright red (permanent red in earlier seasons).

Each painting started with criss-cross strokes, that appeared to be nothing more than the smudges of color. As more criss-cross were added, the blotches transformed into intricate paintings. While painting, he instructed viewers regarding the techniques that he was using, he told stories about the &quot;happy little clouds&quot;, and &quot;happy little trees&quot;, that he was creating. 
He would often attach human emotions to the objects he was painting; after painting a tree trunk, for example, Ross would usually add another nearby &quot;because it needs a friend&quot;. He would occasionally present home video footage of himself with a baby deer, a raccoon and another small animal. Each program was shot in real time with two cameras: a medium shot of Ross and his canvas, and a close-up shot of the canvas or palette. At the end of each episode, Ross was known for saying something akin to, &quot;...so, from all of us here, I&#x27;d like to wish you happy painting, and God bless, my friend...&quot;. Then, the show&#x27;s theme song (&quot;Interlude&quot;, a stock selection from Network Music, from season 2 onward) played, as the credits rolled over a shot of the finished and successful painting.

Ross created three versions of each painting. The first, done prior to taping, sat on an easel off-camera and was used as a template to create a second, which the viewers actually watched him paint, after taping he painted a more detailed third one for inclusion in his instructional books. All three were then donated to various PBS stations, the Smithsonian Institution, or kept by Bob Ross, Inc.

The show featured many guest appearances from other painters, who painted in Ross&#x27;s stead, such as Dana Jester, Ross&#x27;s son Steve, John Thamm, Audrey Golden, Joyce Ortner, Ben Stahl, Dorothy Dent, his business partner Annette Kowalski (who specialized in floral painting) and Diane Andre.

==Episodes==

==Legacy==
In 1994, Ross appeared on &quot;Bill Nye the Science Guy&quot;, where he did a self-parody segment entitled &quot;The Artistic Eye with Bob Ross”.

As part of its launch of Twitch Creative, Twitch streamed every episode over a nine-day period starting on October 29, 2015what would have been Ross&#x27;s 73rd birthday. Twitch reported that 5.6 million viewers, and due to its popularity, created a weekly rebroadcast of all 31 seasons of &quot;The Joy of Painting&quot; to air on Twitch each Monday from November 2015 onward, and will have a marathon of episodes each October 29. A portion of the advertising revenue has been promised to charities, including St. Jude Children&#x27;s Research Hospital. This event was also repeated on October 29, 2016, for his 74th birthday.

In 2015, all 403 episodes of &quot;The Joy of Painting&quot; were added to the official Bob Ross YouTube channel.
In June 2016, Netflix repackaged several 1991–92 episodes of &quot;The Joy of Painting&quot; under the moniker &quot;Beauty Is Everywhere&quot;. A second package, titled &quot;Chill with Bob Ross&quot;, was added in December. In 2020, Tubi added 30 seasons of &quot;The Joy of Painting&quot;, totaling nearly 400 episodes, to its platform for free.

In November 2017, the first teaser trailer for the 2018 film &quot;Deadpool 2&quot; was released, featuring a parody of &quot;The Joy of Painting&quot; with Ryan Reynolds as Deadpool.

&quot;The Joy of Painting&quot; has been licensed for merchandise, including a Chia Pet and a breakfast cereal made by the makers of Flutie Flakes.

A comedy television series in Iran called &quot;Khande Bazaar&quot; had in each episode an item called &quot;The Humiliation of Painting&quot; which was a parody of the program &quot;The Joy of Painting&quot; in which Mohammad Reza Khosravi imitated Bob Ross.

The program returned to television on BBC Four as part of Culture Quarantine Programming with its first broadcast on April 20, 2020.

In 2022, Goodfood Market released a parody Bob Ross TV commercial titled &quot;Joy of Cooking&quot;.

Ross&#x27;s painting from the first episode of &quot;The Joy of Painting&quot;, &quot;A Walk in the Woods&quot;, was listed for sale in 2023 priced at $9.85 million.
==References==

==External links==
* 
* Unofficial &quot;The Joy of Painting&quot; database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="59" end="74" title="television show" label="television show"/>
<link wikidata="Q455511" start="106" end="114" title="Bob Ross" label="Bob Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="208" end="217" title="Landscape painting" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001975" start="453" end="478" title="The Magic of Oil Painting" label="The Magic of Oil Painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004246" start="515" end="529" title="Bill Alexander (painter)" label="Bill Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q55315848" start="807" end="811" title="WNVT" label="WNVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q408744" start="815" end="837" title="Falls Church, Virginia" label="Falls Church, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950846" start="908" end="912" title="WIPB" label="WIPB"/>
<link wikidata="Q932981" start="916" end="931" title="Muncie, Indiana" label="Muncie, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929728" start="969" end="997" title="Blue Ridge PBS" label="Blue Ridge Public Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q501796" start="1001" end="1018" title="Roanoke, Virginia" label="Roanoke, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744767" start="1063" end="1089" title="American Public Television" label="American Public Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="1420" end="1423" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1431" end="1437" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="1441" end="1455" title="CBC Television" label="CBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1566" end="1572" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="1574" end="1584" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="1586" end="1594" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1600" end="1614" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="1616" end="1629" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1631" end="1637" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1643" end="1654" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1656" end="1663" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="1665" end="1676" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="1678" end="1685" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="1687" end="1693" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="1695" end="1699" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="1701" end="1712" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1714" end="1723" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1729" end="1734" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948574" start="1869" end="1876" title="WDSC-TV" label="WDSC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744767" start="2456" end="2482" title="American Public Television" label="American Public Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514256" start="2764" end="2769" title="gesso" label="gesso"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="3462" end="3471" title="Landscape painting" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441810" start="3473" end="3481" title="seascape" label="seascape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856046" start="3512" end="3522" title="wet-on-wet" label="wet-on-wet"/>
<link wikidata="Q193897" start="3695" end="3702" title="paintbrush" label="brushes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756462" start="3715" end="3730" title="painting knife" label="painting knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639460" start="3904" end="3918" title="titanium white" label="titanium white"/>
<link wikidata="Q413867" start="3920" end="3933" title="phthalo green" label="phthalo green"/>
<link wikidata="Q282557" start="3935" end="3947" title="phthalo blue" label="phthalo blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q421894" start="3949" end="3962" title="Prussian blue" label="Prussian blue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3980" end="3991" title="Sienna#Dark sienna (ISCC-NBS)" label="dark sienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518638" start="3993" end="4007" title="van dyke brown" label="van dyke brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q901731" start="4009" end="4020" title="burnt umber" label="burnt umber"/>
<link wikidata="Q267813" start="4054" end="4070" title="alizarin" label="alizarin crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478619" start="4083" end="4097" title="cadmium yellow" label="cadmium yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q194191" start="4099" end="4111" title="yellow ochre" label="yellow ochre"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611196" start="4113" end="4126" title="Indian yellow" label="Indian yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="4585" end="4637" title="Anthropomorphism" label="attach human emotions to the objects he was painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q753532" start="4897" end="4906" title="real time (media)" label="real time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117826" start="4927" end="4938" title="medium shot" label="medium shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q296001" start="4969" end="4977" title="close-up" label="close-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q425548" start="5000" end="5007" title="Palette (painting)" label="palette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111784" start="5252" end="5257" title="stock music" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407535" start="5273" end="5286" title="Network Music" label="Network Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="5742" end="5765" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886504" start="5975" end="5984" title="Ben Stahl (artist)" label="Ben Stahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526152" start="6150" end="6174" title="Bill Nye the Science Guy" label="Bill Nye the Science Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555537" start="6308" end="6314" title="Twitch (service)" label="Twitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164246" start="6777" end="6819" title="St. Jude Children&amp;#x27;s Research Hospital" label="St. Jude Children&amp;#x27;s Research Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="6992" end="6999" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="7023" end="7030" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189826" start="7244" end="7248" title="Tubi" label="Tubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q622550" start="7387" end="7401" title="Trailer (promotion)" label="teaser trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25431158" start="7426" end="7436" title="Deadpool 2" label="Deadpool 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q192682" start="7516" end="7529" title="Ryan Reynolds" label="Ryan Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631090" start="7533" end="7541" title="Deadpool" label="Deadpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q740777" start="7598" end="7609" title="merchandising" label="merchandise"/>
<link wikidata="Q519930" start="7623" end="7631" title="Chia Pet" label="Chia Pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564095" start="7677" end="7690" title="Flutie Flakes" label="Flutie Flakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="7723" end="7727" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="7848" end="7854" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7911" end="7933" title="Mohammad Reza Khosravi" label="Mohammad Reza Khosravi"/>
<link wikidata="Q455511" start="7943" end="7951" title="Bob Ross" label="Bob Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q787211" start="7992" end="8000" title="BBC Four" label="BBC Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q54621402" start="8097" end="8112" title="Goodfood Market" label="Goodfood Market"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290474" wikidata="Q234819" url="?curid=290474" title="Alice Munro">
<text>Alice Ann Munro ( ; ; 10 July 1931 – 13 May 2024) was a Canadian short story writer who won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2013. Her work tends to move forward and backward in time, with integrated short story cycles.

Munro&#x27;s fiction is most often set in her native Huron County in southwestern Ontario. Her stories explore human complexities in a simple but meticulous prose style. Munro received the Man Booker International Prize in 2009 for her life&#x27;s work. She was also a three-time winner of Canada&#x27;s Governor General&#x27;s Award for Fiction, and received the Writers&#x27; Trust of Canada&#x27;s 1996 Marian Engel Award and the 2004 Rogers Writers&#x27; Trust Fiction Prize for &quot;Runaway&quot;. She stopped writing around 2013 and died at her home in 2024.

==Early life==

Munro was born Alice Ann Laidlaw in Wingham, Ontario. Her father, Robert Eric Laidlaw, was a fox and mink farmer, and later turned to turkey farming. Her mother, Anne Clarke Laidlaw (née Chamney), was a schoolteacher. She was of Irish and Scottish descent; her father was a descendant of Scottish poet James Hogg, the Ettrick Shepherd.

Munro began writing as a teenager, publishing her first story, &quot;The Dimensions of a Shadow&quot;, in 1950 while studying English and journalism at the University of Western Ontario on a two-year scholarship. During this period she worked as a waitress, a tobacco picker, and a library clerk. In 1951, she left the university, where she had been majoring in English since 1949, to marry fellow student James Munro. They moved to Dundarave, West Vancouver, for James&#x27; job in a department store. In 1963, the couple moved to Victoria, where they opened Munro&#x27;s Books, which still operates.

She had four children with James Munro (one died shortly after birth), and when the children were still young she would attempt to write whenever she could; her husband encouraged her by sending her into the book shop while he looked after the children and cooked. In 1961, after she had had a few stories published in small magazines, the &quot;Vancouver Sun&quot; ran a brief article on her, titled &quot;Housewife Finds Time to Write Short Stories&quot;, and called her the &quot;least praised good writer&quot;. She found it difficult, even with her husband&#x27;s help, to find the time among &quot;the pile up of unavoidable household jobs&quot; to write, and found it easier to concentrate on short stories, rather than the novels her publisher wanted her to write.

==Career==

Munro&#x27;s first collection of stories, &quot;Dance of the Happy Shades&quot; (1968), won the Governor General&#x27;s Award, then Canada&#x27;s highest literary prize. That success was followed by &quot;Lives of Girls and Women&quot; (1971), a collection of interlinked stories. In 1978, Munro&#x27;s collection of interlinked stories &quot;Who Do You Think You Are?&quot; was published. This book earned Munro a second Governor General&#x27;s Literary Award and was shortlisted for the Booker Prize for Fiction in 1980 under its international title, &quot;The Beggar Maid&quot;.

From 1979 to 1982, Munro toured Australia, China and Scandinavia for public appearances and readings. In 1980, she held the position of writer in residence at both the University of British Columbia and the University of Queensland.

From the 1980s to 2012, Munro published a short story collection at least once every four years. First versions of Munro&#x27;s stories appeared in journals such as &quot;The Atlantic Monthly&quot;, &quot;Grand Street&quot;, &quot;Harper&#x27;s Magazine&quot;, &quot;Mademoiselle&quot;, &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, &quot;Narrative Magazine&quot;, and &quot;The Paris Review&quot;. Her collections have been translated into 13 languages. In 2013, Munro was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature, cited as a &quot;master of the contemporary short story&quot;. She was the first Canadian and the 13th woman to receive the Nobel Prize in Literature.

Munro had a longtime association with editor and publisher Douglas Gibson. When Gibson left Macmillan of Canada in 1986 to launch the Douglas Gibson Books imprint at McClelland &amp; Stewart, Munro returned the advance Macmillan had paid her for &quot;The Progress of Love&quot; so that she could follow Gibson to the new company. When Gibson published his memoirs in 2011, Munro wrote the introduction, and Gibson often made public appearances on Munro&#x27;s behalf when her health prevented her from appearing personally.

Almost 20 of Munro&#x27;s works have been made available for free on the web, in most cases only the first versions. From the period before 2003, 16 stories have been included in Munro&#x27;s own compilations more than twice, with two of her works scoring four republications: &quot;Carried Away&quot; and &quot;Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage&quot;. 

Film adaptations of Munro&#x27;s short stories include &quot;Martha, Ruth and Edie&quot; (1988), &quot;Edge of Madness&quot; (2002), &quot;Away from Her&quot; (2006), &quot;Hateship, Loveship&quot; (2013) and &quot;Julieta&quot; (2016).

==Writing==

Many of Munro&#x27;s stories are set in Huron County, Ontario. Strong regional focus is one of her fiction&#x27;s features. Asked after she won the Nobel Prize, &quot;What can be so interesting in describing small town Canadian life?&quot;, she replied: &quot;You just have to be there.&quot; Another feature is an omniscient narrator. Many compare her small-town settings to writers from the rural American South. Her characters often confront deep-rooted customs and traditions. Much of her work exemplifies the Southern Ontario Gothic literary subgenre.

A frequent theme of her work, especially her early stories, is the girl coming of age and coming to terms with her family and small hometown. In work such as &quot;Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage&quot; (2001) and &quot;Runaway&quot; (2004) she shifted her focus to the travails of middle age, women alone, and the elderly. Munro&#x27;s stories explore human complexities in an uncomplicated prose style. Her prose reveals the ambiguities of life: &quot;ironic and serious at the same time&quot;, &quot;mottoes of godliness and honor and flaming bigotry&quot;, &quot;special, useless knowledge&quot;, &quot;tones of shrill and happy outrage&quot;, &quot;the bad taste, the heartlessness, the joy of it&quot;. Her style juxtaposes the fantastic and the ordinary, with each undercutting the other in ways that simply and effortlessly evoke life. Robert Thacker wrote:

Many critics have written that Munro&#x27;s stories often have the emotional and literary depth of novels. Some have asked whether Munro actually writes short stories or novels. Alex Keegan, writing in &quot;Eclectica Magazine&quot;, answered: &quot;Who cares? In most Munro stories there is as much as in many novels.&quot;

The first PhD thesis on Munro&#x27;s work was published in 1972. The first book-length volume collecting the papers presented at the University of Waterloo&#x27;s first conference on her work, &quot;The Art of Alice Munro: Saying the Unsayable&quot;, was published in 1984. In 2003/2004, the journal &quot;Open Letter. Canadian quarterly review of writing and sources&quot; published 14 contributions on Munro&#x27;s work. In 2010, the &quot;Journal of the Short Story in English (JSSE)/Les cahiers de la nouvelle&quot; dedicated a special issue to Munro, and in 2012, an issue of the journal &quot;Narrative&quot; focused on a single story by Munro, &quot;Passion&quot; (2004), with an introduction, summary of the story, and five analytical essays.

===Creating new versions===

Munro published variant versions of her stories, sometimes within a short span of time. Her stories &quot;Save the Reaper&quot; and &quot;Passion&quot; came out in two different versions in the same year, in 1998 and 2004 respectively. Two other stories were republished in a variant version about 30 years apart, &quot;Home&quot; (1974/2006/2014) and &quot;Wood&quot; (1980/2009). 

In 2006, Ann Close and Lisa Dickler Awano reported that Munro had not wanted to reread the galleys of &quot;Runaway&quot; (2004): &quot;No, because I&#x27;ll rewrite the stories.&quot; In their symposium contribution &quot;An Appreciation of Alice Munro&quot;, they say that Munro wrote eight versions of her story &quot;Powers&quot;, for example.

Awano writes that &quot;Wood&quot; is a good example of how Munro, &quot;a tireless self-editor&quot;, rewrites and revises a story, in this case returning to it for a second publication nearly 30 years later, revising characterizations, themes, and perspectives, as well as rhythmic syllables, a conjunction or a punctuation mark. The characters change, too. Inferring from the perspective they take on things, they are middle-aged in 1980, and older in 2009. Awano perceives a heightened lyricism brought about not least by the poetic precision of Munro&#x27;s revision. The 2009 version has eight sections to the 1980 version&#x27;s three, and a new ending. Awano writes that Munro literally &quot;refinishes&quot; the first take on the story with an ambiguity characteristic of her endings, and reimagines her stories throughout her work in various ways.

==Personal life==

Munro married James Munro in 1951. Their daughters Sheila, Catherine, and Jenny were born in 1953, 1955, and 1957, respectively; Catherine died the day of her birth due to a kidney dysfunction. In September 1966, their youngest daughter, Andrea Sarah, was born.

In 1963, the Munros moved to Victoria, where they opened Munro&#x27;s Books, a popular bookstore that remains in business. Alice and James Munro divorced in 1972.

Munro returned to Ontario to become writer in residence at the University of Western Ontario, and in 1976, received an honorary LLD from the institution. In 1976, she married Gerald Fremlin, a cartographer and geographer she met during her university days. The couple moved to a farm outside Clinton, Ontario, and later to a house in Clinton, where Fremlin died on 17 April 2013, aged 88. Munro and Fremlin also owned a home in Comox, British Columbia. 

In 2009, Munro revealed that she had received treatment for cancer and for a heart condition requiring coronary artery bypass surgery.

In 2002, Sheila Munro published a childhood memoir, &quot;Lives of Mothers and Daughters: Growing Up with Alice Munro&quot;. 

Munro died at her home in Port Hope, Ontario, on 13 May 2024, at age 92. She had dementia for at least 12 years.

===Child sexual abuse by partner Gerald Fremlin===

On 7 July 2024, shortly after Munro&#x27;s death, her youngest daughter, Andrea Skinner, revealed in an essay in the &quot;Toronto Star&quot; that her stepfather, Gerald Fremlin, had sexually abused her starting in 1976 when she was nine years old and ending when she became a teenager. She told Munro about the abuse in 1992. After learning of the abuse, Munro separated from Fremlin for a few months, but ultimately went back to him. According to Skinner, Munro said that she had been &quot;told too late&quot;, loved her husband too much, and wanted to stay with him. In 2002, Skinner cut off contact with Munro after Munro objected to Skinner not wanting Fremlin near her own children. In 2005, Fremlin pleaded guilty to sexual assault and received a suspended sentence and two years&#x27; probation. Munro&#x27;s other family members continued regular contact with Munro and Fremlin, while Skinner became estranged from all of them until after Munro&#x27;s death.

For &quot;The New York Times&quot;, Giles Harvey wrote: &quot;Munro&#x27;s stories—particularly those from the years after she learned of the abuse—are full of violated children, negligent mothers and marriages founded on secrets and lies... Munro seems to have spent much of her career absorbed by the same questions that readers have asked since Andrea published her essay. Why did she not protect her daughter? What led her to take Fremlin back? How could a writer who was capable of such power on the page prove so feeble in real life?&quot; Articles in &quot;The New Yorker&quot; and &quot;The New Republic&quot; note that many of Munro&#x27;s stories written afterward relate to the topic, such as &quot;Vandals&quot;, in which a woman vandalizes the house of a couple where the man molested her as a child, and &quot;Dimension&quot;, in which a woman defends her desire to keep making jail visits to the husband who killed their three children.

Munro&#x27;s biographer Robert Thacker was aware of the allegations, but did not mention them in his 2005 biography of her, though Skinner contacted him with her story shortly before it was published. Others had worked with Munro and were aware of Skinner’s experience, but did not make it public. This included Douglas Gibson, Munro&#x27;s editor and publisher. Lawyer Robert Morris, who prosecuted Fremlin in his 2005 conviction, theorized that Fremlin&#x27;s abuse went unreported for so long because &quot;everyone was protecting the mother&quot;.

==Legacy==

Munro&#x27;s work has been described as having revolutionized the short story, especially in its tendency to move forward and backward in time, and with integrated short story cycles, in which she displayed &quot;inarguable virtuosity&quot;. Her stories have been said to &quot;embed more than announce, reveal more than parade&quot;. Munro was seen as a pioneer in short story telling, with the Swedish Academy calling her a &quot;master of the contemporary short story&quot; who could &quot;accommodate the entire epic complexity of the novel in just a few short pages&quot;. In her &quot;New York Times&quot; obituary, Munro&#x27;s works were credited for &quot;attracting a new generation of readers&quot; and she was called a &quot;master of the short story&quot;. Her work is often compared with that of the most critically acclaimed short story writers. 

Her works and career have been ranked alongside other well-established short story writers such as Anton Chekhov and John Cheever. As in Chekhov, Garan Holcombe writes: &quot;All is based on the epiphanic moment, the sudden enlightenment, the concise, subtle, revelatory detail.&quot; Her work deals with &quot;love and work, and the failings of both. She shares Chekhov&#x27;s obsession with time and our much-lamented inability to delay or prevent its relentless movement forward.&quot;

Munro&#x27;s work has been considered a &quot;national treasure&quot; of Canada as it focuses largely on life in rural Canada from a woman&#x27;s perspective. 

Canadian novelist Margaret Atwood called Munro a &quot;pioneer for women, and for Canadians&quot;. The Associated Press said that Munro created &quot;stories set around Canada that appealed to readers far away.&quot;

Sherry Linkon, professor at Georgetown University, said that Munro&#x27;s works &quot;helped remodel and revitalize the short-story form&quot;. The complexity of the themes explored in her work, such as womanhood, death, relationships, aging, and themes associated with the counterculture of the 1960s, were seen as groundbreaking.

Upon winning the Man Booker International Prize, her works were described by judges of the committee as bringing &quot;as much depth, wisdom and precision to every story as most novelists bring to a lifetime of novels&quot;.

The news of the sexual abuse of Munro&#x27;s daughter caused a reassessment of both Munro&#x27;s life and her literary legacy. Novelist Rebecca Makkai wrote, &quot;the revelations don&#x27;t just defile the artist, but the art itself&quot;. Writer Brandon Taylor said, &quot;I think we cannot talk about Munro&#x27;s art without also talking about this aspect of her life&quot;.

==Selected awards and honours==

* 1968: Governor General&#x27;s Literary Award for English language fiction for &quot;Dance of the Happy Shades&quot;
* 1971*: Canadian Booksellers Award for &quot;Lives of Girls and Women&quot;
* 1977: Canada-Australia Literary Prize, inaugural prize
* 1978: Governor General&#x27;s Literary Award for English language fiction for &quot;Who Do You Think You Are?&quot;
* 1980: Booker Prize for Fiction (shortlisted) for &quot;Who Do You Think You Are?&quot; (as &quot;The Beggar Maid&quot;)
* 1982: Nominated for a Governor General&#x27;s Literary Award for English language fiction for &quot;The Moons of Jupiter&quot;
* 1986: Governor General&#x27;s Literary Award for English language fiction for &quot;The Progress of Love&quot;
* 1986: Writers&#x27; Trust of Canada&#x27;s Marian Engel Award for her body of work
* 1990: Trillium Book Award for &quot;Friend of My Youth&quot;
* 1991: Commonwealth Writers Prize for Canada and the Caribbean Region shortlisted for &quot;Friend of My Youth&quot;
* 1994: Governor General&#x27;s Award for &quot;Open Secrets&quot;
* 1994: Trillium Book Award, English nomination for &quot;Open Secrets&quot;
* 1994: WH Smith Literary Award for &quot;Open Secrets&quot;
* 1995: Lannan Literary Award for Fiction
* 1996: Trillium Book Award, English nomination for &quot;Selected Stories&quot;
* 1997: PEN/Malamud Award
* 1998: Giller Prize nomination for &quot;The Love of a Good Woman&quot;
* 1998: National Book Critics Circle Award for Fiction for &quot;The Love of a Good Woman&quot;
* 1998: Trillium Book Award, English for &quot;The Love of a Good Woman&quot;
* 1999: Libris Award for Author of the Year
* 1999: Libris Award for Fiction Book of the Year for &quot;The Love of a Good Woman&quot;
* 2001: Rea Award for the Short Story
* 2001: Trillium Book Award, English nomination for &quot;Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage&quot;
* 2002: Commonwealth Writers Prize for Canada and the Caribbean Region shortlisted for &quot;Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage&quot;
* 2002: Giller Prize for &quot;Runaway&quot;
* 2004: Rogers Writers&#x27; Trust Fiction Prize for &quot;Runaway&quot;
* 2004: Trillium Book Award, English nomination for &quot;Runaway&quot;
* 2004: Giller Prize for &quot;The View from Castle Rock&quot;
* 2005: Commonwealth Writers Prize for Canada and the Caribbean Region shortlisted for &quot;Runaway&quot;
* 2006: Edward MacDowell Medal for outstanding contribution to the arts by the MacDowell Colony
* 2007: Commonwealth Writers Prize for Canada and the Caribbean Region shortlisted for &quot;The View from Castle Rock&quot;
* 2009: Man Booker International Prize
* 2009: Trillium Book Award, English nomination for &quot;Too Much Happiness&quot;
* 2013: Trillium Book Award, English for &quot;Dear Life&quot;
* 2013: Nobel Prize in Literature
Additionally, she was award the O. Henry Award for continuing achievement in short fiction in the U.S. for &quot;Passion&quot; (2006), &quot;What Do You Want To Know For&quot; (2008) and &quot;Corrie&quot; (2012) 

===Honours===

* 1993: Royal Society of Canada&#x27;s Lorne Pierce Medal
* 1997: Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters
* 2005: Medal of Honor for Literature from the U.S. National Arts Club
* 2010: Government of France – Knight of the Order of Arts and Letters
* 2014: Silver coin released by the Royal Canadian Mint in honour of Munro&#x27;s Nobel Prize win
*2015: Postage stamp released by Canada Post in honour of Munro&#x27;s Nobel Prize win

==Works==

===Original short story collections===

* &quot;Dance of the Happy Shades&quot; (1968)
* &quot;Lives of Girls and Women&quot; (1971)
* &quot;Something I&#x27;ve Been Meaning to Tell You&quot; (1974)
* &quot;Who Do You Think You Are?&quot; (1978)
* &quot;The Moons of Jupiter&quot; (1982)
* &quot;The Progress of Love&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Friend of My Youth&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Open Secrets&quot; (1994)
* &quot;The Love of a Good Woman&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Runaway&quot; (2004)
* &quot;The View from Castle Rock&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Too Much Happiness&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Dear Life&quot; (2012)
===Short story compilations===

*&quot;Selected Stories&quot; (later retitled &quot;Selected Stories 1968–1994&quot; and &quot;A Wilderness Station: Selected Stories, 1968–1994&quot;) – 1996
*&quot;No Love Lost&quot; – 2003
*&quot;Vintage Munro&quot; – 2004
*&quot;Alice Munro&#x27;s Best: A Selection of Stories&quot; – Toronto 2006 / &quot;Carried Away: A Selection of Stories&quot; – New York 2006; both 17 stories (spanning 1977–2004) with an introduction by Margaret Atwood
*&quot;My Best Stories&quot; – 2009
* &quot;New Selected Stories&quot; – 2011
* &quot;Lying Under the Apple Tree. New Selected Stories&quot; – 2014
* &quot;Family Furnishings: Selected Stories 1995–2014&quot; – 2014

==References==
==Further reading==
*Atwood, Margaret et al. &quot;Appreciations of Alice Munro.&quot; &quot;Virginia Quarterly Review&quot; 82.3 (Summer 2006): 91–107. Interviews with various authors (Margaret Atwood, Russell Banks, Michael Cunningham, Charles McGrath, Daniel Menaker and others) presented in first-person essay format
*Awano, Lisa Dickler. &quot;Kindling The Creative Fire: Alice Munro&#x27;s Two Versions of &#x27;Wood.&#x27;&quot; &quot;New Haven Review&quot; (30 May 2012). Examining overall themes in Alice Munro&#x27;s fiction through a study of her two versions of &quot;Wood.&quot;
*Awano, Lisa Dickler. &quot;Alice Munro&#x27;s Too Much Happiness.&quot; &quot;Virginia Quarterly Review&quot; (22 October 2010). Long-form book review of &quot;Too Much Happiness&quot; in the context of Alice Munro&#x27;s canon.
*Dolnick, Ben. &quot;A Beginner&#x27;s Guide to Alice Munro&quot; &quot;The Millions&quot; (5 July 2012)
*Gibson, Douglas. &quot;Stories About Storytellers: Publishing Alice Munro, Robertson Davies, Alistair MacLeod, Pierre Trudeau, and Others.&quot; (ECW Press, 2011.) Excerpt.
*Hooper, Brad &quot;The Fiction of Alice Munro: An Appreciation&quot; (Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 2008), 
*Howells, Coral Ann. &quot;Alice Munro.&quot; (New York: Manchester University Press, 1998), 
*Lorre-Johnston,Christine, and Eleonora Rao, eds. &quot;Space and Place in Alice Munro&#x27;s Fiction: &quot;A Book with Maps in It.&quot;&quot; Rochester, NY: Camden House, 2018.&quot;.&quot;
*Mazur, Carol and Moulder, Cathy. &quot;Alice Munro: An Annotated Bibliography of Works and Criticism.&quot; (Toronto: Scarecrow Press, 2007) 
*Murray, Jennifer. &quot;Reading Alice Munro with Jacques Lacan .&quot; (Montreal: McGill-Queen&#x27;s University Press, 2016)
*Simpson, Mona. A Quiet Genius &quot;The Atlantic&quot;. (December 2001)
*Somacarrera, Pilar. &quot;A Spanish Passion for the Canadian Short Story: Reader Responses to Alice Munro&#x27;s Fiction in Web 2.0 &quot; , in: &quot;Made in Canada, Read in Spain: Essays on the Translation and Circulation of English-Canadian Literature &quot; , edited by Pilar Somacarrera, de Gruyter, Berlin 2013, p. 129–144, 
*Tausky, Thomas E. Biocritical Essay. The University of Calgary Library &quot;Special Collections&quot; (1986)
==External links==

*List of Works
*
*&quot;Alice Munro, The Art of Fiction No. 137&quot;, &quot;The Paris Review&quot; No. 131, Summer 1994
*&quot;Alice Munro’s Passive Voice&quot; by Rachel Aviv. The New Yorker, December 23, 2024
*Alice Munro at the British Council Writers Directory
*Stories by Alice Munro accessible online
*Alice Munro&#x27;s papers (fonds) held at the University of Calgary
* How To Tell If You Are in an Alice Munro Story, 8 December 2014
* with a pre-recorded video conversation with the Laureate Alice Munro: &quot;In Her Own Words&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q234819" start="0" end="15" title="Alice Munro" label="Alice Ann Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="65" end="76" title="short story" label="short story"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="96" end="121" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502092" start="200" end="217" title="short story cycle" label="short story cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638493" start="274" end="286" title="Huron County, Ontario" label="Huron County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502890" start="290" end="310" title="southwestern Ontario" label="southwestern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052291" start="410" end="440" title="Man Booker International Prize" label="Man Booker International Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405805" start="525" end="566" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award for English-language fiction" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038448" start="585" end="614" title="Writers&amp;#x27; Trust of Canada" label="Writers&amp;#x27; Trust of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038447" start="627" end="645" title="Marian Engel Award" label="Marian Engel Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359348" start="659" end="699" title="Rogers Writers&amp;#x27; Trust Fiction Prize" label="Rogers Writers&amp;#x27; Trust Fiction Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797308" start="710" end="717" title="Runaway (book)" label="Runaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4249510" start="840" end="856" title="Wingham, Ontario" label="Wingham, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q941810" start="1106" end="1116" title="James Hogg" label="James Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="1297" end="1326" title="University of Western Ontario" label="University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q991329" start="1574" end="1599" title="Dundarave, West Vancouver" label="Dundarave, West Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="1673" end="1681" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936821" start="1701" end="1719" title="Munro&amp;#x27;s Books" label="Munro&amp;#x27;s Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973269" start="2063" end="2078" title="Little magazine" label="small magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004274" start="2090" end="2103" title="Vancouver Sun" label="Vancouver Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215273" start="2578" end="2603" title="Dance of the Happy Shades" label="Dance of the Happy Shades"/>
<link wikidata="Q283256" start="2626" end="2655" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q60675668" start="2735" end="2759" title="Lives of Girls and Women" label="Lives of Girls and Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667381" start="2873" end="2898" title="Who Do You Think You Are? (book)" label="Who Do You Think You Are?"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="3019" end="3043" title="Booker Prize for Fiction" label="Booker Prize for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667381" start="3089" end="3104" title="Who Do You Think You Are? (book)" label="The Beggar Maid"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="3281" end="3311" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q866012" start="3320" end="3344" title="University of Queensland" label="University of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279564" start="3389" end="3411" title="short story collection" label="short story collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="3518" end="3538" title="The Atlantic Monthly" label="The Atlantic Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595117" start="3552" end="3564" title="Grand Street (magazine)" label="Grand Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="3578" end="3600" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q738294" start="3614" end="3626" title="Mademoiselle (magazine)" label="Mademoiselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="3640" end="3654" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966200" start="3668" end="3686" title="Narrative Magazine" label="Narrative Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988628" start="3704" end="3720" title="The Paris Review" label="The Paris Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="3815" end="3840" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301515" start="4053" end="4067" title="Douglas Gibson" label="Douglas Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724744" start="4086" end="4105" title="Macmillan of Canada" label="Macmillan of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301515" start="4128" end="4148" title="Douglas Gibson Books" label="Douglas Gibson Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800322" start="4160" end="4184" title="McClelland &amp;amp; Stewart" label="McClelland &amp;amp; Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795094" start="4246" end="4266" title="The Progress of Love" label="The Progress of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q45709616" start="4954" end="4975" title="Martha, Ruth and Edie" label="Martha, Ruth and Edie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337710" start="4996" end="5011" title="Edge of Madness" label="Edge of Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q482652" start="5032" end="5045" title="Away from Her" label="Away from Her"/>
<link wikidata="Q14387340" start="5066" end="5084" title="Hateship, Loveship" label="Hateship, Loveship"/>
<link wikidata="Q20026867" start="5108" end="5115" title="Julieta (film)" label="Julieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638493" start="5184" end="5205" title="Huron County, Ontario" label="Huron County, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="5537" end="5557" title="Southern United States" label="rural American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570223" start="5658" end="5681" title="Southern Ontario Gothic" label="Southern Ontario Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874589" start="5866" end="5917" title="Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage" label="Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797308" start="5941" end="5948" title="Runaway (book)" label="Runaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332959" start="6796" end="6814" title="Eclectica Magazine" label="Eclectica Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="6924" end="6934" title="PhD thesis" label="PhD thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="7047" end="7069" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8088" end="8097" title="Ann Close" label="Ann Close"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8102" end="8120" title="Lisa Dickler Awano" label="Lisa Dickler Awano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="9599" end="9607" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936821" start="9627" end="9645" title="Munro&amp;#x27;s Books" label="Munro&amp;#x27;s Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="9797" end="9826" title="University of Western Ontario" label="University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518699" start="9862" end="9865" title="LLD" label="LLD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979345" start="10026" end="10042" title="Clinton, Ontario" label="Clinton, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018257" start="10162" end="10185" title="Comox, British Columbia" label="Comox, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18361829" start="10292" end="10307" title="coronary artery" label="coronary artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004192" start="10308" end="10322" title="bypass surgery" label="bypass surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q613870" start="10478" end="10496" title="Port Hope, Ontario" label="Port Hope, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="10533" end="10541" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067299" start="10741" end="10753" title="Toronto Star" label="Toronto Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="10801" end="10820" title="child sexual abuse" label="sexually abused her"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="11598" end="11616" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="12152" end="12166" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329873" start="12183" end="12199" title="The New Republic" label="The New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301515" start="12853" end="12867" title="Douglas Gibson" label="Douglas Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502092" start="13270" end="13287" title="short story cycle" label="short story cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q207360" start="13502" end="13517" title="Swedish Academy" label="Swedish Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="13697" end="13711" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685" start="14068" end="14081" title="Anton Chekhov" label="Anton Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q336151" start="14086" end="14098" title="John Cheever" label="John Cheever"/>
<link wikidata="Q183492" start="14638" end="14653" title="Margaret Atwood" label="Margaret Atwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="14723" end="14739" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14838" end="14851" title="Sherry Linkon" label="Sherry Linkon"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="14866" end="14887" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="15112" end="15139" title="counterculture of the 1960s" label="counterculture of the 1960s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052291" start="15188" end="15218" title="Man Booker International Prize" label="Man Booker International Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204629" start="15533" end="15547" title="Rebecca Makkai" label="Rebecca Makkai"/>
<link wikidata="Q97402004" start="15645" end="15659" title="Brandon Taylor (writer)" label="Brandon Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q283256" start="15818" end="15856" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Literary Award" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Literary Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215273" start="15896" end="15921" title="Dance of the Happy Shades" label="Dance of the Happy Shades"/>
<link wikidata="Q283256" start="16070" end="16108" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Literary Award" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Literary Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667381" start="16148" end="16173" title="Who Do You Think You Are? (book)" label="Who Do You Think You Are?"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="16188" end="16212" title="Booker Prize for Fiction" label="Booker Prize for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667381" start="16237" end="16262" title="Who Do You Think You Are? (book)" label="Who Do You Think You Are?"/>
<link wikidata="Q283256" start="16326" end="16364" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Literary Award" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Literary Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752186" start="16404" end="16424" title="The Moons of Jupiter" label="The Moons of Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q283256" start="16439" end="16477" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Literary Award" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Literary Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795094" start="16517" end="16537" title="The Progress of Love" label="The Progress of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038448" start="16552" end="16581" title="Writers&amp;#x27; Trust of Canada" label="Writers&amp;#x27; Trust of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038447" start="16589" end="16607" title="Marian Engel Award" label="Marian Engel Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453329" start="16637" end="16656" title="Trillium Book Award" label="Trillium Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504022" start="16667" end="16685" title="Friend of My Youth" label="Friend of My Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153697" start="16700" end="16726" title="Commonwealth Writers Prize" label="Commonwealth Writers Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504022" start="16785" end="16803" title="Friend of My Youth" label="Friend of My Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405766" start="16818" end="16847" title="1994 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954388" start="16858" end="16870" title="Open Secrets (short story collection)" label="Open Secrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q112892822" start="16885" end="16913" title="Trillium Book Award, English" label="Trillium Book Award, English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954388" start="16935" end="16947" title="Open Secrets (short story collection)" label="Open Secrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614635" start="16962" end="16985" title="WH Smith Literary Award" label="WH Smith Literary Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954388" start="16996" end="17008" title="Open Secrets (short story collection)" label="Open Secrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q675638" start="17023" end="17056" title="Lannan Literary Award for Fiction" label="Lannan Literary Award for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q112892822" start="17065" end="17093" title="Trillium Book Award, English" label="Trillium Book Award, English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227401" start="17146" end="17163" title="PEN/Malamud Award" label="PEN/Malamud Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328335" start="17172" end="17184" title="Giller Prize" label="Giller Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795880" start="17206" end="17230" title="The Love of a Good Woman" label="The Love of a Good Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q109554372" start="17245" end="17291" title="National Book Critics Circle Award for Fiction" label="National Book Critics Circle Award for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795880" start="17302" end="17326" title="The Love of a Good Woman" label="The Love of a Good Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q112892822" start="17341" end="17369" title="Trillium Book Award, English" label="Trillium Book Award, English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795880" start="17380" end="17404" title="The Love of a Good Woman" label="The Love of a Good Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108649" start="17419" end="17431" title="Libris Award" label="Libris Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108649" start="17463" end="17475" title="Libris Award" label="Libris Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795880" start="17515" end="17539" title="The Love of a Good Woman" label="The Love of a Good Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134521" start="17554" end="17583" title="Rea Award for the Short Story" label="Rea Award for the Short Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q112892822" start="17592" end="17620" title="Trillium Book Award, English" label="Trillium Book Award, English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874589" start="17642" end="17693" title="Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage" label="Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153697" start="17708" end="17734" title="Commonwealth Writers Prize" label="Commonwealth Writers Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874589" start="17793" end="17844" title="Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage" label="Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328335" start="17859" end="17871" title="Giller Prize" label="Giller Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797308" start="17882" end="17889" title="Runaway (book)" label="Runaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359348" start="17904" end="17944" title="Rogers Writers&amp;#x27; Trust Fiction Prize" label="Rogers Writers&amp;#x27; Trust Fiction Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797308" start="17955" end="17962" title="Runaway (book)" label="Runaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q112892822" start="17977" end="18005" title="Trillium Book Award, English" label="Trillium Book Award, English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797308" start="18027" end="18034" title="Runaway (book)" label="Runaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328335" start="18049" end="18061" title="Giller Prize" label="Giller Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3824938" start="18072" end="18097" title="The View from Castle Rock" label="The View from Castle Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153697" start="18112" end="18138" title="Commonwealth Writers Prize" label="Commonwealth Writers Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797308" start="18197" end="18204" title="Runaway (book)" label="Runaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344291" start="18219" end="18241" title="Edward MacDowell Medal" label="Edward MacDowell Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273867" start="18290" end="18306" title="MacDowell Colony" label="MacDowell Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153697" start="18315" end="18341" title="Commonwealth Writers Prize" label="Commonwealth Writers Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3824938" start="18400" end="18425" title="The View from Castle Rock" label="The View from Castle Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052291" start="18440" end="18470" title="Man Booker International Prize" label="Man Booker International Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q112892822" start="18479" end="18507" title="Trillium Book Award, English" label="Trillium Book Award, English"/>
<link wikidata="Q760771" start="18529" end="18547" title="Too Much Happiness" label="Too Much Happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q112892822" start="18562" end="18590" title="Trillium Book Award, English" label="Trillium Book Award, English"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="18625" end="18650" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q19339" start="18683" end="18697" title="O. Henry Award" label="O. Henry Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q94301" start="18889" end="18912" title="Royal Society of Canada" label="Royal Society of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332225" start="18920" end="18938" title="Lorne Pierce Medal" label="Lorne Pierce Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="18978" end="19014" title="American Academy of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103888" start="19067" end="19085" title="National Arts Club" label="National Arts Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q716909" start="19131" end="19156" title="Order of Arts and Letters" label="Order of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647539" start="19193" end="19212" title="Royal Canadian Mint" label="Royal Canadian Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032001" start="19288" end="19299" title="Canada Post" label="Canada Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215273" start="19402" end="19427" title="Dance of the Happy Shades" label="Dance of the Happy Shades"/>
<link wikidata="Q60675668" start="19449" end="19473" title="Lives of Girls and Women" label="Lives of Girls and Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560114" start="19495" end="19539" title="Something I&amp;#x27;ve Been Meaning to Tell You" label="Something I&amp;#x27;ve Been Meaning to Tell You"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667381" start="19561" end="19586" title="Who Do You Think You Are? (book)" label="Who Do You Think You Are?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752186" start="19608" end="19628" title="The Moons of Jupiter" label="The Moons of Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795094" start="19650" end="19670" title="The Progress of Love" label="The Progress of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504022" start="19692" end="19710" title="Friend of My Youth" label="Friend of My Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954388" start="19732" end="19744" title="Open Secrets (short story collection)" label="Open Secrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795880" start="19766" end="19790" title="The Love of a Good Woman" label="The Love of a Good Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874589" start="19812" end="19863" title="Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage" label="Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797308" start="19885" end="19892" title="Runaway (book)" label="Runaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3824938" start="19914" end="19939" title="The View from Castle Rock" label="The View from Castle Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q760771" start="19961" end="19979" title="Too Much Happiness" label="Too Much Happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246885" start="20001" end="20010" title="Dear Life (book)" label="Dear Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447703" start="20063" end="20079" title="Selected Stories" label="Selected Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q15254472" start="20222" end="20234" title="No Love Lost (book)" label="No Love Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q15254472" start="20255" end="20268" title="Vintage Munro" label="Vintage Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q183492" start="20487" end="20502" title="Margaret Atwood" label="Margaret Atwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q60767957" start="20589" end="20637" title="Lying Under the Apple Tree" label="Lying Under the Apple Tree. New Selected Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q183492" start="20921" end="20936" title="Margaret Atwood" label="Margaret Atwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q665144" start="20938" end="20951" title="Russell Banks" label="Russell Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q310257" start="20953" end="20971" title="Michael Cunningham" label="Michael Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732469" start="20990" end="21004" title="Daniel Menaker" label="Daniel Menaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751492" start="21629" end="21641" title="The Millions" label="The Millions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301515" start="21663" end="21678" title="Douglas Gibson" label="Gibson, Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q109553269" start="23199" end="23210" title="Rachel Aviv" label="Rachel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="23212" end="23226" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q45433" start="23266" end="23281" title="British Council" label="British Council"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290482" wikidata="Q231091" url="?curid=290482" title="Morena Baccarin">
<text>Morena Silva de Vaz Setta Baccarin (; born June 2, 1979) is an American actress. She is known for portraying Adria in season 10 of the TV series &quot;Stargate SG-1&quot;, Inara Serra in the sci-fi television series &quot;Firefly&quot; (2002–2003) and its follow-up film &quot;Serenity&quot; (2005), Vanessa in the superhero comedy films &quot;Deadpool&quot; (2016), &quot;Deadpool 2&quot; (2018) and &quot;Deadpool &amp; Wolverine&quot; (2024), Jessica Brody in the thriller series &quot;Homeland&quot; (2011–2013), and Leslie Thompkins in the superhero series &quot;Gotham&quot; (2015–2019). For &quot;Homeland&quot;, she was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series in 2013.

==Early life and education ==
Morena Silva de Vaz Setta Baccarin was born on June 2, 1979 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, the daughter of actress Vera Setta and Fernando Baccarin, a journalist. Through her father, she is partially of Italian descent, with roots in Veneto.

Baccarin attended Public School 41 and New York City Lab School for Collaborative Studies, where her future &quot;Homeland&quot; co-star Claire Danes and she were classmates. She later entered the theater program at the Juilliard School, where she was in the drama division&#x27;s &quot;Group 29&quot; (1996–2000).

==Career==
Baccarin landed her first film role in the improvised fashion-world comedy &quot;Perfume&quot; (2001). This was followed by a lead role in &quot;Way Off Broadway&quot; (2001).

She served as Natalie Portman&#x27;s understudy in the Central Park production of &quot;The Seagull&quot;. The science-fiction drama &quot;Firefly&quot; (2002) as Inara Serra was Baccarin&#x27;s first television series, and she reprised her role in the 2005 film &quot;Serenity&quot;.In February 2005, Baccarin provided the voice for Black Canary in multiple episodes of the animated series &quot;Justice League Unlimited&quot;. She guest-starred in season two, episode seven of &quot;How I Met Your Mother&quot; as Chloe, which aired on November 6, 2006. She also guest-starred in three episodes of the television series &quot;The O.C.&quot; in 2006. Baccarin appeared in the unaired pilot episode of &quot;It&#x27;s Always Sunny in Philadelphia&quot;, playing a transgender woman, Carmen. In April 2006 Baccarin was announced to be playing the adult version of recurring villain Adria in the 10th season of &quot;Stargate SG-1&quot;. She first appeared in season-10 episode &quot;Counterstrike&quot; as adult Adria (the younger versions of Adria were previously played by other actresses). Baccarin reprised her role in the film &quot;&quot;.

In May 2009, Baccarin made her off-Broadway debut in Theresa Rebeck&#x27;s television satire &quot;Our House&quot; at Playwrights Horizons in New York City. She landed the lead role of Anna, the leader of the alien Visitors, in ABC&#x27;s 2009–2011 series &quot;V&quot;, a remake of the 1984 series. In May 2011, shortly following the airing of the show&#x27;s second-season finale, producers announced that the show would not return for a third season. That same month, Baccarin joined the cast of the Showtime television drama &quot;Homeland&quot;, for which she received praise for her role as the conflicted wife of a former prisoner of war. On July 18, 2013, she was nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series at the 2013 Primetime Emmy awards for her performance.

Baccarin appeared in the 2015 action-comedy &quot;Spy&quot; as agent Karen Walker. In 2016, Baccarin appeared in the film &quot;Deadpool&quot; as Vanessa Carlysle. She reprised her role in the 2018 sequel &quot;Deadpool 2&quot;. In 2015, Baccarin began a leading role as Dr. Leslie Thompkins in the Fox show &quot;Gotham&quot;. She portrayed the character in all five seasons of the show. She also played a recurring role as Erica Flynn, a woman who murdered her husband, and a romantic interest of Patrick Jane (Simon Baker) from &quot;The Mentalist&quot;, 2013 to 2015. In 2019, she played a psychologist on the Brazilian TV series &quot;Sessão de Terapia (Therapy Session)&quot;, her first production role in her native country. In 2020, Baccarin co-starred in the apocalyptic thriller &quot;Greenland&quot;. In 2023, Bacarrin starred in the action film &quot;Fast Charlie&quot;.

==Political views and activism==
In January 2019, Baccarin wrote an opinion piece in &quot;Newsweek&quot; magazine describing her experiences
working with the International Rescue Committee on behalf of refugees. She was interviewing refugees from Venezuela during a trip to Colombia. She warned of an evolving situation, which could lead to an increase of refugees asking for asylum in the United States. Baccarin became an advocate for women and girls, inspired by her mother&#x27;s work for women’s rights in Brazil.

In 2019, together with other artists, lawyers, advocates, and refugees, she took part in the Flores Exhibits project. She read the sworn testimony of a migrant child held in detention at the U.S.-Mexico border.

==Personal life==
In November 2011, Baccarin married American film producer and director Austin Chick, and in October 2013, their son was born. 

In July 2015, Chick filed for divorce, citing irreconcilable differences. Around that time, Baccarin began dating her &quot;Gotham&quot; co-star Ben McKenzie, and their daughter was born In March 2016, around the same time that Baccarin&#x27;s divorce became official. In November 2016, Baccarin and McKenzie announced their engagement, and they were married in Brooklyn, New York, on June 2, 2017, Baccarin&#x27;s 38th birthday. In March 2021, they had a son.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
===Video game===
==Awards and nominations==
==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q231091" start="0" end="34" title="Morena Baccarin" label="Morena Silva de Vaz Setta Baccarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187462" start="151" end="164" title="Stargate SG-1" label="Stargate SG-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q11821507" start="172" end="183" title="Inara Serra" label="Inara Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11622" start="222" end="229" title="Firefly (TV series)" label="Firefly"/>
<link wikidata="Q691611" start="277" end="285" title="Serenity (2005 film)" label="Serenity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589349" start="300" end="307" title="Copycat (Marvel Comics)" label="Vanessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19347291" start="344" end="352" title="Deadpool (film)" label="Deadpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q25431158" start="373" end="383" title="Deadpool 2" label="Deadpool 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q102180106" start="407" end="431" title="Deadpool &amp;amp; Wolverine" label="Deadpool &amp;amp; Wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573383" start="446" end="459" title="Jessica Brody (character)" label="Jessica Brody"/>
<link wikidata="Q23594" start="489" end="497" title="Homeland (TV series)" label="Homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059949" start="521" end="537" title="Leslie Thompkins" label="Leslie Thompkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726959" start="568" end="574" title="Gotham (TV series)" label="Gotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285504" start="646" end="719" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="823" end="837" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16941012" start="871" end="881" title="Vera Setta" label="Vera Setta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="990" end="996" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117077" start="1017" end="1033" title="PS 41" label="Public School 41"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707075" start="1038" end="1088" title="New York City Lab School for Collaborative Studies" label="New York City Lab School for Collaborative Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q23594" start="1113" end="1121" title="Homeland (TV series)" label="Homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q867813" start="1136" end="1148" title="Claire Danes" label="Claire Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q503246" start="1219" end="1235" title="Juilliard School" label="Juilliard School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008476" start="1407" end="1414" title="Perfume (2001 film)" label="Perfume"/>
<link wikidata="Q37876" start="1517" end="1532" title="Natalie Portman" label="Natalie Portman"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="1558" end="1570" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q650063" start="1591" end="1602" title="The Seagull" label="The Seagull"/>
<link wikidata="Q11622" start="1642" end="1649" title="Firefly (TV series)" label="Firefly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11821507" start="1666" end="1677" title="Inara Serra" label="Inara Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q691611" start="1772" end="1780" title="Serenity (2005 film)" label="Serenity"/>
<link wikidata="Q599124" start="1837" end="1849" title="Black Canary" label="Black Canary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669712" start="1900" end="1924" title="Justice League Unlimited" label="Justice League Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q147235" start="1988" end="2009" title="How I Met Your Mother" label="How I Met Your Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q194427" start="2131" end="2139" title="The O.C." label="The O.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q23670" start="2211" end="2249" title="It&amp;#x27;s Always Sunny in Philadelphia" label="It&amp;#x27;s Always Sunny in Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="2267" end="2278" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q849248" start="2384" end="2389" title="Adria (Stargate)" label="Adria"/>
<link wikidata="Q187462" start="2418" end="2431" title="Stargate SG-1" label="Stargate SG-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716500" start="2485" end="2498" title="Counterstrike (Stargate SG-1)" label="Counterstrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="2680" end="2692" title="off-Broadway" label="off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492077" start="2702" end="2716" title="Theresa Rebeck" label="Theresa Rebeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q164980" start="2767" end="2787" title="Playwrights Horizons" label="Playwrights Horizons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148685" start="2864" end="2872" title="Visitors (V)" label="Visitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q219650" start="2888" end="2918" title="V (2009 TV series)" label="2009–2011 series &amp;quot;V&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076940" start="2936" end="2947" title="V (1984 TV series)" label="1984 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q23594" start="3184" end="3192" title="Homeland (TV series)" label="Homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="3278" end="3293" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoner of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285504" start="3335" end="3383" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series" label="Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="3396" end="3410" title="Primetime Emmy" label="Primetime Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16389838" start="3490" end="3493" title="Spy (2015 film)" label="Spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19347291" start="3568" end="3576" title="Deadpool (film)" label="Deadpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589349" start="3586" end="3602" title="Vanessa Carlysle" label="Vanessa Carlysle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25431158" start="3651" end="3661" title="Deadpool 2" label="Deadpool 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059949" start="3715" end="3731" title="Leslie Thompkins" label="Leslie Thompkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726959" start="3754" end="3760" title="Gotham (TV series)" label="Gotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q192021" start="3953" end="3964" title="Simon Baker" label="Simon Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15063839" start="3977" end="3990" title="The Mentalist season 6" label="The Mentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q73897733" start="4235" end="4244" title="Greenland (film)" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q114843114" start="4303" end="4315" title="Fast Charlie" label="Fast Charlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="4415" end="4423" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666849" start="4483" end="4513" title="International Rescue Committee" label="International Rescue Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="4599" end="4607" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56316467" start="4626" end="4644" title="Venezuelan refugee crisis" label="evolving situation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283415" start="4701" end="4707" title="Right of asylum" label="asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823022" start="5146" end="5158" title="Austin Chick" label="Austin Chick"/>
<link wikidata="Q314569" start="5348" end="5360" title="Ben McKenzie" label="Ben McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="5565" end="5573" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290492" wikidata="Q755905" url="?curid=290492" title="Atilia gens">
<text>The gens Atilia, sometimes written Atillia, was a plebeian family at ancient Rome, which rose to prominence at the beginning of the fourth century BC. The first member of this gens to attain the consulship was Marcus Atilius Regulus, in 335 BC. The Atilii continued to hold the highest offices of the state throughout the history of the Republic, and well into imperial times.

==Origin==
Chase classifies the nomen &quot;Atilius&quot; with a small group of gentilicia probably formed from praenomina ending in &#x27; using the suffix &#x27;, a morphology common in names of Latin origin. The root might then be a praenomen &quot;Atius&quot;, otherwise unknown, although there was a Sabine praenomen &quot;Attius&quot;.

==Praenomina==
The Atilii favored the praenomina &quot;Lucius&quot;, &quot;Marcus&quot;, and &quot;Gaius&quot;, the three most common names throughout Roman history, to which they sometimes added &quot;Aulus&quot; and &quot;Sextus&quot;. Under the Empire, some of the Atilii bore the praenomen &quot;Titus&quot;.

==Branches and cognomina==
Under the Republic, the cognomina of the Atilii included &quot;Bulbus&quot;, &quot;Calatinus&quot;, &quot;Luscus&quot;, &quot;Priscus&quot;, &quot;Regulus&quot;, &quot;Nomentanus&quot;, and &quot;Serranus&quot;. Of these, only &quot;Regulus&quot; and &quot;Serranus&quot; appear to constitute a distinct family, with the Serrani being descended from the Reguli. The only cognomina found on coins are &quot;Saranus&quot;, which appears to be the same as &quot;Serranus&quot;, and &quot;Nomentanus&quot;.

&quot;Luscus&quot;, the first surname associated with the Atilii appearing in history, was a common name originally describing someone with poor eyesight, belonging to a large class of cognomina derived from the physical characteristics of individuals. This is the surname as given in Dionysius, although some sources amend it to &quot;Longus&quot;, originally referring to someone particularly tall. It has been argued that Lucius Atilius Luscus, one of the first consular tribunes elected in 444 BC, was a patrician, since the first plebeians were elected to that office in 400; and most if not all of the ancient patrician gentes possessed plebeian branches, which frequently came to eclipse the fame of their patrician forebears. However, the lists of consular tribunes from both 444 and 422 contain names that are otherwise regarded as plebeian, and according to tradition the office was created with the intention that its members should be elected from either order, so in all probability Luscus, like all of the other Atilii, was plebeian.

&quot;Priscus&quot;, a personal cognomen belonging to one of the early Atilii, usually translates as &quot;elder&quot;, and probably served to distinguish its bearer from younger Atilii of his era.

&quot;Bulbus&quot;, an onion, belongs to a class of surnames derived from everyday objects, although the circumstances by which such cognomina were acquired by individuals is seldom known. The name is comparable to &quot;Caepio&quot;, a cognomen with much the same meaning.

The Atilii Reguli were the most illustrious of their gens. The surname &quot;Regulus&quot; is a diminutive of &quot;Rex&quot;, a king. This family rose to prominence in the time of the Samnite Wars, and continued down to the interval between the First and Second Punic Wars, at which time it was supplanted by that of &quot;Serranus&quot; or &quot;Saranus&quot;. The Atilii Serrani continued down to the time of Cicero, before fading into obscurity.

&quot;Calatinus&quot;, also found as &quot;Caiatinus&quot;, the surname of Aulus Atilius Calatinus, a hero of the First Punic War, probably refers either to the town of Cales in Campania, or to the neighboring town of Caia. One of the Atilii Reguli had previously obtained the surname &quot;Calenus&quot;, in consequence of a battle fought at Cales in 335 BC. Likewise, &quot;Nomentanus&quot;, the name of one of the Atilii during the late Republic, is derived from the Nomentum, an ancient city of Latium, although his particular connection with that town is unknown.

==Members==

* Lucius Atilius Luscus, one of the first consular tribunes, elected in 444 BC. In consequence of a defect in the auspices, he and his colleagues resigned, and consuls were appointed in their stead.
* Lucius Atilius L. f. L. n. Priscus, consular tribune in 399 and 396 BC.
* Lucius Atilius, tribune of the plebs in 311 BC.
* Aulus Atilius A. f. C. n. Calatinus, consul in 258 and 254 BC, and dictator in 249.
* Gaius Atilius A. f. A. n. Bulbus, consul in 245 and 235 BC.
* Lucius Atilius, quaestor in 216 BC, slain at the Battle of Cannae.
* Marcus Atilius, duumvir in 216 BC, with Gaius Atilius, dedicated the temple of Concordia, which Lucius Manlius Vulso, the praetor of 218, had vowed.
* Gaius Atilius, duumvir in 216 BC with Marcus Atilius.
* Lucius Atilius, commander of the Roman garrison in Locri, escaped with his troops by sea, when the town was surrendered to Hannibal in 215 BC.
* Lucius Atilius, praetor in 197 BC, obtained Sardinia as his province.
* Lucius Atilius, sent to Samothrace by Lucius Aemilius Paullus to demand the surrender of Perseus in 168 BC.
* Lucius Atilius, a jurist, who probably lived in the middle of the second century BC
* Marcus Atilius, a comic poet during the second century BC, quoted by Cicero and Varro.
* Lucius Atilius Nomentanus, &quot;triumvir monetalis&quot; in 141 BC. In 120, he served on the staff of Quintus Mucius Scaevola, praetor in Asia.
* Atilius, a freedman, built an amphitheatre at Fidenae in the reign of Tiberius, which collapsed, killing between twenty and fifty thousand spectators.
* Atilius Vergilio, a standard-bearer who deserted Galba in AD 69.
* Titus Atilius Rufus, a man of consular rank, was governor of Syria, early in the reign of Domitian. He died in AD 84, just before the return of Agricola from Britain.
* Marcus Atilius Postumus Bradua, proconsul of Asia under Domitian.
* Atilius Crescens, a friend of the younger Pliny.
* Marcus Atilius Metilius Bradua, consul in AD 108.
* Marcus Atilius M. f. Metilius Bradua Caucidius Tertullus … Bassus, proconsul of Africa under Antoninus Pius.
* Atilia M. f. Caucidia Tertulla, daughter of the consul Marcus Atilius Metilius Bradua and Caucidia Tertulla.
* Gaius Atilius Serranus, consul &quot;suffectus&quot; in AD 120.
* Titus Atilius Rufus Titianus, consul in AD 127.
* Titus Atilius Maximus, consul &quot;suffectus&quot; around AD 130.
* Atilius Fortunatianus, a Latin grammarian, probably not later than the fourth century.

===Atilii Reguli et Serrani===

* Marcus Atilius (M. f.) Regulus, surnamed &quot;Calenus&quot;, consul in 335 BC, with his colleague, Marcus Valerius Corvus, conquered Cales.
* Marcus Atilius M. f. M. n. Regulus, consul in 294 BC, triumphed over the Samnites.
* Marcus Atilius M. f. L. n. Regulus, consul in 267 and consul &quot;suffectus&quot; in 256 BC, captured during the First Punic War.
* Gaius Atilius M. f. M. n. Regulus, surnamed &quot;Serranus&quot;, consul in 257 and 250 BC.
* Marcus Atilius M. f. M. n. Regulus, consul in 227 and 217 BC, and censor in 214.
* Marcus Atilius (M. f. M. n) Regulus, perhaps praetor in 212 BC, though the position may have instead been held by a Marcus Aemilius Lepidus. 
* Gaius Atilius M. f. M. n. Regulus, consul in 225 BC, slain at the Battle of Telamon.
* Gaius Atilius (C. f. M. n.) Serranus, praetor in 218 BC.
* Gaius Atilius (C. f. C. n.) Serranus, praetor in 185 BC.
* Aulus Atilius (C. f. C. n.) Serranus, consul in 170 BC.
* Marcus Atilius (C. f. C. n.) Serranus, praetor in 174 BC, was assigned to Sardinia, and given the command of the war in Corsica.
* Marcus Atilius (M. f. C. n.) Serranus, praetor in Hispania Ulterior in 152 BC, defeated the Lusitani, and took their principal city, Oxthracae.
* Marcus Atilius (M. f. M. n.) Serranus, &quot;triumvir monetalis&quot; in 151 BC, probably the son of Marcus Atilius Serranus, the praetor of 152. His coins bear the inscription &quot;Saran.&quot;
* Sextus Atilius M. f. C. n. Serranus, consul in 136 BC.
* Gaius Atilius Serranus, consul in 106 BC, took up arms against Saturninus in 100.
* Atilius Serranus, one of the distinguished men slain by order of Marius and Cinna, when they entered Rome at the close of 87 BC.
* Sextus Atilius Serranus Gavianus, tribune of the plebs in 57 BC.
* Atilius Serranus Domesticus, mentioned by Cicero in 54 BC.
* Atilia, first wife of Cato the Younger

==See also==
* List of Roman gentes

==References==
==Bibliography==

* Marcus Tullius Cicero, &quot;Epistulae ad Quintum Fratrem&quot;.
* Dionysius of Halicarnassus, &quot;Romaike Archaiologia&quot; (Roman Antiquities).
* Titus Livius (Livy), &quot;History of Rome&quot;.
* Publius Cornelius Tacitus, &quot;Annales&quot;, &quot;De Vita et Moribus Iulii Agricolae&quot; (On the Life and Mores of Julius Agricola).
* Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus, &quot;De Vita Caesarum&quot; (Lives of the Caesars, or The Twelve Caesars).
* Appianus Alexandrinus (Appian), &quot;Bellum Civile&quot; (The Civil War), &quot;Hispanica&quot; (The Spanish Wars).
* Joseph Hilarius Eckhel, &quot;Doctrina Numorum Veterum&quot; (The Study of Ancient Coins, 1792–1798).
* &quot;Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology&quot;, William Smith, ed., Little, Brown and Company, Boston (1849).
* George Davis Chase, &quot;The Origin of Roman Praenomina&quot;, in &quot;Harvard Studies in Classical Philology&quot;, vol. VIII, pp. 103–184 (1897).
* T. Robert S. Broughton, &quot;The Magistrates of the Roman Republic&quot;, American Philological Association (1952–1986).
* Michael Crawford, &quot;Roman Republican Coinage&quot;, Cambridge University Press (1974, 2001).
* Timothy J. Cornell, &quot;The Beginnings of Rome: Italy and Rome from the Bronze Age to the Punic Wars (c. 1000–264 BC)&quot;, Routledge, London (1995).
* John C. Traupman, &quot;The New College Latin &amp; English Dictionary&quot;, Bantam Books, New York (1995).
* Werner Eck &amp; Peter Weiß, &quot;Hadrianische Konsuln. Neue Zeugnisse aus Militärdiplomen&quot; (Hadrianic Consuls: New Evidence from Military Diplomas), in &quot;Chiron&quot;, vol. 32 (2002).
* Anthony R. Birley, &quot;The Roman Government of Britain&quot;, Oxford University Press (2005).
* Sarah B. Pomeroy, &quot;The Murder of Regilla: a Case of Domestic Violence in Antiquity&quot;, Harvard University Press (2009).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q755905" start="4" end="15" title="Atilia gens" label="gens Atilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q755905" start="35" end="42" title="Atilia gens" label="Atillia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="50" end="58" title="plebs" label="plebeian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="69" end="81" title="ancient Rome" label="ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q899409" start="176" end="180" title="gens" label="gens"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="195" end="205" title="Roman consul" label="consulship"/>
<link wikidata="Q579548" start="210" end="232" title="Marcus Atilius Regulus Calenus" label="Marcus Atilius Regulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="337" end="345" title="Roman Republic" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="361" end="375" title="Roman Empire" label="imperial times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760158" start="458" end="468" title="Nomen gentilicium" label="gentilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240901" start="490" end="500" title="praenomen" label="praenomina"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="575" end="580" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q108356" start="683" end="689" title="Sabines" label="Sabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697451" start="776" end="782" title="Lucius (praenomen)" label="Lucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757977" start="796" end="802" title="Marcus (praenomen)" label="Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517401" start="820" end="825" title="Gaius (praenomen)" label="Gaius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821839" start="923" end="928" title="Aulus (praenomen)" label="Aulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458630" start="945" end="951" title="Sextus (praenomen)" label="Sextus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21473990" start="1021" end="1026" title="Titus (praenomen)" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q777342" start="1086" end="1095" title="cognomen" label="cognomina"/>
<link wikidata="Q26204" start="1851" end="1860" title="Dionysius of Halicarnassus" label="Dionysius"/>
<link wikidata="Q755905" start="1991" end="2012" title="Lucius Atilius Luscus" label="Lucius Atilius Luscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q673808" start="2031" end="2047" title="consular tribune" label="consular tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="2074" end="2083" title="patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q109251" start="3274" end="3286" title="Samnite Wars" label="Samnite Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="3335" end="3340" title="First Punic War" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271" start="3345" end="3361" title="Second Punic War" label="Second Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="3501" end="3507" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q714798" start="3615" end="3638" title="Aulus Atilius Calatinus" label="Aulus Atilius Calatinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="3718" end="3726" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q242942" start="4010" end="4018" title="Nomentum" label="Nomentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048669" start="4039" end="4045" title="Latium" label="Latium"/>
<link wikidata="Q755905" start="4125" end="4146" title="Lucius Atilius Luscus" label="Lucius Atilius Luscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q673808" start="4165" end="4181" title="consular tribune" label="consular tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q11933548" start="4398" end="4412" title="Lucius Atilius (tribune 311 BC)" label="Lucius Atilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704729" start="4414" end="4434" title="tribune of the plebs" label="tribune of the plebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q714798" start="4448" end="4483" title="Aulus Atilius Calatinus" label="Aulus Atilius A. f. C. n. Calatinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="4485" end="4491" title="Roman consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q236885" start="4515" end="4523" title="Roman dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341549" start="4534" end="4566" title="Gaius Atilius Bulbus" label="Gaius Atilius A. f. A. n. Bulbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189430" start="4612" end="4620" title="quaestor" label="quaestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q179591" start="4645" end="4661" title="Battle of Cannae" label="Battle of Cannae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266474" start="4681" end="4688" title="duumviri" label="duumvir"/>
<link wikidata="Q746321" start="4744" end="4753" title="Concordia (mythology)" label="Concordia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266474" start="4831" end="4838" title="duumviri" label="duumvir"/>
<link wikidata="Q54619" start="4923" end="4928" title="Locri" label="Locri"/>
<link wikidata="Q36456" start="4995" end="5003" title="Hannibal" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="5033" end="5040" title="praetor" label="praetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q281345" start="5061" end="5069" title="Sardinia et Corsica" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5089" end="5103" title="Lucius Atilius (envoy to Samothrace)" label="Lucius Atilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q203175" start="5113" end="5123" title="Samothrace" label="Samothrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q298168" start="5127" end="5150" title="Lucius Aemilius Paulus Macedonicus" label="Lucius Aemilius Paullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207363" start="5178" end="5185" title="Perseus of Macedon" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873522" start="5199" end="5213" title="Lucius Atilius (jurist)" label="Lucius Atilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164947" start="5285" end="5299" title="Marcus Atilius (poet)" label="Marcus Atilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q355732" start="5365" end="5370" title="Varro Atacinus" label="Varro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844592" start="5407" end="5425" title="triumvir monetalis" label="triumvir monetalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q955339" start="5477" end="5500" title="Quintus Mucius Scaevola Augur" label="Quintus Mucius Scaevola"/>
<link wikidata="Q210718" start="5513" end="5517" title="Asia (Roman province)" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16172294" start="5521" end="5528" title="Atilius (freedman)" label="Atilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234405" start="5567" end="5574" title="Fidenae" label="Fidenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="5591" end="5599" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414" start="5723" end="5728" title="Galba" label="Galba"/>
<link wikidata="Q19997995" start="5741" end="5760" title="Titus Atilius Rufus" label="Titus Atilius Rufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="5802" end="5807" title="Roman Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="5831" end="5839" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q272082" start="5885" end="5893" title="Gnaeus Julius Agricola" label="Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="5899" end="5906" title="Roman Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12286057" start="5910" end="5940" title="Marcus Atilius Postumus Bradua" label="Marcus Atilius Postumus Bradua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912782" start="5942" end="5951" title="proconsul" label="proconsul"/>
<link wikidata="Q168707" start="6020" end="6025" title="Pliny the Younger" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233612" start="6029" end="6059" title="Marcus Atilius Metilius Bradua" label="Marcus Atilius Metilius Bradua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912782" start="6148" end="6157" title="proconsul" label="proconsul"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="6161" end="6167" title="Africa (Roman province)" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429" start="6174" end="6188" title="Antoninus Pius" label="Antoninus Pius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4815798" start="6192" end="6222" title="Atilia Caucidia Tertulla" label="Atilia M. f. Caucidia Tertulla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6303" end="6325" title="Gaius Atilius Serranus (consul 120)" label="Gaius Atilius Serranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11951957" start="6369" end="6397" title="Titus Atilius Rufus Titianus" label="Titus Atilius Rufus Titianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8208327" start="6488" end="6509" title="Atilius Fortunatianus" label="Atilius Fortunatianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="6513" end="6518" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q579548" start="6610" end="6640" title="Marcus Atilius Regulus Calenus" label="Marcus Atilius (M. f.) Regulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q453874" start="6710" end="6732" title="Marcus Valerius Corvus" label="Marcus Valerius Corvus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026628" start="6744" end="6749" title="Cales" label="Cales"/>
<link wikidata="Q939001" start="6753" end="6787" title="Marcus Atilius Regulus (consul 294 BC)" label="Marcus Atilius M. f. M. n. Regulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q463459" start="6826" end="6834" title="Samnium" label="Samnites"/>
<link wikidata="Q318718" start="6838" end="6872" title="Marcus Atilius Regulus" label="Marcus Atilius M. f. L. n. Regulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="6952" end="6967" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q965435" start="6971" end="7004" title="Gaius Atilius Regulus (consul 257 BC)" label="Gaius Atilius M. f. M. n. Regulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q781626" start="7065" end="7099" title="Marcus Atilius Regulus (consul 227 BC)" label="Marcus Atilius M. f. M. n. Regulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q947736" start="7292" end="7325" title="Gaius Atilius Regulus (consul 225 BC)" label="Gaius Atilius M. f. M. n. Regulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q175985" start="7358" end="7375" title="Battle of Telamon" label="Battle of Telamon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7379" end="7415" title="Gaius Atilius Serranus (praetor)" label="Gaius Atilius (C. f. M. n.) Serranus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7438" end="7474" title="Gaius Atilius Serranus (praetor 185 BC)" label="Gaius Atilius (C. f. C. n.) Serranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289275" start="7497" end="7533" title="Aulus Atilius Serranus" label="Aulus Atilius (C. f. C. n.) Serranus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7555" end="7592" title="Marcus Atilius Serranus (praetor 174 BC)" label="Marcus Atilius (C. f. C. n.) Serranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q281345" start="7629" end="7637" title="Sardinia et Corsica" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q747040" start="7736" end="7753" title="Hispania Ulterior" label="Hispania Ulterior"/>
<link wikidata="Q837549" start="7778" end="7786" title="Lusitanians" label="Lusitani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656287" start="8030" end="8065" title="Sextus Atilius Serranus" label="Sextus Atilius M. f. C. n. Serranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933377" start="8087" end="8109" title="Gaius Atilius Serranus (consul 106 BC)" label="Gaius Atilius Serranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q355544" start="8150" end="8160" title="Lucius Appuleius Saturninus" label="Saturninus"/>
<link wikidata="Q177975" start="8236" end="8242" title="Gaius Marius" label="Marius"/>
<link wikidata="Q171083" start="8247" end="8252" title="Lucius Cornelius Cinna" label="Cinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q11949619" start="8302" end="8334" title="Sextus Atilius Serranus Gavianus" label="Sextus Atilius Serranus Gavianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704729" start="8336" end="8356" title="tribune of the plebs" label="tribune of the plebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334126" start="8430" end="8436" title="Atilia" label="Atilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193506" start="8452" end="8468" title="Cato the Younger" label="Cato the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230420" start="8485" end="8505" title="List of Roman gentes" label="List of Roman gentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="8542" end="8563" title="Cicero" label="Marcus Tullius Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q12899784" start="8571" end="8599" title="Epistulae ad Quintum Fratrem" label="Epistulae ad Quintum Fratrem"/>
<link wikidata="Q26204" start="8609" end="8635" title="Dionysius of Halicarnassus" label="Dionysius of Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="8707" end="8711" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155892" start="8720" end="8735" title="Ab Urbe Condita Libri (Livy)" label="History of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="8745" end="8770" title="Tacitus" label="Publius Cornelius Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q564358" start="8778" end="8785" title="Annals (Tacitus)" label="Annales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244446" start="8799" end="8833" title="Agricola (book)" label="De Vita et Moribus Iulii Agricolae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="8886" end="8913" title="Suetonius" label="Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229963" start="8921" end="8937" title="The Twelve Caesars" label="De Vita Caesarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q190368" start="9016" end="9022" title="Appian" label="Appian"/>
<link wikidata="Q78749" start="9112" end="9134" title="Joseph Hilarius Eckhel" label="Joseph Hilarius Eckhel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210336" start="9222" end="9275" title="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology" label="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q559411" start="9283" end="9296" title="William Smith (lexicographer)" label="William Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q980809" start="9499" end="9521" title="Thomas Robert Shannon Broughton" label="T. Robert S. Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927193" start="9623" end="9639" title="Michael Crawford (historian)" label="Michael Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803357" start="9722" end="9740" title="Tim Cornell" label="Timothy J. Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q96525" start="9988" end="9998" title="Werner Eck" label="Werner Eck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074755" start="10153" end="10159" title="Chiron (journal)" label="Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q573849" start="10185" end="10202" title="Anthony Birley" label="Anthony R. Birley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322600" start="10283" end="10299" title="Sarah B. Pomeroy" label="Sarah B. Pomeroy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290502" wikidata="Q2639390" url="?curid=290502" title="Seven Sisters, London">
<text>Seven Sisters is a district of Tottenham, north London, England, at the eastern end of Seven Sisters Road, which runs from Tottenham High Road to join the A1 in Holloway.

==Etymology==

The Dorset map of 1619 shows the area known today as Seven Sisters named as Page Greene. However, by 1805 the first series Ordnance Survey map was showing the area as Seven Sisters.

The name is derived from seven elms which were planted in a circle with a walnut tree at their centre on an area of common land known as Page Green. The clump was known as the Seven Sisters by 1732.

In his early-seventeenth-century work, &quot;The Briefe Description of the Towne of Tottenham Highcrosse&quot;, local vicar and historian William Bedwell singled out the walnut tree for particular mention. He wrote of it as a local &#x27;arboreal wonder&#x27; which &#x27;flourished without growing bigger&#x27;. He described it as popularly associated with the burning of an unknown Protestant. There is also speculation that the tree was ancient, possibly going back as far as Roman times, perhaps standing in a sacred grove or pagan place of worship.

The location of the seven trees can be tracked through a series of maps from 1619 on. From 1619 they are shown in a position which today corresponds with the western tip of Page Green at the junction of Broad Lane and the High Road. With urbanisation radically changing the area, the &#x27;Seven Sisters&#x27; had been replanted by 1876, still on Page Green, but further to the east. Contemporary maps show them remaining in this new location until 1955.

The current ring of hornbeam trees on Page Green Common was planted in 1997 in a ceremony led by five families of seven sisters.

==History==
Seven Sisters is on the route of Ermine Street, the Roman road connecting London to York. At the time of Domesday, the area was within the Manor of Tottenham held by Waltheof II, Earl of Northumbria, the last of the great Anglo-Saxon Earls.

In the medieval period a settlement grew up at Page Green and the woodland was increasingly cleared for agriculture.
In the early decades of the nineteenth century, the Seven Sisters Road was constructed and the area saw the construction of a number of large houses, including Suffield Lodge, Seven Sisters House and Grove Place. These fine buildings soon fell victim to the spread of Victorian London and by the third quarter of the century the area had been almost completely built over.

==Seven Sisters today==

Today Seven Sisters is a multi-cultural area strongly influenced by its location on key road and underground rail routes. Immediately above the tube station is an early-Edwardian department store building, formerly occupied by Wards Furnishing Stores, which traded until 1972. Part of the building, known locally as Wards Corner became an indoor market with a strong Latin American flavour, known as &quot;Latin Village&quot; or &quot;Pueblito Paisa&quot;. The site had been under threat of demolition since 2004 (see section Plans for development below); there were plans to redevelop it in 2018, but this action was resisted, and cancelled in August 2021.

The Clyde Circus Conservation Area stretches between the busy local shops of West Green Road and Philip Lane. Most of the residential streets between are in the Conservation Area, but not the more modern Lawrence Road and Elizabeth Place.

Residents of the Clyde Circus Conservation Area are brought together by the Clyde Area Residents Association (CARA), which holds an annual street party. Its sister group, the Fountain Area Residents Association (FARA), covers residents to the south of West Green Road, namely those in Kirkton Road, Roslyn Road, Seaford Road, Elmar Road, Turner Avenue, Brunel Walk, Avenue Road and Braemar Road. Recent successful projects organised by FARA members include the creation of a community garden at the site of a dated pedestrian ramp.

Another community project is the Avenue Orchard. The local community utilised wasteland behind a concrete wall on Avenue Road for planting apple trees, and held a workshop with local artists to source ideas for how to improve the look and feel of the wall and area around the Avenue Orchard.

==Plans for development==
The old Wards Corner building above the tube station was earmarked for development in 2004, when Haringey Council published a development brief. In August 2007 Haringey Council entered into a Development Agreement with developer Grainger plc. Grainger&#x27;s plan to demolish the existing buildings on the site and replace them with a new mixed-use development of retail and residential units was met with local opposition. The Wards Corner Coalition (WCC) campaigned for the existing buildings and Latin American market to be retained and improved. The WCC mounted a legal challenge against the plans and, in June 2010, the Court of Appeal quashed the planning permission.

In 2012, Grainger submitted revised plans for the site. Haringey Council granted planning permission for the revised plans on 12 July 2012. After protests, the plan was definitively cancelled in August 2021.

In addition to the Wards Corner plans, further projects for regeneration in Seven Sisters are planned. Haringey Council&#x27;s &#x27;Plan for Tottenham&#x27; sets out the council&#x27;s long-term vision for the area. Plans to regenerate Lawrence Road were put out for consultation and are now partly implemented. Transport for London has completed a major project to improve the Tottenham Hale Gyratory – a busy one-way system that used to pass Seven Sisters station – converting it to a slower, pedestrian-friendly, two-way road.

==Education==
==Nearest places==

*Alexandra Park
*Bruce Grove
*Harringay
*Hornsey
*Manor House
*St Ann&#x27;s
*Stamford Hill
*Stoke Newington
*Tottenham Hale
*Turnpike Lane
*West Green
*Wood Green
==Nearest railway stations==
* Seven Sisters station
* South Tottenham railway station
*Tottenham Hale railway station
* Stamford Hill railway station
* Harringay Green Lanes railway station

==References==
==External links==
*Seven Sisters Group on Flickr</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2639390" start="0" end="13" title="Seven Sisters, London" label="Seven Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q503375" start="31" end="40" title="Tottenham" label="Tottenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q734547" start="42" end="54" title="north London" label="north London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298343" start="87" end="105" title="Seven Sisters Road" label="Seven Sisters Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828449" start="123" end="142" title="Tottenham High Road" label="Tottenham High Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q279859" start="155" end="157" title="A1 road (Great Britain)" label="A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q124308" start="161" end="169" title="Holloway, London" label="Holloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q131113" start="401" end="404" title="elm" label="elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q208021" start="444" end="450" title="walnut" label="walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="486" end="497" title="common land" label="common land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710095" start="708" end="723" title="William Bedwell" label="William Bedwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="1363" end="1375" title="urbanisation" label="urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q158513" start="1601" end="1609" title="hornbeam" label="hornbeam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355961" start="1756" end="1769" title="Ermine Street" label="Ermine Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="1775" end="1780" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1797" end="1803" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="1807" end="1811" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="1828" end="1836" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q940404" start="1889" end="1921" title="Waltheof II, Earl of Northumbria" label="Waltheof II, Earl of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1972" end="1987" title="medieval period" label="medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="Q185852" start="2650" end="2659" title="Edwardian" label="Edwardian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3007" end="3028" title="#Plans for development" label="Plans for development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593525" start="4461" end="4473" title="Grainger plc" label="Grainger plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298922" start="4571" end="4592" title="mixed-use development" label="mixed-use development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918203" start="5683" end="5697" title="Alexandra Park, London" label="Alexandra Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977586" start="5699" end="5710" title="Bruce Grove" label="Bruce Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q952515" start="5712" end="5721" title="Harringay" label="Harringay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454407" start="5723" end="5730" title="Hornsey" label="Hornsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780499" start="5732" end="5743" title="Manor House, London" label="Manor House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592452" start="5745" end="5758" title="St Ann&amp;#x27;s, London" label="St Ann&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716505" start="5760" end="5773" title="Stamford Hill" label="Stamford Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483346" start="5775" end="5790" title="Stoke Newington" label="Stoke Newington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996004" start="5792" end="5806" title="Tottenham Hale" label="Tottenham Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q650552" start="5808" end="5821" title="Turnpike Lane, Haringey" label="Turnpike Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019077" start="5823" end="5833" title="West Green, London" label="West Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992780" start="5835" end="5845" title="Wood Green" label="Wood Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q109037583" start="5877" end="5898" title="Seven Sisters station" label="Seven Sisters station"/>
<link wikidata="Q686458" start="5901" end="5932" title="South Tottenham railway station" label="South Tottenham railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q801529" start="5934" end="5964" title="Tottenham Hale railway station" label="Tottenham Hale railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179250" start="5967" end="5996" title="Stamford Hill railway station" label="Stamford Hill railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q9286575" start="5999" end="6036" title="Harringay Green Lanes railway station" label="Harringay Green Lanes railway station"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290504" wikidata="Q816823" url="?curid=290504" title="Beneath a Steel Sky">
<text>Beneath a Steel Sky is a 1994 point-and-click adventure game developed by British developer Revolution Software and published by Virgin Interactive Entertainment for MS-DOS and Amiga home computers. It was made available as freewareand with the source code releasedfor PC platforms in 2003. Set in a dystopian cyberpunk future, the player assumes the role of Robert Foster, who was stranded in a wasteland known as &quot;the Gap&quot; as a child and adopted by a group of local Aboriginals, gradually adjusting to his life in the wilderness. After many years, armed security officers arrive, killing the locals and taking Robert back to Union City. He escapes and soon uncovers the corruption which lies at the heart of society.

Originally titled &quot;Underworld&quot;, the game was a collaboration between game director Charles Cecil and comic book artist Dave Gibbons, and cost £40,000 to make. Cecil was a fan of Gibbons&#x27;s work and approached with the idea of a video game. The game has a serious tone but features humour-filled dialogue, which came as a result of Cecil&#x27;s and writer Dave Cummins&#x27;s goal to find a middle ground between the earnestness of Sierra&#x27;s and the slapstick comedy of LucasArts&#x27;s adventure games. It was built using Revolution&#x27;s Virtual Theatre engine, first used in Revolution&#x27;s previous and debut release, 1992&#x27;s &quot;Lure of the Temptress&quot;.

It received positive reviews at the time of its release and is retrospectively viewed as a cult classic and Revolution&#x27;s greatest game besides &quot;Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars&quot;. A remastered edition was released for iOS in 2009 as &quot;Beneath a Steel Sky Remastered&quot;, which also received a positive reception from the gaming press. A sequel was greenlit during the &quot;Broken Sword: The Serpent&#x27;s Curse&quot; 2012 Kickstarter campaign, and was announced in March 2019. Entitled &quot;Beyond a Steel Sky&quot;, it was released on Apple Arcade in June 2020, on Steam in July 2020, and on GOG.com in March 2021.

==Gameplay==

&quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot; is a 2D adventure game played from a third-person perspective. The player uses a point-and-click interface to interact with the environment and to guide protagonist Robert Foster through the game&#x27;s world. To solve puzzles and progress in the game, the player collects items that may be combined with one another, used on the environment, or given to non-player characters (NPCs). The protagonist converses with NPCs via dialogue trees to learn about the game&#x27;s puzzles and plot. Clues and other information are obtained by clicking on items in the inventory and on objects in the environment. Unlike in most adventure games at the time, the protagonist&#x27;s death is possible, after which the player starts from the last save point. In the remastered iOS version, the point-and-click interface is replaced with a touch user interface, a hint system is added, and hotspots are highlighted.

==Synopsis==

===Background===
&quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot; is set at an unknown point in a dystopian future, when the Earth has been significantly damaged by pollution, nuclear fallout, or both.

In Australia, the six states and two territories who have been consumed by their respective capital cities are described as &quot;city states&quot;. Union City is the second largest of the six remaining city states after the acquisition of Asio-City. Within this socio-political &quot;milieu&quot;, the national intelligence agency ASIO wield a great deal of power.

After the &quot;Euro–American War&quot;, all participants agreed upon a set of ideals described as the &quot;neo democratic principles&quot; which remove all labour representation and social benefits. Ironically, those that subscribe to these principles are called &quot;Unions&quot;, contrasting the real world definition of what a trade union pushes for. Those that oppose the Unions&#x27; ideals are called &quot;Corporations&quot;. All of the City States in Australia are either Corporations or Unions.

The larger political context of the game involves a conflict between Union City and the Hobart Corporation, whereby they are each trying to achieve market dominance by the use of sabotage. During the game, characters in Union City remark that Hobart Corporation is winning the &quot;economic war&quot; by flooding the market with &quot;cheap, gimmicky garbage&quot;, although it is never clarified whether this is mere propaganda.

===Plot===

The immediate backstory is introduced via a comic book that tells the story of a young boy called Robert who is the sole survivor of a helicopter crash in &quot;the Gap&quot; (the name applied to the Outback at the time of the game). Too young to fend for himself, Robert is adopted by a group of locals, who teach him the skills he needs to survive in this harsh new environment; they name him Robert Foster, partly due to him being fostered by them, but also because of the discovery of an empty can of Foster&#x27;s Lager found near the crash site. Over the years, Foster learns engineering and technology and builds a talking, sentient robot called Joey. Joey&#x27;s personality is stored on a small circuit board, which can easily be inserted and removed from many types of robot. This allows him to change bodies as the situation requires, provided his circuit board is not damaged. His commentaries on the current &quot;shell&quot; he is in are a running gag throughout the game.

As the game starts, Foster is kidnapped and his tribe annihilated by security soldiers sent from Union City by its all-powerful computer, LINC (&quot;Logical Inter-Neural Connection&quot;). The abductors refuse to give Foster any explanation as to what is happening. Shortly upon arriving in the city, the helicopter malfunctions and crashes in the city&#x27;s upper level. Foster survives and flees, making his way into a recycling plant, carrying Joey&#x27;s circuit board with him.

Foster places Joey&#x27;s circuit board into a robotic vacuum cleaner (something about which Joey is none too happy). He then attempts to escape the plant, but is cornered by a security officer who had also survived the accident. The officer, Reich, addresses Foster as &quot;Overmann&quot;. Just as Reich is about to kill Foster, a nearby security camera shoots a laser, disarming him. Reich tells the camera, which he reveals is controlled by LINC, that Foster must be stopped. In answer the camera shoots him again, killing him. Foster takes the officer&#x27;s access card and sunglasses before he continues his escape.

As he makes his way further down the city, Foster eventually arrives in the abandoned subway tunnels. There he discovers that LINC has grown exponentially, to the point where he is now half-machine, half-organic entity. However, in order to function, LINC needs a human host to share its brain. The current host is Foster&#x27;s biological father, who is old and has become severely worn out from his symbiosis with LINC. It is revealed that LINC sent for Foster because, with the death of its current host inevitable, it needed a replacement, and only a blood relative would do. Foster ultimately defeats LINC by plugging Joey (who, at this point, could be optionally given the new name &quot;Ken&quot; by Foster) into the mainframe. Joey/Ken is able to take control of the system, and set about turning Union City into a utopia.

==Development==
While working at Activision, Revolution co-founder and CEO Charles Cecil got the idea of working with Dave Gibbons, artist and co-creator of comic book &quot;Watchmen&quot;, as Cecil was a fan of the comic book himself. He approached Gibbons, but shortly thereafter, the old Activision broke down. However, they maintained a friendship, and Cecil later contacted Gibbons to ask him to work on Revolution&#x27;s second game. Seeing his son play video games, Gibbons became interested and realized that his skills in drawing, writing and conceptualizing could be useful in a gaming environment. Joining the team just before the release of &quot;Lure of the Temptress&quot;, Gibbons was sent a rudimentary outline of what could happen in the hypothesised game, and wrote a longer story with new characters and scenarios, to which Revolution then further added. Originally the game was named &quot;Underworld&quot;, a title proposed by Gibbons, but it was renamed due to the release of &quot;Ultima Underworld: The Stygian Abyss&quot;.

The production values became much higher for &quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot; than for &quot;Lure of the Temptress&quot;, resulting in a game six times larger, and by the end of 1993, the team working on the game had grown to eleven. The game was created in sections, which allowed the team to ensure that each part was &quot;perfected&quot; before moving on. Its 2-year development cost £40,000, a large amount of money for the company at the time.

===Creative and technical design===
The designers&#x27; goal was to create a visual bridge between comic and video game graphics. Gibbons drew the backgrounds in pencil, starting with roughs, which were sent to Revolution to see if they were technically feasible. Once agreed upon, Gibbons would then make the final sketch. The pencil sketches were then colored, mainly by Les Pace. The backgrounds were scanned on a Macintosh as 24-bit, 1000x1000 pixel images with 16 million colors, and then transformed to 8-bit, 320x200 pixel images with 256 colors for the PC version. The backgrounds were designed so that the sprites would appear clear on the screen and would not mix with the backgrounds. Gibbons created the sprites using Deluxe Paint on an Amiga. Steve Ince, who joined the team in February 1993, created a number of sprite animations, also painting some backgrounds based on Gibbons&#x27;s sketches. Gibbons also designed the characters, although he found it challenging to get a character&#x27;s personality and expression in a face that was only around seven pixels wide and nine pixels high with a limited palette. He would have liked to design a character in a similar manner to &quot;Prince of Persia&quot; or &quot;Flashback&quot;, but Revolution wanted something more detailed, so the result became a compromise. All character sprites are smoothly animated with around 20 positions each. According to Gibbons, about 75% of the backgrounds and characters he designed were used in the game.

Dave Cummins wrote the dialogue for the game. The tone of Revolution&#x27;s early games was born from a tension between Cummins and Cecil. Cummins wanted to be more flippant with dialogue, while Cecil wanted to be more serious. Their goal was to find the middle ground between Sierra&#x27;s &quot;ridiculously earnest&quot; stories and the slapstick comedy of LucasArts games. For the voice acting, which is only included in the CD-ROM version, Revolution used actors from the Royal Shakespeare Company. Only two days were spent recording over five thousands lines of dialogue. Not pleased with the results, however, Revolution decided on a lengthy re-recording, and realized that voice actors should be used, rather than stage actors. As a result of this, the speech does not always match the on-screen text, with English terms being Americanized. Cummins was also responsible for the score of the game, writing a specific tune for each of the main locations.

&quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot; became the second game to use Revolution&#x27;s Virtual Theatre engine, after &quot;Lure of the Temptress&quot;. According to Cecil, the original version of the engine seemed less applicable in &quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot;, as the ability to issue commands conflicted with the gameplay they intended to create. &quot;Lure of the Temptress&quot; had one story that was moved forward by a key event, whereas &quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot; had multiple threads. In one way this presented them with &quot;exciting gameplay opportunities, but in others it cordoned off more ambitious ideas in terms of multilinearity.&quot; As a consequence, some of the engine&#x27;s features were scaled back. Tony Warriner and David Sykes, both Revolution co-founders and programmers, had to update the engine, which was part of the new deal with Virgin Interactive. As an example of change in the updated engine, Virtual Theatre 2.0, Warriner explained that in &quot;Lure of the Temptress&quot;, the system controlled everything, for instance specific routines to a door. So if there was a door on-screen, the door-routine was called up to handle it. The consequence was that every door looked the same and acted the same, so if a door was somewhat different from the last one, it caused a problem. This was changed in the new system, as it was object oriented and no distinction was made between a proper object like a door or key.

===Release===
&quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot; was presented at the European Computer Trade Show in the London Business Design Centre in April 1993 and at the Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago in June 1993. According to French magazine &quot;Génération 4&quot;, the game was supposed to be released by the end of October 1993. Various playable demos of the game were made; one was added to the first issue of &quot;PC Gamer&quot;, and Amiga demos were added as cover disks to several Amiga magazines.

&quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot; was published in March 1994 by Virgin Interactive on floppy disks and CD-ROM. It came on 15 floppy disks, as opposed to &quot;Lure of The Temptress&quot;, which came on four. Because of the Amiga restrictions, a few animations had to be left out, as not all Amiga owners had a hard drive. Each conversion of the images to the Amiga resulted in a loss of detail. According to Revolution in-house artist Adam Tween, it took a couple of days to &quot;touch up&quot; the screens. A comic book created by Gibbons, which was translated into the introduction sequence of the game, came as part of the game package.

&quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot; was translated from English into French and Portuguese. This was the first game not developed in Portugal to be released with a Portuguese translation.

===Freeware release and Remastered edition===
In August 2003, the game was released as freeware, with its assembly language source code by Revolution Software, although the license under which the source code is released does not qualify as a free software license. The source code availability made it possible for the ScummVM project to support the game, which allows the game to be played on Windows, OS X, Linux, Windows CE and other compatible operating systems and platforms.

In November 2011, James Woodcock released an enhanced soundtrack of the game for ScummVM. The game is also available as a zero-cost download on digital distribution services, including Desura and GOG.com.

In July 2009, Revolution announced that a remastered edition of &quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot; would be released on iOS later that year. The remastered edition features new animated movies by Gibbons, a context-sensitive help system and improved audio quality. The game was released on the App Store on October 7, 2009. The animated movies in the iOS remastered version make use of the original stills and use a sliding paper-like style to animate them. The source code was released under GNU GPL-2.0-or-later.

==Critical reception and commercial performance==

&quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot; was critically acclaimed. In 1995, &quot;PC Gamer&quot; awarded it the &quot;Best Dialogue&quot; award, and it won the &quot;Best Adventure&quot; award at the &quot;Golden Joystick Awards&quot;. It was also a commercial success, reaching the number one place on the British Gallup charts. Eurogamer&#x27;s Simon Parkin later summarized that it &quot;sold extremely well&quot;, with lifetime sales between 300,000 and 400,000 units by July 2009. Parkin noted that the majority of its sales derived from European countries.

&quot;CU Amiga&quot;″s Tony Dillon proclaimed &quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot; as &quot;one of the greatest adventures ever.&quot; &quot;Amiga Format&quot;″s Rob Mead said that the game is an &quot;Utterly brilliant&quot;, &quot;massive, intense and atmospheric adventure which will keep you on tenterhooks right until its final startling conclusion.&quot; &quot;PC Gamer US&quot;″s Steve Poole called it &quot;slick, funny,&quot; &quot;absorbing&quot; and &quot;one of the most playable adventures of all time&quot; &quot;that will appeal to a wide variety of gamers&quot;. &quot;Amiga Power&quot;″s Cam Winstanley said that it is &quot;an example of what an adventure game should be like – funny, enthralling and convincing.&quot; Adventure Gamers&#x27; Claire Wood called it an &quot;enjoyable&quot;, &quot;engaging adventure classic, thoroughly enjoyable playing experience&quot; and &quot;a &quot;1984&quot; for the computer game generation.&quot;

Winstanley thought that the main highpoint of the game was the story, with an ending &quot;that&#x27;s actually quite a surprise.&quot; Wood praised the &quot;intelligent, thought provoking storyline&quot; that &quot;becomes more and more compelling, punctuated by unexpected plot twists and macabre discoveries.&quot;

Dillon praised the game&#x27;s &quot;stunning&quot; graphics. Mead said the comic book-like artwork projected a great &quot;atmosphere&quot;. Winstanley felt that the game looked &quot;superb&quot;. Wood said the graphics &quot;have aged reasonably well&quot;.

Many of the critics praised the game&#x27;s &quot;adult humour&quot;, showcased through numerous one-liners and double entendres. Dillon praised the charm of the various characters and their personalities built through conversations. Wood also praised the Revolution&#x27;s &quot;trademark&quot; &quot;light-hearted humour&quot;. Both Dillon and Wood, as well as Winstanley, highlighted Joey&#x27;s witty remarks. Poole called the writing &quot;some of the funniest dialog ever&quot; and the characters &quot;warped&quot; and &quot;interesting&quot;.

Reviewers praised the game&#x27;s puzzles for being logical but still challenging. Poole found the puzzles to be &quot;tricky&quot; and &quot;engaging&quot;, but stated &quot;the difficulty of the puzzles in the final third of the game is disproportionately high&quot; and that he disliked some of the &quot;race the clock&quot; puzzles. On the other hand, Winstanley felt that the &quot;real time&quot; puzzles &quot;add pace&quot;. Wood&#x27;s only gripe with the puzzles were the &quot;odd and disorienting&quot; LINC-space sequences.

Dillon wrote that the controls were so &quot;simple that Revolution can finally lay claim to having created the ultimate in intuitive control methods.&quot; Poole labeled them &quot;a masterwork of simplicity&quot;. Winstanley also praised the &quot;simple&quot; interface, while Wood said that the &quot;unobtrusive interface&quot; is one of the factors that make the game a &quot;highly immersive experience&quot;.

===Remastered version===
The remastered 2009 iOS version was also very well received. It holds an aggregate score of 85% on GameRankings based on 7 reviews, and 82 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 5 reviews. It was nominated for Best Port/Enhanced Re-release at the Adventure Gamers&#x27; 2009 Aggie Awards in 2010. The game sold around 20,000 units in its first month of release, while Cecil anticipated sales of around 70,000 copies during its first year on sale, and roughly 100,000 in its lifetime.

The remastered release is available with Spanish, French, Swedish, Portuguese, German, Italian, and English subtitles.

&quot;Slide To Play&quot; Keith Andrew said that &quot;&quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot; somehow feels bigger and bolder than its rivals, raising the bar and highlighting what others have so far failed to achieve. Perfectly suited to its new home, this remastering of a classic game serves up point-and-click play nearly unmatched on the App Store.&quot; Andrew noted that the point-and-click interface &quot;merg[es] seamlessly with touchscreen controls&quot; and that the hint system is &quot;a feature that might antagonize some of Steel Sky&#x27;s hardened fan-base, but one perfectly pitched at the iPhone generation.&quot;

&quot;IGN&quot; Eduardo Vasconcellos stated that the game &quot;is a reminder of how good the old point-and-clickers really were. The updated elements only add to the experienceespecially the cutscenes. If you&#x27;re looking for an intriguing story, solid gameplay and some nostalgic charm, &quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot; is for you.&quot; Vasconcellos complimented the &quot;intuitive and responsive&quot; touch controls and said that the &quot;visuals are an attractive update of the original release&quot;, and gave the game an &quot;Editor&#x27;s Choice&quot; award.

&quot;Pocket Gamer&quot;″s Tracy Erickson said that the game &quot;remains as entertaining as it did 15 years ago, galvanising the adventure gaming resurgence on iPhone.&quot; Erickson felt that the touch controls are &quot;only functional and not fantastic,&quot; but that &quot;measures have been taken to address [problems of the original point-and click interface] to a respectable degree,&quot; and that the &quot;minimally enhanced presentation raises alarm.&quot; However, he concluded that even though &quot;More could have been done to brush the dust off this ageing title,&quot; &quot;it&#x27;s still a standout game.&quot; He gave it a &quot;Silver Award&quot;.

==Legacy==
Although retrospectively &quot;Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars&quot; is generally looked upon as Revolution&#x27;s magnum opus, &quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot; still holds the status of a cult classic and has been featured on numerous &quot;all-time top&quot; lists:

&quot;Amiga Power&quot; ranked &quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot; 42nd on their &quot;Amiga Power&quot; All-Time Top One Hundred in 1994. Adventure Gamers ranked the game 17th on their list of Top 20 Adventure Games of All-Time in 2004, and 19th on the Top 100 All-Time Adventures in 2011. In 2006, Adventure Classic Gaming put the game in 9th place on their list of the Top 10 retro graphic adventure games of all time from PC to consoles. &quot;Retro Gamer&quot; placed it in third on its list of Top 20 Adventure Games of All-Time ... not by LucasArts in 2010. It was included in &quot;Edge&quot; editor Tony Mott&#x27;s &quot;1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die&quot;, a book published in 2010. In 2011, &quot;PC Gamer&quot; ranked it ninth on its list of 20 free PC games you must play. In the same year, Now Gamer listed it as one of the Greatest Point-And-Click Games (Not By LucasArts). In 2014, TechRadar placed it 40th on its list of the Top 50 best free games you should play today. &quot;Pocket Gamer&quot; included it on its list of Top 10 adventure games that should be revived on DS in 2009.

&quot;Beneath a Steel Sky: Remastered&quot; has been placed on numerous top lists as well, including &quot;Edge&quot;″s Top 50 iPhone Games at 26th in 2009, as well as &quot;Pocket Gamer&quot;″s Top 10 point-and-click adventure games on iPhone and iPad and Mashable&#x27;s 10 Classic PC Games That Found New Life on the iPhone, both in 2010.

&quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot; is often referenced in Revolution&#x27;s &quot;Broken Sword&quot; games, including 1997&#x27;s &quot;Broken Sword II: The Smoking Mirror&quot;, in 2009&#x27;s &quot;Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars – Director&#x27;s Cut&quot; and 2013/2014&#x27;s &quot;Broken Sword 5: The Serpent&#x27;s Curse&quot;, in the form of an easter egg.

===Sequel===

In 2004, Cecil commented &quot;&quot;Beneath a Steel Sky 2&quot; is a project Revolution has been considering for a while, and has started to move forward on, but we are unable to comment beyond this.&quot;

In an interview with Eurogamer in 2006, Cecil spoke of his admiration for the work done by ScummVM and the resulting interest in a sequel. He also stated that if he were to make the game he &quot;would dearly love to work with Dave Gibbons again.&quot; In a February 20, 2009 interview with IGN UK about the Wii and DS versions of &quot;Broken Sword: The Director&#x27;s Cut&quot;, Cecil and Gibbons re-iterated their interest in a sequel to &quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot;.

On September 25, 2012, Revolution announced that &quot;Beneath a Steel Sky 2&quot; would be greenlit if their &quot;Broken Sword 5: The Serpent&#x27;s Curse&quot; Kickstarter reached $1 million. Despite &quot;Broken Sword: The Serpent&#x27;s Curse&quot; failing to meet the $1 million &#x27;stretch goal&#x27;, Revolution announced that the success of its crowdfunding campaign had inspired them to greenlight &quot;Beneath a Steel Sky 2&quot;. However, Revolution later clarified that &quot;Beneath a Steel Sky 2&quot; will not necessarily be the studio&#x27;s first project following &quot;Broken Sword 5&quot; and that they would &quot;think&quot; about what their next game will be after finishing the &quot;Broken Sword&quot; game. In February 2014 it was reported that &quot;Beneath a Steel Sky 2&quot; had never entered production, despite previous reports to the contrary. The reason cited was that the Broken Sword franchise took up the sole focus of the company.

On March 25, 2019, Revolution announced that &quot;Beyond a Steel Sky&quot; would be released on Apple Arcade (iOS, macOS, tvOS) later in 2019. The game was released on Apple Arcade on June 26, 2020, on Steam on July 16, 2020, and on GOG.com on March 19, 2021.

==References==
== External links ==
*
*
*The Making of &quot;Beneath a Steel Sky&quot; at Game Nostalgia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="30" end="60" title="point-and-click adventure game" label="point-and-click adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060066" start="92" end="111" title="Revolution Software" label="Revolution Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481820" start="129" end="161" title="Virgin Interactive Entertainment" label="Virgin Interactive Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="166" end="172" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="177" end="182" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q178285" start="224" end="232" title="freeware" label="freeware"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="300" end="308" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="478" end="489" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginals"/>
<link wikidata="Q983594" start="823" end="836" title="Charles Cecil" label="Charles Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q445765" start="859" end="871" title="Dave Gibbons" label="Dave Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q494614" start="1175" end="1181" title="Sierra Entertainment" label="Sierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q624771" start="1197" end="1206" title="slapstick" label="slapstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q216611" start="1217" end="1226" title="LucasArts" label="LucasArts"/>
<link wikidata="Q596572" start="1288" end="1303" title="Virtual Theatre" label="Virtual Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023451" start="1390" end="1411" title="Lure of the Temptress" label="Lure of the Temptress"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1574" end="1614" title="Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars" label="Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1624" end="1634" title="Remaster#Video Games" label="remastered"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="1660" end="1663" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1822" end="1860" title="Broken Sword 5: The Serpent&amp;#x27;s Curse" label="Broken Sword: The Serpent&amp;#x27;s Curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q34755" start="1872" end="1883" title="Kickstarter" label="Kickstarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q96740602" start="1942" end="1960" title="Beyond a Steel Sky" label="Beyond a Steel Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q62513347" start="1987" end="1999" title="Apple Arcade" label="Apple Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q337535" start="2017" end="2022" title="Steam (service)" label="Steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486288" start="2044" end="2051" title="GOG.com" label="GOG.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="2122" end="2136" title="adventure game" label="adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q9086092" start="2151" end="2175" title="Third-person (video games)" label="third-person perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062345" start="2181" end="2187" title="Player character" label="player"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048387" start="2195" end="2210" title="Point and click" label="point-and-click"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2387" end="2392" title="Item (game terminology)#In adventure games" label="items"/>
<link wikidata="Q466466" start="2469" end="2489" title="non-player character" label="non-player character"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270586" start="2539" end="2552" title="Dialog tree" label="dialogue tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565379" start="2847" end="2857" title="save point" label="save point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816535" start="2939" end="2959" title="touch user interface" label="touch user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439034" start="2989" end="2997" title="Screen hotspot" label="hotspots"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="3189" end="3204" title="nuclear fallout" label="nuclear fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571836" start="3501" end="3507" title="milieu" label="milieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47913" start="3528" end="3547" title="intelligence agency" label="intelligence agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q782740" start="3548" end="3552" title="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation" label="ASIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="3741" end="3762" title="Trade union" label="labour representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="3767" end="3782" title="Welfare spending" label="social benefits"/>
<link wikidata="Q40191" start="4179" end="4185" title="Hobart" label="Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="4270" end="4278" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q692412" start="4374" end="4386" title="Trade war" label="economic war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="4579" end="4589" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423785" start="5040" end="5059" title="Foster&amp;#x27;s Lager" label="Foster&amp;#x27;s Lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038799" start="5166" end="5180" title="Cognitive robotics" label="sentient robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="5239" end="5252" title="Printed circuit board" label="circuit board"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="6374" end="6379" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610" start="7034" end="7043" title="symbiosis" label="symbiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q200491" start="7498" end="7508" title="Activision" label="Activision"/>
<link wikidata="Q128444" start="7639" end="7647" title="Watchmen" label="Watchmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023451" start="8124" end="8145" title="Lure of the Temptress" label="Lure of the Temptress"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8469" end="8505" title="Ultima Underworld: The Stygian Abyss" label="Ultima Underworld: The Stygian Abyss"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="9381" end="9390" title="Mac (computer)" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="9412" end="9417" title="pixel" label="pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333015" start="9579" end="9586" title="Sprite (computer graphics)" label="sprites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333015" start="9680" end="9687" title="Sprite (computer graphics)" label="sprites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683487" start="9694" end="9706" title="Deluxe Paint" label="Deluxe Paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q174171" start="9720" end="9730" title="Steve Ince" label="Steve Ince"/>
<link wikidata="Q157387" start="10163" end="10179" title="Prince of Persia" label="Prince of Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001925" start="10195" end="10204" title="Flashback (1992 video game)" label="Flashback"/>
<link wikidata="Q494614" start="10748" end="10754" title="Sierra Entertainment" label="Sierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q624771" start="10811" end="10820" title="slapstick" label="slapstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q216611" start="10831" end="10840" title="LucasArts" label="LucasArts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146254" start="10948" end="10973" title="Royal Shakespeare Company" label="Royal Shakespeare Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q596572" start="11513" end="11528" title="Virtual Theatre" label="Virtual Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993321" start="12159" end="12172" title="Tony Warriner" label="Tony Warriner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376482" start="12952" end="12980" title="European Computer Trade Show" label="European Computer Trade Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373586" start="12995" end="13017" title="Royal Agricultural Hall" label="Business Design Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q646089" start="13043" end="13068" title="International CES" label="Consumer Electronics Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283786" start="13302" end="13310" title="PC Gamer" label="PC Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="13474" end="13485" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="13491" end="13497" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="14095" end="14101" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="14106" end="14116" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q178285" start="14302" end="14310" title="freeware" label="freeware"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="14321" end="14338" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="14339" end="14350" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060066" start="14354" end="14373" title="Revolution Software" label="Revolution Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="14458" end="14471" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q145568" start="14535" end="14542" title="ScummVM" label="ScummVM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="14610" end="14617" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="14619" end="14623" title="OS X" label="OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="14625" end="14630" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q488244" start="14632" end="14642" title="Windows CE" label="Windows CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q333455" start="14883" end="14889" title="Desura" label="Desura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486288" start="14894" end="14901" title="GOG.com" label="GOG.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971087" start="14946" end="14954" title="remaster" label="remaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="15021" end="15024" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q368215" start="15195" end="15204" title="App Store (iOS)" label="App Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="15394" end="15414" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU GPL-2.0-or-later"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15541" end="15549" title="PC Gamer#PC Gamer US" label="PC Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627776" start="15665" end="15686" title="Golden Joystick Award" label="Golden Joystick Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="15774" end="15780" title="Gallup (company)" label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q281243" start="15789" end="15798" title="Eurogamer" label="Eurogamer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16029" end="16037" title="Commodore User#CU Amiga" label="CU Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843316" start="16159" end="16171" title="Amiga Format" label="Amiga Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843320" start="16603" end="16614" title="Amiga Power" label="Amiga Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q506391" start="16755" end="16771" title="Adventure Gamers" label="Adventure Gamers"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="16924" end="16928" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q40160" start="19191" end="19203" title="GameRankings" label="GameRankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="19245" end="19255" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q506391" start="19362" end="19374" title="Aggie Awards" label="Aggie Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="19613" end="19620" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="19622" end="19628" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="19630" end="19637" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="19639" end="19649" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="19651" end="19657" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="19659" end="19666" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="20294" end="20300" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="20326" end="20329" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206402" start="20900" end="20912" title="Pocket Gamer" label="Pocket Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21610" end="21650" title="Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars" label="Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21660" end="21681" title="Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars#Legacy" label="generally looked upon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843320" start="21862" end="21873" title="Amiga Power" label="Amiga Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q506391" start="21991" end="22007" title="Adventure Gamers" label="Adventure Gamers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22152" end="22176" title="Adventure Classic Gaming" label="Adventure Classic Gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021204" start="22300" end="22311" title="Retro Gamer" label="Retro Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546082" start="22483" end="22528" title="1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die" label="1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283786" start="22577" end="22585" title="PC Gamer" label="PC Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q611515" start="22767" end="22776" title="TechRadar" label="TechRadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206402" start="22863" end="22875" title="Pocket Gamer" label="Pocket Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="22958" end="22960" title="Nintendo DS" label="DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q793975" start="23078" end="23082" title="Edge (magazine)" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q619899" start="23228" end="23236" title="Mashable" label="Mashable"/>
<link wikidata="Q807106" start="23393" end="23405" title="Broken Sword" label="Broken Sword"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23447" end="23482" title="Broken Sword II: The Smoking Mirror" label="Broken Sword II: The Smoking Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23511" end="23573" title="Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars – Director&amp;#x27;s Cut" label="Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars – Director&amp;#x27;s Cut"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23607" end="23647" title="Broken Sword 5: The Serpent&amp;#x27;s Curse" label="Broken Sword 5: The Serpent&amp;#x27;s Curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q281243" start="23929" end="23938" title="Eurogamer" label="Eurogamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="24216" end="24219" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="24224" end="24226" title="Nintendo DS" label="DS"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24245" end="24282" title="Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars" label="Broken Sword: The Director&amp;#x27;s Cut"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24500" end="24540" title="Broken Sword 5: The Serpent&amp;#x27;s Curse" label="Broken Sword 5: The Serpent&amp;#x27;s Curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q34755" start="24547" end="24558" title="Kickstarter" label="Kickstarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q96740602" start="25409" end="25427" title="Beyond a Steel Sky" label="Beyond a Steel Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q62513347" start="25455" end="25467" title="Apple Arcade" label="Apple Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q337535" start="25561" end="25566" title="Steam (service)" label="Steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486288" start="25592" end="25599" title="GOG.com" label="GOG.com"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290505" wikidata="Q375083" url="?curid=290505" title="Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats">
<text>The Bern Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats, also known as the Bern Convention (or Berne Convention), is a binding international legal instrument in the field of Nature Conservation, it covers the natural heritage in Europe, as well as in some African countries.
The Convention was open for signature on 19 September 1979 and came into force on 1 June 1982. It is particularly concerned about protecting natural habitats and endangered species, including migratory species.

==Aims and objectives==

The convention has three main aims, which are stated in Article 1:

* to conserve wild flora and fauna and their natural habitats
* to promote cooperation between states
* to give particular attention to endangered and vulnerable species including endangered and vulnerable migratory species

== Structure==

The convention is divided into:

;Preamble 
:Because this convention has a special nature, which is to include the maximum number of signatures possible, it included the eventual signing by non-members of the Council of Europe: &quot;the member States of the Council of Europe and the other signatories hereto, Considering that the aim of the Council of Europe is to achieve a greater unity between its members...&quot;
;Chapter I – General provisions
:This chapter contains three articles, where it is stated the three aims of the Convention and general obligations of the Contracting Parties.
;Chapter II – Protection of habitats
:Here are set out the obligations of the Contracting Parties concerning the conservation of the habitats.
;Chapter III – Protection of species
:This chapter contains the obligations of the Contracting Parties regarding the Appendices I, II, III and IV and the exceptions of these obligations.
;Chapter IV – Special provisions for migratory species
:This chapter contains the obligations of the Contracting Parties regarding migratory species.
;Chapter V – Supplementary provisions
:This chapter contains supplementary obligations of the Contracting Parties, concerning co-operation, research, reintroduction and introduction of species.
;Chapter VI – Standing Committee
:This chapter settles the functioning procedure of the Standing Committee and their tasks.
;Chapter VII – Amendments
:This chapter contains the procedure of amendments regarding articles and Appendices of the Convention.
;Chapter VIII – Settlement of disputes
:This chapter contains the procedure of the arbitration of any disputes that could arise between Contracting Parties.
;Chapter IX – Final provisions
:This chapter contains the final arrangements of the Convention.
; Appendices
:Four appendices set out particular species for protection. They are regularly updated by the Standing Committee, who are advised by a number of Expert Groups:
:* Appendix I – Strictly protected flora species
:* Appendix II – Strictly protected fauna species
:* Appendix III – Protected fauna species
:* Appendix IV – Prohibited means and methods of killing, capture and other exploitation

==Ratifying states==
Member States of the Council of Europe, status as of 15 February 2022.

States not members of the Council of Europe
International Organisations
Algeria, Cape Verde, the Holy See, San Marino and Russia are among non-signatories that have observer status at meetings of the committee.

The convention led to the creation in 1998 of the Emerald network of Areas of Special Conservation Interest (ASCIs) throughout the territory of the parties to the convention, which operates alongside the European Union&#x27;s Natura 2000 programme.

===Duties of contracting parties===
All countries that have signed the convention must:

* promote national conservation policies
* promote measures against pollution
* promote educational and informative measures
* co-ordinate efforts to protect migratory species
* establish legislative and administrative measures

==Monitoring the implementation of the convention==
To achieve successfully the aims of this Convention, a number of monitoring devices were implemented.

===Reporting system===

* Compulsory biannual reports
* Voluntary general reports (every four years)
* Legal reports (one country per year)
* National reports
* Follow-up of recommendations

===Groups of experts===

The chosen experts are in charge of monitoring the implementation of the Standing Committee recommendation regarding species and habitats, as well as doing their own recommendations about specific conservation problems.

===Case-file system===

The system is based in complaints for possible non-compliance or other problems related with the provisions of the Convention. These complaints are processed by the Secretariat, the Bureau and the Standing Committee and when they feel there is the need for further information, on-the-spot visits by independent experts can be arranged.

==See also==
*Animal rights by country or territory
*Biogeographic regions of Europe
*Environmental agreements
*International Convention on the Protection of Birds
*International Union for Conservation of Nature
*List of international animal welfare conventions
*Migratory Bird Treaty
*Red Data Book of the Russian Federation
*List of Council of Europe treaties

==References==
==External links==
*Text of treaty and appendices
*Natura 2000 network</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q375083" start="4" end="8" title="Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q375083" start="9" end="81" title="Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats" label="Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q375083" start="101" end="116" title="Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats" label="Bern Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q375083" start="121" end="137" title="Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats" label="Berne Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q386426" start="235" end="251" title="natural heritage" label="natural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="255" end="261" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="463" end="481" title="endangered species" label="endangered species"/>
<link wikidata="Q131449" start="625" end="630" title="flora" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="635" end="640" title="fauna" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q278113" start="757" end="775" title="vulnerable species" label="vulnerable species"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="1056" end="1073" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="3192" end="3199" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="3201" end="3211" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="3217" end="3225" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="3227" end="3237" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="3242" end="3248" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457077" start="3382" end="3397" title="Emerald network" label="Emerald network"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3401" end="3439" title="Areas of Special Conservation Interest" label="Areas of Special Conservation Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q503021" start="3558" end="3569" title="Natura 2000" label="Natura 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q865588" start="4344" end="4362" title="Standing Committee" label="Standing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q85741776" start="4868" end="4905" title="Animal rights by country or territory" label="Animal rights by country or territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q85747320" start="4907" end="4938" title="Biogeographic regions of Europe" label="Biogeographic regions of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q351001" start="4940" end="4964" title="Environmental agreements" label="Environmental agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q97170881" start="4966" end="5017" title="International Convention on the Protection of Birds" label="International Convention on the Protection of Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="5019" end="5065" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248818" start="5067" end="5115" title="List of international animal welfare conventions" label="List of international animal welfare conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844352" start="5117" end="5138" title="Migratory Bird Treaty" label="Migratory Bird Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q569223" start="5140" end="5179" title="Red Data Book of the Russian Federation" label="Red Data Book of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20827649" start="5181" end="5215" title="List of Council of Europe treaties" label="List of Council of Europe treaties"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290507" wikidata="Q7457421" url="?curid=290507" title="Seven Sisters, Neath Port Talbot">
<text>Seven Sisters (: source of the (river) Dulais) is a village and community in the Dulais Valley, Wales, UK. It lies north-east of Neath. Seven Sisters falls within the Seven Sisters ward of Neath Port Talbot county borough.

==History==
The village of Seven Sisters had always been recognised historically for its coal mining pit that was located in the middle of what was once one of the richest sources of coal in Britain, if not the world, in the heart of the South Wales Coalfield.

Development of many mines, and hence small settlements into villages and towns in the area, was brought about by a combination of a rich deposits of anthracite in the western South Wales coalfield, as well as the construction of the Neath and Brecon Railway from 1862.

===Colliery===
David Evans of the Evans-Bevan coal mining partnership, had wanted to call the colliery after his daughter, Isabella Bevan who cut the first sod on the land at Bryn Dulais farm with a silver spade on Monday 11 March 1872. However, in light of superstition, and the fact that his own six sisters attended the ceremony, Evans agreed to call the mine Seven Sisters.

Anthracite coal fields always suffer from blow out, and on 10 November 1907, one occurred which killed 5 men. In 1923, there were 607 men working at Seven Sisters, producing from the Furnace Four Feet, Brass and Nine Feet Big Vein seams. During World War II the colliery was featured in an anti-Nazi film &quot;The Silent Village,&quot; made with the cooperation of the South Wales Miners Federation.

During the 1950s geological problems and changing economic conditions took their toll, and in May 1963 the colliery closed and the pit filled in. The men who had been employed at the Seven Sisters were transferred to the nearby Blaenant Colliery, which closed in 1990.

==Village==
With the opening of the mine in 1875, a community grew up around it. The present day name of the village came from the fact that Evan Evans had one son and seven daughters, hence the &quot;seven sisters&quot;. At its peak in 1945 the colliery employed over 759 men from the surrounding area.

The first dwellings erected in the village were single storey buildings for the coal miners, named Brick Row, which are still in place today. More collieries were opened in the surrounding area, such as the demand for coal increased. Nant-y-Cafn or Dillwyn colliery was opened in 1884, Henllan Colliery 1911 and Brynteg Colliery and brickworks in 1885. All housing in the village prior to the 1930s was for coal miners, brick workers and railway employees.

A junior school was opened in 1884 at a cost of £530 for the school building and £280 for the school house. 33 children appeared on the register for this year. Its first headmaster was Mr W.J. Thomas employed on an annual salary of £52.

In 1905, a mixed collection of bronze objects found much earlier in the Bryntêg area, was recognized as being an important find. Held in the National Museum of Wales, they are known as &quot;The Seven Sisters Hoard.&quot;

===The palace===
In 1912, Evan Evans Bevan agreed to build a village hall, which on completion in 1914 became known as the &quot;Palace.&quot; Used for gathering and travelling drama shows, from 1916 it showed films. Purchased in 1925 by the Reading Room Committee, it became the Seven Sisters&#x27; Miners&#x27; Welfare Society, which later established a children&#x27;s playing field, a football field and in 1935 the construction of an outdoor swimming pool, completed in 1932. In 1941 the Society purchased the 1926 institute and bowling green, constructed by Evan Evans Bevan. The Society was taken over by the National Coal Board on nationalisation in 1947.

===Present day===
The former colliery site now has the Canolfan sheltered housing complex, and the Ysticlau Park playing field. Some history of the village still remains, with the pit head winding gear sunk in the ground next to the site of the old colliery, and five pairs of preserved sections of railway line indicating the size of the enterprise.

Although the railway still runs through the village, the station was removed and the line is at present freight only. Access to Neath is via the First Cymru 907 services to/from Coelbren; while the 158/X58 services run to Swansea&#x27;s Quadrant Bus Station to/from Banwen. The former pit head baths were converted to an indoor swimming pool which was later converted into a multi-purpose Community Hall.

Originally the colliery team, Seven Sisters RFC founded in 1897, are a WRU affiliated rugby union club.

The village has as of 2019 a post office, small convenience shop, hairdressers, a cafe/fish and chip shop, a takeaway selling pizzas, kebabs and burgers and a small shop selling gifts.

==Notable people==
:&quot;See :Category:People from Seven Sisters, Neath Port Talbot&quot;

*Richard Ithamar Aaron – philosopher
*Ruth Bidgood – poet
*Phil Davies – rugby player
*Geraint F. Lewis, professor of astrophysics at the University of Sydney, Australia.
*Valerie James BEM – British Empire Medal 
*Dennis Gethin – President of the Welsh Rugby Union 2007–2019

==References==
==External links==
* Cwmdulais Historical Society
* Welsh mining history
* Seven Sisters RFC
* www.geograph.co.uk : photos of Seven Sisters and surrounding area</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7457421" start="0" end="13" title="Seven Sisters, Neath Port Talbot" label="Seven Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630741" start="64" end="73" title="Community (Wales)" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313289" start="81" end="94" title="Dulais Valley" label="Dulais Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="103" end="105" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003342" start="129" end="134" title="Neath" label="Neath"/>
<link wikidata="Q15276517" start="167" end="180" title="Seven Sisters (electoral ward)" label="Seven Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q748078" start="189" end="206" title="Neath Port Talbot" label="Neath Port Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="313" end="324" title="coal mining" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568766" start="462" end="483" title="South Wales Coalfield" label="South Wales Coalfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q182458" start="635" end="645" title="anthracite" label="anthracite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973158" start="719" end="743" title="Neath and Brecon Railway" label="Neath and Brecon Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q133182" start="1014" end="1026" title="superstition" label="superstition"/>
<link wikidata="Q885506" start="1177" end="1185" title="Blowout (well drilling)" label="blow out"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1380" end="1392" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="1430" end="1434" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764240" start="1446" end="1464" title="The Silent Village" label="The Silent Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568777" start="1505" end="1534" title="South Wales Miners Federation" label="South Wales Miners Federation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1765" end="1782" title="Blaenant Colliery" label="Blaenant Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2398" end="2414" title="Henllan Colliery" label="Henllan Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2424" end="2440" title="Brynteg Colliery" label="Brynteg Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="2839" end="2845" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2880" end="2887" title="Bryntêg" label="Bryntêg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046319" start="2949" end="2973" title="National Museum of Wales" label="National Museum of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q367885" start="3092" end="3104" title="village hall" label="village hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q895453" start="3565" end="3578" title="bowling green" label="bowling green"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971538" start="3647" end="3666" title="National Coal Board" label="National Coal Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493990" start="3760" end="3777" title="sheltered housing" label="sheltered housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310214" start="3809" end="3822" title="playing field" label="playing field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003342" start="4176" end="4181" title="Neath" label="Neath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452894" start="4193" end="4204" title="First Cymru" label="First Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140602" start="4226" end="4234" title="Coelbren, Powys" label="Coelbren"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="4270" end="4277" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653724" start="4285" end="4305" title="Quadrant Bus Station" label="Quadrant Bus Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398615" start="4314" end="4320" title="Banwen" label="Banwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457436" start="4484" end="4501" title="Seven Sisters RFC" label="Seven Sisters RFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="4540" end="4551" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4775" end="4829" title=":Category:People from Seven Sisters, Neath Port Talbot" label=":Category:People from Seven Sisters, Neath Port Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398798" start="4838" end="4859" title="Richard Ithamar Aaron" label="Richard Ithamar Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382906" start="4875" end="4887" title="Ruth Bidgood" label="Ruth Bidgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378756" start="4896" end="4907" title="Phil Davies (rugby union)" label="Phil Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548804" start="4924" end="4940" title="Geraint F. Lewis" label="Geraint F. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="4955" end="4967" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="4975" end="4995" title="University of Sydney" label="University of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="4997" end="5006" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5052" end="5065" title="Dennis Gethin" label="Dennis Gethin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038022" start="5085" end="5102" title="Welsh Rugby Union" label="Welsh Rugby Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290508" wikidata="Q3298343" url="?curid=290508" title="Seven Sisters Road">
<text>Seven Sisters Road is a road in north London, England which runs within the boroughs of Islington, Hackney and Haringey. It is an extension of Camden Road, running from Holloway Road (the A1 road) at the Nags Head crossroads then on to another crossroads with Blackstock Road and Stroud Green Road. It carries on uphill alongside Finsbury Park to Manor House, and from there downhill to the junction with Tottenham High Road (the A10 road) at Seven Sisters Corner. The road was authorised in 1829 and constructed in 1833 by the Metropolitan Turnpike Trust. Seven Sisters Road is part of the A503. The stretch running past Finsbury Park is open to the park on the west side, and on the east side are large Victorian villas now used mainly as hotels .

The &quot;Seven Sisters&quot; after which the road is named were seven trees located opposite its junction with Tottenham High Road. This is made clear in the legislation authorising its construction, where the route of the road was described as running &quot;from the &quot;Stamford Hill Road&quot; in the Parish of &quot;Tottenham&quot; , in the said County of &quot;Middlesex&quot;, nearly opposite to certain Trees called the &quot;Seven Sisters&quot;&quot;.

This junction is known as Wards Corner, reflecting the name of the large department store that stood on this corner. The Hetchins bicycle shop and frame factory were situated in Seven Sisters Road, on the site of what is now Apex House.

In the early morning hours of 19 June 2017, a man rammed a vehicle, hitting pedestrians on Seven Sisters Road near the Finsbury Park Mosque. One person was killed and about 10 were injured during the attack.

==Buildings==
Notable buildings along the road include:

* The Rainbow Theatre
* The Sir George Robey (pub; demolished 2015)
* Finsbury Park station (side entrance)

==References in popular culture==
Welsh singer Shirley Bassey was a resident of Seven Sisters Road during the 1950s before she became famous.

The 1979 single &quot;Saturday Night (Beneath the Plastic Palm Trees)&quot; by the Leyton Buzzards features the line &quot;I discovered heaven in the Seven Sisters Road&quot;. 

Portland, Oregon based rock band Dan Reed Network released a song written by Dan Reed called &quot;Seven Sisters Road&quot; on the album &quot;Slam&quot; in 1989. The song was also included on the album &quot;Live At Last&quot; in 1997. 

The Suede song &quot;By the Sea&quot; from the 1996 album &quot;Coming Up&quot; contains the line &quot;And we said our goodbyes to the bank, left Seven Sisters for a room in a seaside shack&quot;. 

Rob Fleming, the main character in Nick Hornby&#x27;s book &quot;High Fidelity&quot;, lives in Seven Sisters Road.

The Swedish singer Meja&#x27;s 1998 album &quot;Seven Sisters&quot; featured a track called Seven Sisters Road and contained the lyric &quot;I&#x27;m going home on the Seven Sisters Road&quot;.

London electropop band Real Lies released a 2015 single entitled Seven Sisters which followed their earlier single, of a similar road theme, &#x27;North Circular&#x27;.

The road is immortalised in the song &#x27;Seven Sisters&#x27; by London-based rock band Desperate Measures. It&#x27;s included on their 2024 album &quot;Sublime Destruction&quot;, released through Cadiz Music.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3298343" start="0" end="18" title="Seven Sisters Road" label="Seven Sisters Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="38" end="44" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q205817" start="88" end="97" title="London_Borough_of_Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q205679" start="99" end="106" title="London_Borough_of_Hackney" label="Hackney"/>
<link wikidata="Q213560" start="111" end="119" title="London_Borough_of_Haringey" label="Haringey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025807" start="143" end="154" title="Camden Road" label="Camden Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q124308" start="169" end="182" title="Holloway, London" label="Holloway Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648978" start="188" end="195" title="A1 road (London)" label="A1 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q123257" start="204" end="213" title="Nag&amp;#x27;s Head, London" label="Nags Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923379" start="260" end="275" title="Blackstock Road" label="Blackstock Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976133" start="280" end="297" title="Stroud Green Road" label="Stroud Green Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453189" start="330" end="343" title="Finsbury Park" label="Finsbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780499" start="347" end="358" title="Manor House, London" label="Manor House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828449" start="405" end="424" title="Tottenham High Road" label="Tottenham High Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648805" start="430" end="438" title="A10 road (Great Britain)" label="A10 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639390" start="443" end="463" title="Seven Sisters, London" label="Seven Sisters Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825294" start="528" end="555" title="Metropolitan Turnpike Trust" label="Metropolitan Turnpike Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660972" start="591" end="595" title="A503 road" label="A503"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828449" start="863" end="882" title="Tottenham High Road" label="Tottenham High Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454554" start="1336" end="1344" title="Hetchins" label="Hetchins"/>
<link wikidata="Q30335791" start="1512" end="1540" title="Finsbury Park attack" label="vehicle, hitting pedestrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328033" start="1572" end="1592" title="Finsbury Park Mosque" label="Finsbury Park Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288732" start="1725" end="1740" title="Rainbow Theatre" label="Rainbow Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q52422990" start="1743" end="1763" title="The Sir George Robey" label="The Sir George Robey"/>
<link wikidata="Q536796" start="1789" end="1810" title="Finsbury Park station" label="Finsbury Park station"/>
<link wikidata="Q234754" start="1875" end="1889" title="Shirley Bassey" label="Shirley Bassey"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="1980" end="1986" title="Single (music)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538138" start="2054" end="2069" title="Leyton Buzzards" label="Leyton Buzzards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="2149" end="2165" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q539803" start="2182" end="2198" title="Dan Reed Network" label="Dan Reed Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q826255" start="2392" end="2397" title="Suede (band)" label="Suede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376349" start="2452" end="2461" title="Coming Up (album)" label="Coming Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q313007" start="2623" end="2634" title="Nick Hornby" label="Nick Hornby"/>
<link wikidata="Q748075" start="2653" end="2666" title="High Fidelity (novel)" label="High Fidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q242589" start="2723" end="2727" title="Meja" label="Meja"/>
<link wikidata="Q16735061" start="2922" end="2931" title="Real Lies" label="Real Lies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290509" wikidata="Q2003342" url="?curid=290509" title="Neath">
<text>Neath (; ) is a market town and community situated in the Neath Port Talbot County Borough, Wales. The town had a population of 50,658 in 2011. The community of the parish of Neath had a population of 19,258 in 2011. Historically in Glamorgan, the town is located on the River Neath, east-northeast of Swansea.

==Etymology==
The town&#x27;s English name ultimately derives from &quot; the original Welsh name for the River Neath and is known to be Celtic or Pre-Celtic. A meaning of &#x27;shining&#x27; or &#x27;brilliant&#x27; has been suggested, as has a link to the older Indo-European root &quot; (simply meaning &#x27;river&#x27;).

As such, the town may share its etymology with the town of Stratton, Cornwall and the River Nidd in Northern England.

==History==
===Roman fort===

The town is located at a ford of the River Neath and its strategic situation is evident by a number of Celtic hill forts, surrounding the town. The Romans also recognised the area&#x27;s strategic importance and built an Auxiliary Fort on the river&#x27;s Western bank around 74 AD.

Much of the site is on the grounds of Dwr-y-Felin Comprehensive School but archaeological digs have also found gate-towers that extended out beyond the fort&#x27;s walls (a feature unique in Roman Britain) and a large Roman marching camp that would have accommodated thousands of troops. These finds indicate some of the unusual measures the Romans took during the resistance of the native Silures. The fort at Neath was abandoned around 125 AD for fifteen years and again around 170 AD for a century before the final Roman withdrawal around 320 AD.

The Antonine Itinerary () names &quot;&quot; (or ) as one of nine places in Roman Wales.

===Medieval period===

St Illtyd visited the Neath area and established a settlement in what is now known as Llantwit on the northern edge of the town. The church of St Illtyd was built at this settlement and was enlarged in Norman times. The Norman and pre-Norman church structure remains intact and active to day within the Church in Wales. The Welsh language name for Neath is , referring to the Norman Neath Castle, the English kings Henry II, John, and Edward I visited.

===Industrial and modern Neath===
Neath was a market town that expanded with the arrival of the Industrial Revolution in the 18th century with new manufacturing industries of iron, steel and tinplate. The Mackworth family, who owned the Gnoll Estate were prominent in the town&#x27;s industrial development. Coal was mined extensively in the surrounding valleys and the construction of canals and railways made Neath a major transportation centre and the Evans and Bevan families were major players in the local coal mining community as well as owning the Vale of Neath Brewery. Silica was mined in the area of Pontneddfechan, after Quaker entrepreneur William Weston Young invented the blast furnace silica firebrick, later moving brick production from the works at to the Green in Neath. The town continued as a market trading centre with a municipal cattle market run by W.B. Trick. Industrial development continued throughout the 20th century with the construction by BP of a new petroleum refinery at .

Admiral Lord Nelson stayed at the Castle Hotel en route to Milford Haven when the fleet was at anchor there. Lt. Lewis Roatley, the son of the landlord of the Castle Hotel, served as a Royal Marines officer with Nelson aboard in the Battle of Trafalgar.

The River Neath is a navigable estuary and Neath was a river port until recent times. The heavy industries are no more; the town is now a commercial and tourism centre. Attractions for visitors are the ruins of the Cistercian Neath Abbey, the Gnoll Park, and Neath Indoor Market.

Neath hosted the National Eisteddfod of Wales in 1918, 1934 and 1994.

==Notable people==
:&quot;See :Category:People from Neath&quot;

*Roger Blake (1957– ), actor, entertainer and impressionist;
*Mark Bowen (1963–, b. Briton Ferry), Former manager of Reading FC, and played for Spurs and Norwich City;
*Hugh Dalton (1887–1962, b. Gnoll), Labour politician, Chancellor of the Exchequer, 1945–1947;
*Ben Davies (1993– ), Tottenham Hotspur, and Wales footballer;
*David Davies, (1877–1944), Welsh international rugby union forward;
*David John Davies (1879–1935), Australian archdeacon;
*Ivor Emmanuel (1927–2007), singer and actor;
*Hugh Evan-Thomas (1862–1928), vice-admiral;
*Craig Evans (born 1971), cricketer;
*Rebecca Evans (1963–, b. Pontrhydyfen), soprano;
*Sir Samuel Thomas Evans (1859–1918, b. Skewen), politician and judge;
*George Grant Francis (1814–1882, b. Swansea) historian who wrote &quot;Original Charters and Materials for a History of Neath&quot; (1845);
*Julie Gardner (1969– ), television producer previously responsible for &quot;Doctor Who&quot; and its spin-off &quot;Torchwood&quot;, former executive producer of Scripted Projects at BBC Worldwide and co-founder of Bad Wolf Productions;
*Richard Grant (born 1984), cricketer;
*Cecil Griffiths (1900–1945), winner of an Olympic gold medal in the 4x400m relay at the 1920 Antwerp Olympics;
*Howel Gwyn (1806–1888), Conservative politician;
*Thomas Haffield (1988– ), Great Britain Olympic swimmer;
*Carl Harris (1956– ), the former Leeds United and Wales international;
*Richard Hibbard (1983– ), Rugby player for the Dragons of the Pro14;
*T. G. H. James (1923–2009), Egyptologist and former Keeper of Egyptian Antiquities at the British Museum;
*Sir William Jenkins (1871–1944), former Neath MP;
*Katherine Jenkins (1980– ), popular classical mezzo-soprano;
*Margaret Townsend Jenkins (1843–1923), Canadian clubwoman
*Della Jones (1946, b. Tonna), mezzo-soprano;
*Kristian Lavercombe (1976–), actor and singer
*Geraint F. Lewis (1969– ), leading astrophysicist;
*Andy Legg (1966– ), former professional footballer and Wales international;
*Tony Lewis (1938–, b. Swansea), first Welshman to Captain an England cricket tour abroad, (India, Pakistan, 1972–73). Led Glamorgan to 2nd County Championship, 1969. Writer and broadcaster.
*Michael Locke (1979–), skateboarder and stuntman known for the TV series &quot;Dirty Sanchez&quot;
*Andrew Matthews-Owen, pianist;
*Ray Milland (1907–1986), Oscar-winning Hollywood actor;
*Craig Mitchell (1986– ), Welsh international rugby union forward;
*David Watts Morgan (1867–1933), miners&#x27; leader and politician;
*Sir William Nott (1782–1845), British General in India;
*Harry Parr-Davies (1914–1955), composer;
*Jessie Penn-Lewis (1861–1927), missioner and revivalist;
*Gary Pickford-Hopkins (1948–2013) singer, composer and guitarist; 
*Sir Arthur Pugh (1870–1955, b. Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire), trade unionist, moved to his father&#x27;s birthplace, Neath, 1894;
*Henry Habberley Price (1899–1984), philosopher;
*Walter Enoch Rees (1863–1949), rugby administrator;
*Andrew Rhodes (1977– ), civil servant, Registrar and Chief Operating Officer of Swansea University
*Paul Rhys (1963– ), actor;
*Craig Richards (1959– ), former professional footballer
*Connor Roberts (1995– ), Welsh international footballer;
*Will Roberts (1907–2000, b. Ruabon, Denbighshire), artist, moved to Neath 1918;
*Peter Shreeves (1940– ), former Spurs and Sheffield Wednesday manager;
*Samuel Charles Silkin, Baron Silkin of Dulwich (1918–1988), barrister and politician, Attorney-General, 1974–1979;
*Tony Skuse (1956–), darts player
*Jonathan Spratt (1986– ), Welsh rugby player
*William Squire (1917–1989), actor;
*David Thaxton (1982– ), West End performer
*Brian Thomas (1940–2012), Wales rugby union lock who also played and managed Neath RFC;
*Bonnie Tyler (1951–, b. Skewen), pop star;
*Andrew Vicari (1938–2016), artist;
*Ron Waldron (1933– ), Welsh rugby coach;
*Alfred Russel Wallace (1823, b. Monmouthshire), evolutionary theorist, lived in Neath during 1841/2 and attended lectures given by the area&#x27;s scientific societies;
*Cyril Walters (1905–1992), Glamorgan cricketer and Captain of the England cricket team;
*Anna Letitia Waring (1823–1910), poet and hymn writer;
*Elijah Waring (1788–1857), writer; and
*Jane Williams [called Llinos] (1795–1873), singer and compiler of traditional Welsh music.

==Sport==

The Welsh Rugby Union was formed at a meeting held at the Castle Hotel in 1881. Neath Rugby Football Club, the famous and successful &quot;Welsh All Blacks&quot;, play at The Gnoll.

Motorcycle speedway was staged at the Abbey Stadium in Neath in 1962. The Welsh Dragons, led by New Zealander Trevor Redmond, raced with some success in the Provincial League but, because of local problems, a number of the &quot;home&quot; fixtures were raced at St Austell. The Dragons introduced the Australian rider Charlie Monk to British speedway. After a season at Long Eaton Archers, Monk went on to have considerable success at Glasgow. The team also featured South African Howdy Cornell. In the early 1960s there was also stock car racing held at Neath Abbey, opposite the monastery

Neath Athletic A.F.C. was the town&#x27;s largest football team, playing at Neath RFC&#x27;s ground, The Gnoll, and played in the top flight of Welsh football, the Welsh Premier League, until the club was wound up in 2012. In the 2006–07 season, Neath Athletic A.F.C. were promoted from the Welsh Football League First Division to the Welsh Premier League. Neath Athletic A.F.C. had an average of 300 supporters attending a domestic, Welsh Premier League game, which was typical of the Welsh Premier League.

==Administration==

After Neath became a municipal borough in 1835, the borough council was based at Neath Town Hall in Church Place before relocating to Gwyn Hall in Orchard Street in 1888. Neath District Council, which was formed in 1974, was absorbed into the larger unitary authority of Neath Port Talbot on 1 April 1996. The town encompasses the electoral wards of Neath East, Neath North, Neath South and Cimla.

For the House of Commons at Westminster, Neath and the surrounding area are part of the Neath constituency. , its Member of Parliament (MP) is Christina Rees of the Labour Party.

In the Senedd, the Neath Senedd constituency is represented by Jeremy Miles (Labour), and by the wider South Wales West electoral region which returns four additional Members of the Senedd (MSs).

==Climate==

As with the rest of the British Isles, Neath experiences a maritime climate with cool summers and mild winters, often high winds, and low sunshine levels.

==Education==

Dwr-y-Felin Comprehensive School is situated on the outskirts of the town, opposite a campus of NPTC Group (which was previously Neath Port Talbot College. Cefn Saeson Comprehensive School is in the village of Cimla. Two other comprehensive schools serve the town: Llangatwg Comprehensive School in Cadoxton and Ysgol Bae Baglan in Baglan.

==Transport==

Neath railway station is on the South Wales Main Line. Great Western Railway and Transport for Wales serve the station with services westbound to , Carmarthen and the West Wales Line and eastbound to Port Talbot Parkway, , and London Paddington. Trains also run via and to and Manchester Piccadilly.

Neath bus station is at Victoria Gardens, a five-minute walk from the railway station. National Express services call at the railway station. From Victoria Gardens, First Cymru provides direct inter-urban services to nearby Swansea and Port Talbot in addition to South Wales Transport who provide many similar local services.

The A465 skirts the town to the north east and provides a link to the M4.

==Plans==
In 2008 plans were announced to regenerate around of land in and around Neath town centre. The site once occupied by the previous civic centre was to be redeveloped as a new shopping centre. The area around the Milland Road Industrial Estate and with the area around the Neath Canal were also to be redeveloped. The proposals included an &quot;iconic&quot; golden rugby ball-shaped museum, a library, heritage centre and other new facilities.

In March 2008, the county&#x27;s new radio station, Afan FM, announced plans to install a new transmitter for the Neath area. This would give residents of Neath access to the radio station, which already transmitted to the neighbouring area of Port Talbot. The new transmitter for the Neath area was commissioned by Government regulator Ofcom on Thursday 23 October 2008.

== Galleries ==
==References==
==External links==

*History of Neath
*Neath Port Talbot Council Adult Learning Portal
*www.geograph.co.uk : photos of Neath and surrounding area
*Wiki style Map of the neath area
*Photo Archive Gallery of old Neath &amp; District</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2003342" start="0" end="5" title="Neath" label="Neath"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511725" start="16" end="27" title="market town" label="market town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630741" start="32" end="41" title="Community (Wales)" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q748078" start="58" end="90" title="Neath Port Talbot" label="Neath Port Talbot County Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="92" end="97" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857731" start="217" end="229" title="Historic counties of Wales" label="Historically"/>
<link wikidata="Q870815" start="233" end="242" title="Glamorgan" label="Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089585" start="271" end="282" title="River Neath" label="River Neath"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="302" end="309" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q653649" start="449" end="455" title="Proto-Celtic language" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394404" start="459" end="469" title="Pre-Celtic" label="Pre-Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142838" start="576" end="594" title="Indo-European root" label="Indo-European root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626529" start="698" end="716" title="Stratton, Cornwall" label="Stratton, Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916783" start="725" end="735" title="River Nidd" label="River Nidd"/>
<link wikidata="Q12743" start="813" end="817" title="ford (crossing)" label="ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089585" start="825" end="836" title="River Neath" label="River Neath"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="891" end="897" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q744099" start="898" end="908" title="hill forts" label="hill forts"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="936" end="942" title="Roman Britain" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362273" start="1009" end="1023" title="Roman auxiliaries in Britain" label="Auxiliary Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318343" start="1110" end="1142" title="Dwr-y-Felin Comprehensive School" label="Dwr-y-Felin Comprehensive School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1437" end="1469" title="Silures#Fierce resistance to Roman forces" label="resistance of the native Silures"/>
<link wikidata="Q512256" start="1627" end="1645" title="Antonine Itinerary" label="Antonine Itinerary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564724" start="1699" end="1710" title="Wales in the Roman Era" label="Roman Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639031" start="1736" end="1745" title="Illtud" label="St Illtyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="1938" end="1944" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q136693" start="1956" end="1962" title="Norman architecture" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089788" start="2039" end="2054" title="Church in Wales" label="Church in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="2060" end="2074" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh language"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="2151" end="2159" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="2161" end="2165" title="John, King of England" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="2171" end="2179" title="Edward I" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511725" start="2236" end="2247" title="market town" label="market town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="2286" end="2307" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="2365" end="2369" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="2371" end="2376" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556927" start="2381" end="2389" title="tinplate" label="tinplate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931782" start="2395" end="2411" title="Mackworth Baronets" label="Mackworth family"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="2498" end="2502" title="Coal" label="Coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="2576" end="2581" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="2587" end="2594" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="2769" end="2775" title="Silica" label="Silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228314" start="2801" end="2815" title="Pontneddfechan" label="Pontneddfechan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="2823" end="2829" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020235" start="2843" end="2863" title="William Weston Young" label="William Weston Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q181485" start="2877" end="2890" title="blast furnace" label="blast furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369000" start="2898" end="2907" title="firebrick" label="firebrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="3162" end="3164" title="BP" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="3174" end="3183" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q83235" start="3199" end="3218" title="Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount Nelson" label="Admiral Lord Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q991055" start="3258" end="3271" title="Milford Haven" label="Milford Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="3384" end="3397" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q171416" start="3432" end="3451" title="Battle of Trafalgar" label="Battle of Trafalgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089585" start="3458" end="3469" title="River Neath" label="River Neath"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="3485" end="3492" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="3669" end="3679" title="Cistercian" label="Cistercian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973162" start="3680" end="3691" title="Neath Abbey" label="Neath Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984496" start="3713" end="3732" title="Neath Indoor Market" label="Neath Indoor Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745177" start="3752" end="3780" title="National Eisteddfod of Wales" label="National Eisteddfod of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3836" end="3863" title=":Category:People from Neath" label=":Category:People from Neath"/>
<link wikidata="Q16188850" start="3872" end="3883" title="Roger Blake" label="Roger Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092611" start="3933" end="3943" title="Mark Bowen (footballer)" label="Mark Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18729" start="3988" end="3998" title="Reading FC" label="Reading FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="4015" end="4020" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18721" start="4025" end="4037" title="Norwich City FC" label="Norwich City"/>
<link wikidata="Q26207" start="4040" end="4051" title="Hugh Dalton" label="Hugh Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="4075" end="4081" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="4094" end="4121" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q93555" start="4135" end="4145" title="Ben Davies (footballer, born 1993)" label="Ben Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234750" start="4198" end="4210" title="David Harris Davies" label="David Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q130287071" start="4267" end="4284" title="D. J. Davies (archdeacon)" label="David John Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099383" start="4322" end="4335" title="Ivor Emmanuel" label="Ivor Emmanuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q520341" start="4368" end="4384" title="Hugh Evan-Thomas" label="Hugh Evan-Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180944" start="4413" end="4424" title="Craig Evans (Welsh cricketer)" label="Craig Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301732" start="4450" end="4463" title="Rebecca Evans (singer)" label="Rebecca Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412772" start="4500" end="4523" title="Samuel Thomas Evans" label="Sir Samuel Thomas Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539858" start="4571" end="4591" title="George Grant Francis" label="George Grant Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800397" start="4712" end="4725" title="Julie Gardner" label="Julie Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="4789" end="4799" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q390120" start="4829" end="4838" title="Torchwood" label="Torchwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071905" start="4896" end="4909" title="BBC Worldwide" label="BBC Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q85744869" start="4928" end="4948" title="Bad Wolf (production company)" label="Bad Wolf Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326022" start="4951" end="4964" title="Richard Grant (cricketer)" label="Richard Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q717007" start="4990" end="5005" title="Cecil Griffiths" label="Cecil Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q636830" start="5032" end="5050" title="Olympic gold medal" label="Olympic gold medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q230057" start="5058" end="5070" title="4x400m relay" label="4x400m relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8128" start="5078" end="5099" title="1920 Summer Olympics" label="1920 Antwerp Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q19664611" start="5102" end="5112" title="Howel Gwyn" label="Howel Gwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790335" start="5152" end="5167" title="Thomas Haffield" label="Thomas Haffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596210" start="5210" end="5221" title="Carl Harris (footballer)" label="Carl Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="5243" end="5255" title="Leeds United" label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149806" start="5282" end="5297" title="Richard Hibbard" label="Richard Hibbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q82216" start="5329" end="5336" title="Dragons (rugby union)" label="Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002" start="5344" end="5349" title="Pro14" label="Pro14"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424156" start="5352" end="5366" title="T. G. H. James" label="T. G. H. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="5442" end="5456" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013539" start="5459" end="5478" title="William Jenkins (Labour politician)" label="Sir William Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q272581" start="5510" end="5527" title="Katherine Jenkins" label="Katherine Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q23988345" start="5572" end="5597" title="Margaret Townsend Jenkins" label="Margaret Townsend Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q546364" start="5631" end="5642" title="Della Jones" label="Della Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q31745124" start="5677" end="5696" title="Kristian Lavercombe" label="Kristian Lavercombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548804" start="5724" end="5740" title="Geraint F. Lewis" label="Geraint F. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849138" start="5776" end="5785" title="Andy Legg" label="Andy Legg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350202" start="5853" end="5863" title="Tony Lewis" label="Tony Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962128" start="6044" end="6057" title="Michael Locke (stuntman)" label="Michael Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228269" start="6123" end="6136" title="Dirty Sanchez (TV series)" label="Dirty Sanchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757910" start="6144" end="6164" title="Andrew Matthews-Owen" label="Andrew Matthews-Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q181774" start="6176" end="6187" title="Ray Milland" label="Ray Milland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138615" start="6233" end="6247" title="Craig Mitchell (rugby player)" label="Craig Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240884" start="6300" end="6318" title="David Watts Morgan" label="David Watts Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580155" start="6369" end="6385" title="William Nott (British general)" label="Sir William Nott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671484" start="6426" end="6443" title="Harry Parr-Davies" label="Harry Parr-Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q459764" start="6468" end="6485" title="Jessie Penn-Lewis" label="Jessie Penn-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47458804" start="6526" end="6547" title="Gary Pickford-Hopkins" label="Gary Pickford-Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800035" start="6594" end="6609" title="Sir Arthur Pugh" label="Sir Arthur Pugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057705" start="6625" end="6636" title="Ross-on-Wye" label="Ross-on-Wye"/>
<link wikidata="Q23129" start="6638" end="6651" title="Herefordshire" label="Herefordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751249" start="6723" end="6744" title="Henry Habberley Price" label="Henry Habberley Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964728" start="6772" end="6789" title="Walter E. Rees" label="Walter Enoch Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q26897353" start="6825" end="6838" title="Andrew Rhodes" label="Andrew Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q979114" start="6925" end="6934" title="Paul Rhys" label="Paul Rhys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181370" start="6953" end="6967" title="Craig Richards (footballer)" label="Craig Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q20878221" start="7010" end="7024" title="Connor Roberts (footballer, born 1995)" label="Connor Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003042" start="7068" end="7080" title="Will Roberts" label="Will Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770481" start="7096" end="7102" title="Ruabon" label="Ruabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q650682" start="7104" end="7116" title="Denbighshire" label="Denbighshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176927" start="7149" end="7163" title="Peter Shreeves" label="Peter Shreeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="7181" end="7186" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19498" start="7191" end="7210" title="Sheffield Wednesday" label="Sheffield Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412628" start="7221" end="7242" title="Samuel Charles Silkin" label="Samuel Charles Silkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="7307" end="7323" title="Attorney-General" label="Attorney-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823432" start="7337" end="7347" title="Tony Skuse" label="Tony Skuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16231553" start="7371" end="7386" title="Jonathan Spratt" label="Jonathan Spratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020156" start="7417" end="7431" title="William Squire" label="William Squire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240329" start="7453" end="7466" title="David Thaxton" label="David Thaxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925023" start="7497" end="7509" title="Brian Thomas (rugby player)" label="Brian Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q156491" start="7586" end="7598" title="Bonnie Tyler" label="Bonnie Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758799" start="7630" end="7643" title="Andrew Vicari" label="Andrew Vicari"/>
<link wikidata="Q285258" start="7666" end="7677" title="Ron Waldron" label="Ron Waldron"/>
<link wikidata="Q160627" start="7708" end="7729" title="Alfred Russel Wallace" label="Alfred Russel Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q207176" start="7740" end="7753" title="Monmouthshire" label="Monmouthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526811" start="7878" end="7891" title="Cyril Walters" label="Cyril Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767193" start="7967" end="7986" title="Anna Laetitia Waring" label="Anna Letitia Waring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361007" start="8023" end="8036" title="Elijah Waring" label="Elijah Waring"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761282" start="8063" end="8076" title="Maria Jane Williams" label="Jane Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038022" start="8170" end="8187" title="Welsh Rugby Union" label="Welsh Rugby Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521270" start="8246" end="8271" title="Neath RFC" label="Neath Rugby Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q12137653" start="8337" end="8346" title="The Gnoll" label="The Gnoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q750080" start="8349" end="8368" title="Motorcycle speedway" label="Motorcycle speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839393" start="8459" end="8473" title="Trevor Redmond" label="Trevor Redmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252664" start="8506" end="8523" title="Speedway Provincial League" label="Provincial League"/>
<link wikidata="Q772614" start="8612" end="8622" title="St Austell" label="St Austell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242750" start="8720" end="8738" title="Long Eaton Invaders" label="Long Eaton Archers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566935" start="8785" end="8792" title="Glasgow Tigers (speedway)" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q905968" start="8942" end="8963" title="Neath Athletic A.F.C." label="Neath Athletic A.F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1521270" start="9018" end="9027" title="Neath RFC" label="Neath RFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916191" start="9086" end="9100" title="Welsh football" label="Welsh football"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="9106" end="9126" title="Welsh Premier League" label="Welsh Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223688" start="9233" end="9254" title="Welsh Football League" label="Welsh Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q518343" start="9492" end="9509" title="municipal borough" label="municipal borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q29490153" start="9552" end="9567" title="Neath Town Hall" label="Neath Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623773" start="9605" end="9614" title="Gwyn Hall" label="Gwyn Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="9721" end="9738" title="unitary authority" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q748078" start="9742" end="9759" title="Neath Port Talbot" label="Neath Port Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="9802" end="9816" title="electoral ward" label="electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261445" start="9821" end="9831" title="Neath East" label="Neath East"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984497" start="9833" end="9844" title="Neath North" label="Neath North"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984503" start="9846" end="9857" title="Neath South" label="Neath South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120138" start="9862" end="9867" title="Cimla" label="Cimla"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="9878" end="9894" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053099" start="9958" end="9963" title="Neath (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Neath"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="9984" end="10004" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q20648332" start="10013" end="10027" title="Christina Rees" label="Christina Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q832685" start="10035" end="10047" title="Welsh Labour" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="10057" end="10063" title="Senedd Cymru – Welsh Parliament" label="Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984487" start="10069" end="10094" title="Neath (Senedd constituency)" label="Neath Senedd constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q24706040" start="10113" end="10125" title="Jeremy Miles" label="Jeremy Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q832685" start="10127" end="10133" title="Welsh Labour" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568795" start="10153" end="10169" title="South Wales West (Senedd electoral region)" label="South Wales West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406079" start="10217" end="10238" title="Member of the Senedd" label="Members of the Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="10284" end="10297" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="10319" end="10335" title="maritime climate" label="maritime climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318343" start="10431" end="10463" title="Dwr-y-Felin Comprehensive School" label="Dwr-y-Felin Comprehensive School"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713648" start="10527" end="10537" title="NPTC Group" label="NPTC Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984498" start="10560" end="10585" title="Neath Port Talbot College" label="Neath Port Talbot College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057273" start="10587" end="10619" title="Cefn Saeson Comprehensive School" label="Cefn Saeson Comprehensive School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120138" start="10641" end="10646" title="Cimla" label="Cimla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10696" end="10726" title="Llangatwg Comprehensive School" label="Llangatwg Comprehensive School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016593" start="10730" end="10738" title="Cadoxton, Neath Port Talbot" label="Cadoxton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10743" end="10759" title="Ysgol Bae Baglan" label="Ysgol Bae Baglan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477613" start="10763" end="10769" title="Baglan, Neath Port Talbot" label="Baglan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059430" start="10787" end="10808" title="Neath railway station" label="Neath railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581668" start="10819" end="10840" title="South Wales Main Line" label="South Wales Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419438" start="10842" end="10863" title="Great Western Railway (train operating company)" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878180" start="10868" end="10887" title="Transport for Wales Rail" label="Transport for Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234479" start="10935" end="10945" title="Carmarthen railway station" label="Carmarthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986969" start="10954" end="10969" title="West Wales Line" label="West Wales Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945743" start="10987" end="11006" title="Port Talbot Parkway railway station" label="Port Talbot Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q214788" start="11014" end="11031" title="Paddington railway station" label="London Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q600367" start="11064" end="11085" title="Manchester Piccadilly railway station" label="Manchester Piccadilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q494829" start="11094" end="11105" title="bus station" label="bus station"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479582" start="11175" end="11191" title="National Express Coaches" label="National Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452894" start="11253" end="11264" title="First Cymru" label="First Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649339" start="11419" end="11423" title="A465 road" label="A465"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638174" start="11485" end="11487" title="M4 motorway" label="M4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984507" start="11771" end="11782" title="Neath Canal" label="Neath Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042481" start="11996" end="12003" title="Afan FM" label="Afan FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072019" start="12188" end="12199" title="Port Talbot" label="Port Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="12281" end="12286" title="Ofcom" label="Ofcom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="290512" wikidata="Q946031" url="?curid=290512" title="Antonine Maillet">
<text>Antonine Maillet, , (10 May 1929 – 17 February 2025) was an Acadian novelist, playwright and scholar.

== Early life and education ==
Maillet was born on 10 May 1929 in Bouctouche, New Brunswick as one of nine children in her family. Her mother died when she was 14 and her father died 10 years after. Following high school, Maillet received her BA from the Collège Notre-Dame d&#x27;Acadie in 1950, followed by an MA from the Université de Moncton in 1959. She then received her PhD in literature in 1971 from the Université Laval. Her thesis is entitled &quot;Rabelais et les traditions populaires en Acadie&quot;. 

== Career ==
Maillet taught literature and folklore at the collège Notre-Dame d&#x27;Acadie (1954–1960), the Université de Moncton (1965–1967), the Collège des Jésuites de Québec (1968–1969), the Université Laval (1971–1974), and the Université de Montréal between (1974–1975). She later worked for Radio-Canada in Moncton as a scriptwriter and host. In 1988, Maillet hosted the French-language Leaders&#x27; Debate for Radio-Canada TV between Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, Liberal Party of Canada Leader John Turner, and New Democratic Party leader Ed Broadbent. From 1989 to 2000, she served as chancellor of the Université de Moncton.

In 1976, she was made an Officer of the Order of Canada and was promoted to Companion in 1981. Maillet was awarded the Royal Society of Canada&#x27;s Lorne Pierce Medal in 1980. In 1985, she was made an Officier des Arts et des Lettres de France and in 2005, she was inducted into the Order of New Brunswick. She was a member of the King&#x27;s Privy Council for Canada from 1 July 1992. This gave her the right to the honorific prefix &quot;The Honourable&quot; and the Post Nominal Letters &quot;PC&quot; for Life. In 1979 her work &quot;Pélagie-la-Charrette&quot; won the Prix Goncourt, making her the first non-European recipient. In 1994, the Collège Militaire Royal theatre group performed in a play by Maillet both at CMR and at Royal Military College of Canada. Maillet was granted an Honorary Degree from RMC in 1995. 

== Personal life and death ==
In 2022, Maillet publicly came out as a lesbian, having been in a relationship with actress and theatre director Mercedes Palomino until her death in 2006. Maillet died in her sleep during the night of 17 February 2025, at her home in Montreal. She was 95.

== Selected works ==
*&quot;Pointe-aux-Coques&quot; – 1958
*&quot;On a mangé la dune&quot; – 1962
*&quot;Les Crasseux&quot; – 1968
*&quot;La Sagouine&quot; – 1971
*&quot;Rabelais et les traditions populaires en Acadie&quot; – 1971 
*&quot;Don l&#x27;Orignal&quot; – 1972 (winner of the (1972 Governor General&#x27;s Award for Fiction)
*&quot;Par derrière chez mon père&quot; – 1972
*&quot;Gapi et Sullivan&quot; – 1973
*&quot;L&#x27;Acadie pour quasiment rien&quot; – 1973
*&quot;Mariaagélas&quot; – 1973
*&quot;Évangéline Deusse&quot; – 1975
*&quot;Gapi&quot; – 1976
*&quot;La veuve enragée&quot; – 1977
*&quot;Les Cordes-de-bois&quot; – 1977
*&quot;Le Bourgeois Gentleman&quot; – 1978
*&quot;Pélagie-la-Charrette&quot; – 1979 (winner of the Prix Goncourt)
*&quot;Cent ans dans les bois&quot; – 1981
*&quot;Christophe Cartier de la Noisette dit Nounours, conte jeunesse illustré par Hans Troxler
*&quot;La Contrebandière&quot; – 1981
*&quot;Les drolatiques, horrifiques et épouvantables aventures de Panurge, ami de Pantagruel&quot; – 1981
*&quot;La Gribouille&quot; – 1982
*&quot;Crache à pic&quot; – 1984
*&quot;Garrochés en paradis&quot; – 1986
*&quot;Le Huitième Jour&quot; – 1986
*&quot;Margot la folle&quot; – 1987
*&quot;L&#x27;oursiade&quot; – 1990
*&quot;William S.&quot; – 1991 
*&quot;Les confessions de Jeanne de Valois&quot; – 1992
*&quot;La nuit des rois&quot; – 1993
*&quot;La Fontaine ou la Comédie des Animaux&quot; – 1995 
*&quot;Le Chemin Saint-Jacques&quot; – 1996
*&quot;L&#x27;Île-aux-Puces&quot; – 1996
*&quot;Chronique d&#x27;une sorcière de vent&quot; – 1999
*&quot;Madame Perfecta&quot; – 2002
*&quot;Le temps me dure&quot; – 2003
*&quot;Pierre Bleu&quot; – 2006
*&quot;Le Mystérieux Voyage de Rien&quot; – 2009
*&quot;Fais confiance à la mer, elle te portera&quot; – 2010

==See also== 
*List of French Canadian writers from outside Quebec
*List of Quebec authors
*Acadian theatre

==References==
==External links==
* Antonine Maillet Profile at Government of Canada
* CBC Digital Archives – Antonine Maillet, Acadian Avenger
* La Sagouine, Acadian tourist attraction
* &quot;Antonine Maillet - The Possibilities Are Endless&quot; (Trailer), National Film Board of Canada
* &quot;Antonine Maillet, Novelist&quot; - Cover story, Atlantic Insight Magazine, July 1980
* Article at thecanadianencyclopedia.ca</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q946031" start="0" end="16" title="Antonine Maillet" label="Antonine Maillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q415054" start="60" end="67" title="Acadian" label="Acadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q125549168" start="169" end="179" title="Grand-Bouctouche" label="Bouctouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="346" end="348" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="BA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="415" end="417" title="Master of Arts" label="MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557355" start="427" end="448" title="Université de Moncton" label="Université de Moncton"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="480" end="483" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067935" start="515" end="531" title="Université Laval" label="Université Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="918" end="930" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Radio-Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q457334" start="934" end="941" title="Moncton" label="Moncton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126013" start="973" end="977" title="1988 Canadian federal election" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030828" start="1014" end="1034" title="Canadian leaders debates" label="Leaders&amp;#x27; Debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="1039" end="1051" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Radio-Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q128563" start="1078" end="1092" title="Brian Mulroney" label="Brian Mulroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="1094" end="1117" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q128568" start="1125" end="1136" title="John Turner" label="John Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="1142" end="1162" title="New Democratic Party" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q717744" start="1170" end="1182" title="Ed Broadbent" label="Ed Broadbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557355" start="1235" end="1256" title="Université de Moncton" label="Université de Moncton"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="1299" end="1314" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q94301" start="1378" end="1401" title="Royal Society of Canada" label="Royal Society of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332225" start="1409" end="1427" title="Lorne Pierce Medal" label="Lorne Pierce Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q948461" start="1544" end="1566" title="Order of New Brunswick" label="Order of New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631137" start="1592" end="1628" title="King&amp;#x27;s Privy Council for Canada" label="King&amp;#x27;s Privy Council for Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746176" start="1701" end="1715" title="The Honourable" label="The Honourable"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010858" start="1730" end="1750" title="List of post-nominal letters in Canada" label="Post Nominal Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q187300" start="1834" end="1847" title="Prix Goncourt" label="Prix Goncourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983872" start="1907" end="1930" title="Royal Military College Saint-Jean" label="Collège Militaire Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565941" start="1995" end="2027" title="Royal Military College of Canada" label="Royal Military College of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q979444" start="2231" end="2248" title="Mercedes Palomino" label="Mercedes Palomino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3212674" start="2514" end="2525" title="La Sagouine" label="La Sagouine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405731" start="2663" end="2709" title="1972 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="1972 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q187300" start="3119" end="3132" title="Prix Goncourt" label="Prix Goncourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243175" start="4192" end="4243" title="List of French Canadian writers from outside Quebec" label="List of French Canadian writers from outside Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242916" start="4245" end="4267" title="List of Quebec authors" label="List of Quebec authors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527579" start="4269" end="4284" title="Acadian theatre" label="Acadian theatre"/>
</links>
</doc>
