<doc id="276879" wikidata="Q61050" url="?curid=276879" title="Architecture of India">
<text>Indian architecture is rooted in the history, culture, and religion of India. Among several architectural styles and traditions, the best-known include the many varieties of Hindu temple architecture and Indo-Islamic architecture, especially Rajput architecture, Mughal architecture, South Indian architecture, and Indo-Saracenic architecture. Early Indian architecture was made from wood, which did not survive due to rotting and instability in the structures. Instead, the earliest existing architecture are made with Indian rock-cut architecture, including many Buddhist, Hindu, and Jain temples.

The Hindu temple architecture is divided into the Dravidian style of southern India and the Nagara style of northern India, with other regional styles. Housing styles also vary between regions, depending on climate.

The first major Islamic kingdom in India was the Delhi Sultanate, which led to the development of Indo-Islamic architecture, combining Indian and Islamic features. The rule of the Mughal Empire, when Mughal architecture evolved, is regarded as the zenith of Indo-Islamic architecture, with the Taj Mahal being the high point of their contribution. Indo-Islamic architecture influenced the Rajput and Sikh styles as well.

During the British colonial period, European styles including Neoclassical, Gothic Revival, and Baroque became prevalent across India. The amalgamation of Indo-Islamic and European styles led to a new style, known as the Indo-Saracenic style. After India&#x27;s independence, modernist ideas spread among Indian architects as a way of progressing from the colonial culture. Le Corbusier - who designed the city of Chandigarh - influenced a generation of architects towards modernism in the 20th century. The economic reforms of 1991 further bolstered the urban architecture of India as the country became more integrated with the world&#x27;s economy. Traditional &quot;Vastu Shastra&quot; remains influential in India&#x27;s architecture in the contemporary era.

==Neolithic period==
In South India, the Neolithic began in 6500 BCE and lasted till around 1400 BCE when the Megalithic transition period began. The South Indian neolithic period is characterized by ash mounds from 2500 BCE in the region of Karnataka, which later expanded into Tamil Nadu. 

Neolithic settlements have been found in the northwest (Kashmir), east (Bihar and Odisha), south (Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, and Andhra Pradesh), and the northeastern frontier (Meghalaya) of India.

The earliest clear evidence of the megalithic urn burials, discovered at various places in Tamil Nadu, date back to 1000 BCE. The most notable megalithic urn was discovered in Adichanallur, from Tirunelveli, where archaeologists from the Archaeological Survey of India unearthed 12 urns containing human skulls, skeletons and bones, husks, grains of charred rice and Neolithic celts, confirming the presence of the Neolithic period 2800 years ago.

The unearthed local and foreign antiquities (of art, architecture, customs, and rituals) depicted by the engravings on pottery and other artifacts, indicate that the prehistoric people of the Burzahom established contact with Central Asia and South West Asia, and had links to the Gangetic plains and peninsular India.

Megalithic burial sites have been found scattered all over the subcontinent. The Neolithic period lasted up until 3300 BCE, overlapping with the following Early Harappan (Chalcolithic to Early Bronze Age) period. One of the earliest Neolithic sites in India is Lahuradewa in the Middle Ganga region and Jhusi near the confluence of the Ganga and Yamuna rivers, both dating to around the 7th millennium BCE.

==Indus Valley Civilization (2600 BCE – 1900 BCE)==

The Indus Valley civilization covered a large area around and beyond the Indus River basin in the late Bronze Age of India. In its mature phase, from about 2600 to 1900 BCE, the civilization developed several cities marked by great uniformity within and between sites, including Harappa, Lothal, and the UNESCO World Heritage Site Mohenjo-daro.

The civic and town planning and the engineering of these cities are deemed remarkable, but the building designs are &quot;of a startling utilitarian character&quot;. There are granaries, drains, water-courses and tanks, but neither palaces nor temples have been identified, though cities have a central raised and fortified &quot;citadel&quot;. Mohenjo-daro has wells which may be the predecessors of the stepwell. As many as 700 wells have been discovered in just one section of the city, leading scholars to believe that &#x27;cylindrical brick lined wells&#x27; were invented by the Indus Valley Civilization.

Architectural decoration is extremely minimal, though there are &quot;narrow pointed niches&quot; inside some buildings. Most of the art found is in miniature forms like seals, and mainly in terracotta, but there are very few larger sculptures of figures. In most sites, fired mud-brick (not sun-baked as in Mesopotamia) is used exclusively as the building material, but a few sites, such as Dholavira, are in stone. Most houses have two storeys, and uniform sizes and plans. The large cities declined relatively quickly, for unknown reasons, so a less sophisticated village culture was left behind.

After the collapse of the Mature Harappan Period, some cities still remained urban and inhabited. Sites like Bet Dwarka in Gujarat, Kudwala (38.1 ha) in Cholistan, and Daimabad (20 Ha) in Maharashtra are considered urban. Daimabad (2000–1000 BC), developed a fortification wall with bastions in its Jorwe culture period (1400–1000 BC), and had public buildings, such as an elliptical temple and an apsidal temple. It also shows evidence of planning in the layout of rectangular houses, and streets or lanes, and planned streets. The area had risen to 50 hectares in with a population of 10,000 people. A long protection wall dated 1500 BCE was found at Bet Dwarka which was believed to be damaged and submerged following a sea storm.

==600 BCE—250 CE==
Indian architecture after the Indus Valley Civilization around the Maurya Empire, from 322 to 185 BCE, most likely used wood or recycled brick. Much of the remains discovered from this period onwards are of Indian rock-cut architecture, predominantly Buddhist.

The construction of Buddhist monastic buildings began before the death of the Buddha, around 400 BCE. This first generation of monasteries only survive in floor-plans, notably the Jivakarama vihara in Bihar.

Important features of the period&#x27;s architecture include, walled and moated cities with large gates and multi-storied buildings, wooden chaitya arches for roofs, and further structures above solid storeys. The reliefs of Sanchi, dated to the 1st centuries BCE-CE, denote places such as Kushinagar or Rajagriha as splendid walled cities, as in the &quot;Royal cortege leaving Rajagriha&quot; or &quot;War over the Buddha&#x27;s relics&quot;. These views of ancient Indian cities are relied on for the understanding of ancient Indian urban architecture.

In the case of the Mauryan capital Pataliputra (near Patna), we have Greek accounts, and that of Faxian; Megasthenes (a visitor around 300 BCE) mentions 564 towers and 64 gates in the city walls. Modern excavations have uncovered a &quot;massive palisade of teak beams held together with iron dowels&quot;. A huge &quot;apadana&quot;-like hall with eighty sandstone columns shows clear influence from contemporary Achaemenid Persia. The single massive sandstone Pataliputra capital shows clear Hellenistic features, reaching India via Persia. The famous Ashoka columns show great sophistication, and a variety of influences in their details. In both these cases a now-vanished Indian predecessor tradition in wood is likely.
Such a tradition is extremely clear in the case of the earliest-known examples of rock-cut architecture, the state-sponsored Barabar caves in Bihar, personally dedicated by Ashoka circa 250 BCE. The entrance of the Lomas Rishi Cave there has a sculpted doorway that clearly copies a wooden style in stone, which is a recurrent feature of rock-cut caves for some time. These artificial caves exhibit an amazing level of technical proficiency, the extremely hard granite rock being cut in geometrical fashion and given the Mauryan polish, also found on sculpture. Later rock-cut viharas, occupied by monastic communities, survive, mostly in Western India, and in Bengal the floor-plans of brick-built equivalents survive. The elaborately decorated facades and &quot;chaitya halls&quot; of many rock-cut sites are believed to reflect vanished free-standing buildings elsewhere.

The Buddhist stupa, a dome shaped monument, was used in India as a commemorative monument associated with storing sacred relics. The stupa architecture was adopted in Southeast and East Asia, where it became prominent as a Buddhist monument used for enshrining sacred relics. Guard rails—consisting of posts, crossbars, and a coping—became a feature of safety surrounding a stupa. Temples—build on elliptical, circular, quadrilateral, or apsidal plans—were constructed using brick and timber. The Indian gateway arches, the &quot;torana&quot;, reached East Asia with the spread of Buddhism. Some scholars hold that &quot;torii&quot; derives from the torana gates at the Buddhist historic site of Sanchi (3rd century BCE – 11th century CE).

Rock-cut stepwells in India date from 200 to 400 CE. Subsequently, the construction of wells at Dhank (550–625 CE) and stepped ponds at Bhinmal (850–950 CE) took place. Cave temples became prominent throughout western India, incorporating various unique features to give rise to cave architecture in places such as the caves at Ajanta and Ellora.

A very important development, the emergence of the shikara or temple tower, is today best evidenced by the Buddhist Mahabodhi Temple. This was already several centuries old when the first very vertical structure replaced an Ashokan original, apparently around 150–200 CE. The current brick-built tower, probably a good deal larger, dates to the Gupta period, in the 5th or 6th centuries.

==Gupta architecture==

The Gupta period chiefly represented a hiatus in Indian rock-cut architecture; the first wave of construction was completed before the empire was assembled, and the second wave began in the late 5th century, after its end. For example, an early group of the Ajanta Caves was crafted by 220 CE and a later group was made around 460 CE. Nonetheless, most of the first surviving free-standing structures in India are accredited to the Gupta period, in particular, the beginnings of Hindu temple architecture. As Milo Beach writes, &quot;Under the Guptas, India was quick to join the rest of the medieval world in a passion for housing precious objects in stylized architectural frameworks&quot;, the &quot;precious objects&quot; primarily suggesting the icons of gods.

The caves at Ajanta, including Elephanta and Ellora (respectively Buddhist, Hindu, mixed, and Jain) were produced under other dynasties in Central India. Ellora was made after the Gupta period, yet they primarily reflect the monumentality and balance of Guptan style. The Ajanta Caves contain the most significant and mature survivals of painting and the periods, mainly in palace paintings. The Hindu Udayagiri Caves record connections with the dynasty and its ministers, and the Dashavatara Temple at Deogarh, one of the earliest to survive, showcases important sculpture.

North Indian Hindu temples that have survived after the 5th century Udayagiri Caves in Madhya Pradesh include those at Tigawa (early 5th century), Sanchi Temple 17 (similar, but respectively Hindu and Buddhist), Deogarh, Parvati Temple, Nachna (465), Bhitargaon, the largest Gupta brick temple to survive, and Lakshman Brick Temple, Sirpur (600–625). Gop Temple in Gujarat (c. 550 or later) is an oddity, with no surviving close comparator.

There are a number of broad models of Guptan-style temples, however, the most common plan exemplifies small but massively built stone prostyle buildings with a sanctuary and a columned porch, apparent at Tigawa and Sanchi Temple 17 and continued today. Both temples have flat roofs over the sanctuary, which would become uncommon by about the 8th century, as seen in the design of the Mahabodhi Temple, Bhitargaon, Deogarh and Gop, with high superstructures of different shapes. The Chejarla Kapoteswara temple further demonstrates the continuance of free-standing chaitya-hall temples with barrel roofs, with many smaller wooden examples.

==Temple architecture==

Whereas the visible stylistic forms of the temple vary greatly and have a complicated development, the basic elements of a Hindu temple remain the same across all periods and styles. The most essential feature is the inner sanctuary, the &quot;garbhagriha&quot; or &quot;womb-chamber&quot;, where the primary &quot;murti&quot; of a deity is housed in. Around this chamber are other structures and buildings, at times covering several acres. On the exterior, the garbhagriha is crowned by a tower-like &quot;shikhara&quot;, also called the &quot;vimana&quot; in the south. The temple may include an ambulatory for &quot;parikrama&quot; (circumambulation), one or more mandapas or congregation halls, and sometimes an antarala antechamber and porch between the garbhagriha and mandapa.

Larger temples may include more shrines or buildings, either connected together or detached, with smaller temples in the compound. The entire temple compound is usually enclosed by a wall, and at times, raised on a plinth (&quot;adhiṣṭhāna&quot;). Large areas of the structure are often decorated with carving, including figurative images of deities and other religious figures.

By the 7th century CE, most key features of the Hindu temple were established in theoretical texts on temple architecture and building methods. Three styles of temple were identified: &quot;nagara&quot;, &quot;dravida&quot; and &quot;vesara.&quot; The styles were sometimes mixed, and not yet associated with specific regions in India. For example, in Karnataka, the group of 7th and 8th-century temples at Pattadakal famously mixes forms later associated with both north and south, as does that at Aihole, which still includes apsidal chaitya hall-type plans.

&quot;Nagara&quot; commonly refers to North Indian temple styles, most easily recognised by a high and curving &quot;shikhara&quot; over the sanctuary. &quot;Dravida&quot; or Dravidian architecture is the broad South Indian style, possessing a lower superstructure over the sanctuary. Instead, the structure has a straight profile, rising in a series of terraces to form a decorated pyramid. Today, this is often dwarfed in larger temples by the far larger gopuram outer gateways, a much later development. The ancient term vesara is also used to describe a temple style with characteristics of both the northern and southern traditions. These attributes come from the Deccan and other fairly central parts of India. Although disagreement stands on the exact period and styles that vesara represents, the term is mainly assigned to the northern tradition, but are regarded as a kind of northern &quot;dravida&quot; by others.

===Nagara architecture===
====Early====
Excluding earlier structures in timber-based architecture, hardly any remains of Nagara Hindu temples exist from before the Gupta dynasty in the 4th century CE. The rock-cut Udayagiri Caves are among the most important early sites. The earliest preserved Hindu temples are simple cell-like stone temples, some rock-cut and others structural, as at Sanchi. By the 6th or 7th century, these evolved into high shikhara stone superstructures. However, there is inscriptional evidence, such as the ancient Gangadhara inscription from around 424, that towering temples predated the 6th or 7th century, and they were made from more perishable material. These temples have not survived.
Early North Indian temples that have survived after the 5th century Udayagiri Caves in Madhya Pradesh include, Deogarh, Parvati Temple, Nachna (465 CE), Lalitpur District (c. 525), Lakshman Brick Temple, Sirpur (600–625 CE); Rajiv Lochan temple, and Rajim (7th-century CE).

Pre-7th century CE South Indian style stone temples have not survived. However, early South Indian temples that have survived, though in ruins, include the diverse styles at Mahabalipuram, from the 7th and 8th centuries. According to Meister, the Mahabalipuram temples are &quot;monolithic models of a variety of formal structures all of which already can be said to typify a developed &quot;Tamil Architecture&quot; (South Indian) order&quot;. They suggest a tradition and a knowledge base existing in South India by the time of the early Chalukya and Pallava era when these were built. Other examples are found in Aihole and Pattadakal.

From between about the 7th and 13th centuries a large number of temples and their ruins have survived (though far fewer than once existed). Many regional styles developed, very often following political divisions, as large temples were typically built with royal patronage. In the north, Muslim invasions from the 11th century onwards reduced the building of temples, and saw the loss of many existing ones. The south also witnessed Hindu-Muslim conflict that affected the temples, but the region was relatively less affected than the north. In the late 14th century, the Hindu Vijayanagara Empire came to power and controlled much of South India. During this period, the distinctive very tall gopuram gatehouse actually a late development, from the 12th century or later, typically added to older large temples.

The recently constructed Ram Mandir in Ayodhya is constructed as per the Nagara style.

====Later====
North Indian temples showed increased elevation of the wall and elaborate spire by the 10th century. On the shikara, the oldest form, called &quot;latina&quot;, with wide shallow projections running up the sides, developed alternative forms with many smaller &quot;spirelets&quot; (&quot;urushringa&quot;). Two varieties of these are called &quot;sekhari&quot;, where the sub-spires extend vertically, and &quot;bhumija&quot;, where individual sub-spires are arrayed in rows and columns.

Richly decorated temples—including the complex at Khajuraho—were constructed in Central India. Examples include the Lingaraja Temple at Bhubaneshwar in Odisha, Sun Temple at Konark in Odisha, Brihadeeswarar Temple at Thanjavur in Tamil Nadu. Indian traders brought Indian architecture to South East Asia through various trade routes.

Styles called &quot;vesara&quot; include the early Badami Chalukya Architecture, Western Chalukya architecture, and finally Hoysala architecture. Other regional styles include those of Bengal, Kashmir and other Himalayan areas, Karnataka, Kalinga architecture, and Māru-Gurjara architecture.

Hoysala architecture is the distinctive building style developed under the rule of the Hoysala Empire in the region historically known as &quot;Karnata&quot;, today&#x27;s Karnataka, India, between the 11th and the 14th centuries. Large and small temples built during this era remain as examples of the Hoysala architectural style, including the Chennakesava Temple at Belur, the Hoysaleswara temple at Halebidu, and the Kesava Temple at Somanathapura. Other examples of fine Hoysala craftmanship are the temples at Belavadi, Amrithapura, and Nuggehalli. Study of the Hoysala architectural style has revealed a negligible Indo-Aryan influence while the impact of Southern Indian style is more distinct. A feature of Hoysala temple architecture is its attention to detail and skilled craftsmanship. The temples of Belur and Halebidu are proposed UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Approximately 100 Hoysala temples survive today.

==== Temples of Khajuraho ====

The Khajuraho Temples are a group of Hindu and Jain temples located in the town of Khajuraho, in the Chhatarpur District of Madhya Pradesh, India. The temples were built between 950 and 1050 by the Chandela dynasty.

Khajuraho is home to 25 sandstone temples in total, although only 20 remain mostly intact. The beautiful carvings on these temples, which show themes from Hindu mythology as well as other facets of everyday life in ancient India, are well-known. Both Hindu and Jain architectural influences may be seen in their design. The temples are split into three groups: the Western group, the Eastern group, and the Southern group. The Western group has the greatest popularity and draws the most tourists.

The Khajuraho Temples were declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1986, and they continue to be a popular tourist attraction in India. According to UNESCO, the Khajuraho Temples &quot;are a masterpiece of Indian art, with their unique architecture and stunning sculptures.

===Dravidian style===

Dravidian style &quot;or&quot; the South Indian temple style is an architectural idiom in Hindu temple architecture that emerged in the southern part of the Indian subcontinent or South India and in Sri Lanka, reaching its final form by the sixteenth century. It is seen in Hindu temples, and the most distinctive difference from north Indian styles is the use of a shorter and more pyramidal tower over the garbhagriha or sanctuary called a vimana, where the north has taller towers, usually bending inwards as they rise, called shikharas. However, for modern visitors to larger temples the dominating feature is the high gopura or gatehouse at the edge of the compound; large temples have several, dwarfing the vimana; these are a much more recent development. There are numerous other distinct features such as the &quot;dwarapalakas&quot; – twin guardians at the main entrance and the inner sanctum of the temple and &quot;goshtams&quot; – deities carved in niches on the outer side walls of the garbhagriha.

&quot;Mayamata&quot; and &quot;Manasara shilpa&quot; texts estimated to be in circulation by 5th to 7th century, is a guidebook on Dravidian style of Vastu Shastra design, construction, sculpture and joinery technique. &quot;Isanasivagurudeva paddhati&quot; is another text from the 9th century describing the art of building in India in south and central India.

From 300 BCE – 300 CE, the greatest accomplishments of the kingdoms of the early Chola, Chera and the Pandyan kingdoms included brick shrines to deities Kartikeya, Shiva, Amman and Vishnu. Several of these have been unearthed near Adichanallur, Kaveripoompuharpattinam and Mahabalipuram, and the construction plans of these sites of worship were shared to some detail in various poems of Sangam literature.

The architecture of the rock-cut temples, particularly the &quot;rathas&quot;, became a model for south Indian temples. Architectural features, particularly the sculptures, were widely adopted in South India. Descendants of the sculptors of the shrines are artisans in contemporary Mahabalipuram.

The Badami Chalukyas also called the Early Chalukyas, ruled from Badami, Karnataka in the period 543–753 and spawned the Vesara style called Badami Chalukya Architecture. The finest examples of their art are seen in Pattadakal, Aihole and Badami in northern Karnataka. Over 150 temples remain in the Malaprabha basin.

The Rashtrakuta contributions to art and architecture are reflected in the splendid rock-cut shrines at Ellora and Elephanta, situated in present-day Maharashtra. It is said that they altogether constructed 34 rock-cut shrines, but most extensive and sumptuous of them all is the Kailasanatha temple at Ellora. The temple is a splendid achievement of Dravidian art. The walls of the temple have marvellous sculptures from Hindu mythology including Ravana, Shiva and Parvathi while the ceilings have paintings. These projects spread into South India from the Deccan. The architectural style used was partly Dravidian. They do not contain any of the &quot;shikharas&quot; common to the &quot;Nagara&quot; style and were built on the same lines as the Virupaksha temple at Pattadakal in Karnataka.

Vijayanagara architecture of the period (1336–1565) was a notable building style evolved by the Vijayanagar empire that ruled most of South India from their capital at Vijayanagara on the banks of the Tungabhadra River in present-day Karnataka. The architecture of the temples built during the reign of the Vijayanagara empire had elements of political authority. This resulted in the creation of a distinctive imperial style of architecture which featured prominently not only in temples but also in administrative structures across the deccan. The Vijayanagara style is a combination of the Chalukya, Hoysala, Pandya and Chola styles which evolved earlier in the centuries when these empires ruled and is characterised by a return to the simplistic and serene art of the past. The South Indian temple consists essentially of a square-chambered sanctuary topped by a superstructure, tower, or spire and an attached pillared porch or hall (maṇḍapa or maṇṭapam), enclosed by a peristyle of cells within a rectangular court. The external walls of the temple are segmented by pilasters and carry niches housing sculpture. The superstructure or tower above the sanctuary is of the kūṭina type and consists of an arrangement of gradually receding stories in a pyramidal shape. Each story is delineated by a parapet of miniature shrines, square at the corners and rectangular with barrel-vault roofs at the centre.

The Warangal Fort, Thousand Pillar Temple, and Ramappa Temple are examples of Kakatiya architecture.

===Vesara Architecture===
The style adopted in the region that today lies in the modern states of Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh (Deccan) which served in its geographical position as buffer between north and south, that architectural style has mix of both the Nagara and Dravidian temple styles. While some scholars consider the buildings in this region as being distinctly either nagara or dravida, a hybridised style that seems to have become popular after the mid-seventh century, is known in some ancient texts as vesara. In the southern part of the Deccan, i.e., in the region of Karnataka is where some of the most experimental hybrid styles of vesara architecture are to be found.

An important temple is Papnath temple, dedicated to Lord Shiva. The temple is one of the best early examples of the South Indian tradition. By contrast other eastern Chalukyan Temples, like the Mahakuta, five kilometres from Badami, and the Swarga Brahma temple at Alampur show a greater assimilation of northern styles from Odisha and Rajasthan. At the same time the Durga temple at Aihole is unique having an even earlier style of an apsidal shrine which is reminiscent of Buddhist chaitya halls and is surrounded by a veranda of a later kind, with a shikhara that is stylistically like a nagara one. The Lad Khan temple at Aihole in Karnataka seems to be inspired by the wooden-roofed temples of the hills, except that it is constructed out of stone.

Historians agree that the &quot;vesara&quot; style originated in what is today Karnataka. According to some, the style was started by the Chalukyas of Badami (500-753AD) whose Early Chalukya or Badami Chalukya architecture built temples in a style that mixed some features of the &quot;nagara&quot; and the &quot;dravida&quot; styles, for example using both the northern shikhara and southern vimana type of superstructure over the sanctum in different temples of similar date, as at Pattadakal. However, Adam Hardy and others regard this style as essentially a form of Dravida. This style was further refined by the Rashtrakutas of Manyakheta (750-983AD) in sites such as Ellora.

Though there is clearly a good deal of continuity with the Badami or Early Chalukya style, other writers only date the start of Vesara to the later Western Chalukyas of Kalyani (983–1195 AD), in sites such as Lakkundi, Dambal, Itagi, and Gadag, and continued by the Hoysala empire (1000–1330 AD).

The Hoysala temples at Belur, Halebidu and Somanathapura are leading examples of the Vesara style. These temples are now proposed as a UNESCO world heritage site.

==Jain architecture==


Jain temple architecture is generally close to Hindu temple architecture, and in ancient times Buddhist religious architecture. Normally the same builders and carvers worked for all religions, and regional and period styles are generally similar. The basic layout of a Hindu and most Jain temples has consisted of a small garbhagriha or sanctuary for the main murti or cult images, over which the high superstructure rises, then one or more larger mandapa halls.

The earliest survivals of Jain architecture are part of the Indian rock-cut architecture tradition, initially shared with Buddhism, and by the end of the classical period with Hinduism. Very often numbers of rock-cut Jain temples and monasteries share a site with those of the other religions, as at Udayagiri, Bava Pyara, Ellora, Aihole, Badami, and Kalugumalai. The Ellora Caves are a late site, which contains temples of all three religions, as the earlier Buddhist ones give way to later Hindu excavations.

There is considerable similarity between the styles of the different religions, but often the Jains placed large figures of one or more of the 24 tirthankaras in the open air rather than inside the shrine. These statues later began to be very large, normally standing nude figures in the &quot;kayotsarga&quot; meditation position (which is similar to standing at attention). Examples include the Gopachal rock cut Jain monuments and the Siddhachal Caves, with groups of statues, and a number of single figures including the 12th-century Gommateshwara statue, and the modern Statue of Vasupujya and, largest of all at tall, the Statue of Ahimsa.

The main buildings of the largest Dilwara temples are surrounded by &quot;cloister&quot; screens of &quot;devakulikā&quot; shrines, and are fairly plain on the outer walls of these; in the case of the Vimal Vasahi this screen was a later addition, around the time of the second temple. Surrounding the main temple with a curtain of shrines was to become a distinctive feature of the Jain temples of West India, still employed in some modern temples.

Mostly funded by private individuals or groups, and catering to a smaller population, Jain temples tend to be at the small or middle end of the range of sizes, but at pilgrimage sites they may cluster in large groups – there are altogether several hundred at Palitana, tightly packed within several high-walled compounds called &quot;tuks&quot; or &quot;tonks&quot;. Temple charitable trusts, such as the very large Anandji Kalyanji Trust, founded in the 17th century and now maintaining 1,200 temples, play a very important role in funding temple building and maintenance.

===Māru-Gurjara architecture===
Regional differences in Hindu temples are largely reflected in Jain ones, except that Māru-Gurjara architecture or the &quot;Solanki style&quot; has become to some extent a pan-Indian, indeed pan-global Jain style. This is a particular temple style from Gujarat and Rajasthan (both regions with a strong Jain presence) that originated in both Hindu and Jain temples around 1000, but became enduringly popular with Jain patrons, spreading to other parts of India and the global Jain diaspora of the last century. It has remained in use, in somewhat modified form, to the present day, indeed also becoming popular again for some Hindu temples in the last century. The style is seen in the groups of pilgrimage temples at Dilwara on Mount Abu, Taranga, Girnar and Palitana.

Interiors are more lavishly decorated, with elaborate carving on most surfaces. In particular, Jain temples often have small low domes carved on the inside with a highly intricate rosette design. Another distinctive feature is &quot;flying&quot; arch-like elements between pillars, touching the horizontal beam above in the centre, and elaborately carved. These have no structural function, and are purely decorative. The style developed large pillared halls, many open at the sides, with Jain temples often having one closed and two pillared halls in sequence on the main axis leading to the shrine.

The Māru-Gurjara style did not represent a radical break with earlier styles. The previous styles in north-west India, and the group of Jain temples of Khajuraho, forming part of the famous Khajuraho Group of Monuments are very largely in the same style as their Hindu companions, which were mostly built between 950 and 1050. They share many features with the Māru-Gurjara style: high plinths with many decorated bands on the walls, lavish figurative and decorative carving, balconies looking out on multiple sides, ceiling rosettes, and others, but at Khajuraho the great height of the shikharas is given more emphasis. There are similarities with the contemporary Hoysala architecture from much further south. In both of these styles architecture is treated sculpturally.
==Indo-Islamic architecture==

The Indo-Islamic architecture began under influence of Islam in Indian subcontinent around the 7th century AD. Many of these styles are also influence by regional Indian architecture. It also Replace Indian Trabeate style with Arcuate style. Turks and Persians, who inherited wealth of various design from Sassanian and Byzantine empire, shaped and influenced the architecture.

Islamic buildings initially adapted the skills of a workforce trained in earlier Indian traditions to their own designs. Unlike most of the Islamic world, where brick tended to predominate, India had highly skilled builders well used to producing stone masonry of extremely high quality. Alongside the architecture developed in Delhi and prominent centres of Mughal culture such as Agra, Lahore and Allahabad, a variety of regional styles developed in regional kingdoms like the Bengal, Gujarat, Deccan, Jaunpur and Kashmir Sultanates. Following the collapse of the Mughal Empire, regional nawabs such as in Lucknow, Hyderabad and Mysore continued to commission and patronize the construction of Mughal-commissioned architecture in the princely states.

=== Sultanate ===
Significant regional styles developed in the independent sultanates formed when the Tughlaq empire weakened in the mid-14th century, and lasted until most were absorbed into the Mughal Empire in the 16th century. Apart from the sultanates of the Deccan Plateau, Gujarat, Bengal, and Kashmir, the architecture of the Malwa and Jaunpur sultanates also left some significant buildings.

==== Delhi Sultanate ====

The start of the Delhi Sultanate in 1206 under Qutb al-Din Aibak introduced a large Islamic state to India, using Central Asian styles. The important Qutb Complex in Delhi was begun under Muhammad of Ghor, by 1199, and continued under Qutb al-Din Aibak and later sultans. The Quwwat-ul-Islam Mosque, now a ruin, was the first structure. Like other early Islamic buildings it re-used elements such as columns from destroyed Hindu and Jain temples, including one on the same site whose platform was reused. The arches were corbelled in the traditional Indian way. Alai Minar, a minaret twice the size of Qutb Minar was commissioned by Alauddin Khilji but never completed. Other examples include the Tughlaqabad Fort and Hauz Khas Complex.

Another very early mosque, begun in the 1190s, is the Adhai Din Ka Jhonpra in Ajmer, Rajasthan, built for the same Delhi rulers, again with corbelled arches and domes. Here Hindu temple columns (and possibly some new ones) are piled up in threes to achieve extra height. Both mosques had large detached screens with pointed corbelled arches added in front of them, probably under Iltutmish a couple of decades later.

At Ajmer the smaller screen arches are tentatively cusped, for the first time in India. By around 1300 true domes and arches with voussoirs were being built; the ruined Tomb of Balban (d. 1287) in Delhi may be the earliest survival. The Alai Darwaza gatehouse at the Qutb complex, from 1311, still shows a cautious approach to the new technology, with very thick walls and a shallow dome, only visible from a certain distance or height. Bold contrasting colours of masonry, with red sandstone and white marble, introduce what was to become a common feature of Indo-Islamic architecture, substituting for the polychrome tiles used in Persia and Central Asia. The pointed arches come together slightly at their base, giving a mild horseshoe arch effect, and their internal edges are not cusped but lined with conventionalized &quot;spearhead&quot; projections, possibly representing lotus buds. Jali, stone openwork screens, are introduced here; they already had been long used in temples.

By the time of Tughlaqs Islamic architecture in India had adopted some features of earlier Indian architecture, such as the use of a high plinth, and often mouldings around its edges, as well as columns and brackets and hypostyle halls. After the death of Firoz the Tughlaqs declined, and the following Delhi dynasties were weak. Most of the monumental buildings constructed were tombs, although the impressive Lodi Gardens in Delhi (adorned with fountains, &quot;charbagh&quot; gardens, ponds, tombs and mosques) were constructed by the late Lodi dynasty. The architecture of other regional Muslim states was often more impressive.

==== Deccan Sultanates ====
Dawood Shah of Bahamani Sultanate ruled for very short amount of time in 1378 but invented a new style of tomb, comprising two similar, domed structures on a single basement, a style not seen anywhere outside Kalaburagi. Firuz Shah who died in 1422 copied the double-chambered style but made his tomb much simpler. The black basalt door jambs reminiscent of temple pillars, the recessed arches bearing stucco floral work, arches bearing stucco floral work, and the chajjas borne on brackets that resemble those found in temples all become common features in later Bahmani architecture. Rangin Mahal in Bidar Fort, built by Ali Barid Shah in the 1500s. While the beautiful tile mosaics on some of its walls and the luminescent mother-of-pearl inlays on black basalt are Persian in style, its carved wooden pillars and brackets are clearly derived from local residential architecture.

The main architectural activities for the Barid Shahi rulers were building garden tombs. The tomb of Ali Barid Shah (1577) is the most notable monument in Bidar. The tomb consists of a lofty domed chamber, open on four sides, located in the middle of a Persian four-square garden. The &quot;Rangin Mahal&quot; in Bidar, built during the reign of Ali Barid Shah, is a complete and exquisitely decorated courtly structure. Other important monuments in Bidar from this period are the tomb of Qasim II and the Kali Masjid.

Amongst the major architectural works in the Bijapur Sultanate, one of the earliest is the unfinished Jami Masjid, which was begun by Ali Adil Shah I in 1576. It has an arcaded prayer hall, with fine aisles, and has an impressive dome supported by massive piers. One of the most impressive monuments built during the reign of Ibrahim II was the Ibrahim Rouza which was originally planned as a tomb for queen Taj Sultana, but was later converted into the tomb for Ibrahim Adil Shah II and his family. This complex, completed in 1626, consists of a paired tomb and mosque.

Notable buildings of the Bahmani and Deccan sultanates in the Deccan include the Charminar, Mecca Masjid, Qutb Shahi tombs, Madrasa Mahmud Gawan and Gol Gumbaz.The greatest monument in Bijapur is the Gol Gumbaz, the mausoleum of Muhammad Adil Shah, which was completed in 1656, and whose hemispherical dome measures across.

One of the earliest architectural achievements of the Qutb Shahi dynasty is the fortified city of Golconda, which is now in ruins. In the 16th century, Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah decided to shift the capital to Hyderabad, east of Golconda. Here, he constructed the most original monument in the Deccan, the Charminar, in the heart of the new city. This monument, completed in 1591, has four minarets, each .

==== Bengal Sultanate ====
The style of the Bengal Sultanate mostly used brick, with characteristic features being indigenous Bengali elements, such as curved roofs, corner towers and complex terracotta ornamentation. which were with blended. One feature in the sultanate was the relative absence of minarets. Many small and medium-sized medieval mosques, with multiple domes and artistic niche mihrabs, were constructed throughout the region.These features are also seen in the Choto Sona Mosque (around 1500), which is in stone, unusually for Bengal, but shares the style and mixes domes and a curving &quot;paddy&quot; roof based on village house roofs made of vegetable thatch. Such roofs feature even more strongly in later Bengal Hindu temple architecture, with types of style such as the do-chala, Jor-bangla Style, and char-chala. For larger mosques, Bengali architects multiplied the numbers of domes, with a nine-domed formula (three rows of three) being one option, surviving in four examples, all 15th or 16th century and now in Bangladesh, although there were others with larger numbers of domes.

The largest mosque in the Indian subcontinent was the 14th century Adina Mosque. Built of stone demolished from temples, it featured a monumental ribbed barrel vault over the central nave, the first such giant vault used anywhere in the subcontinent. The mosque was modelled on the imperial Sassanian style of Persia. The Sultanate style flourished between the 14th and 16th centuries. A provincial style influenced by North India evolved in Mughal Bengal during the 17th and 18th centuries. The Mughals also copied the Bengali do-chala roof tradition for mausoleums in North India.

Although the description in Pandua, the ancient capital, shows mainly Persian culture in courts, we find one of the first attempts at fusing together the Islamic and Bengali style of architecture under Ilyas Shahi dynasty who ruled then. Under Jalaludin emerged the &#x27;Bengal&#x27; style of mosques. With Jalaludin&#x27;s reign we see the beginnings of a trend of Muslim ruling dynasty that grounded itself in local culture rather than seeking legitimacy from Delhi or Mecca. Upon his return to Delhi from his first Bengal expedition, Firoz Shah Tughlaq built Kotla Mosque, which bear a striking resemblance to the Bengal style.

==== Kashmir ====

By 1339, Shams-ud-din Shah Mir of the Shah Mir dynasty established a sultanate encompassing the region of Kashmir (consisting of modern-day Gilgit-Baltistan, Azad Kashmir, Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, and Aksai Chin), allowing for the gradual Islamization of the region and the hybridization of Persianate culture and architecture with the indigenous Buddhist styles of Kashmir. In the capital at Srinagar in modern Indian-administered Kashmir, Sikandar Shah Mir constructed the Jamia Masjid, a large wooden congregational mosque that incorporates elements two cultures, that is, it has been erected in Persian style but its minar is topped with umbrella-shaped finial, which is in similitude with Buddhist pagoda structure, as well as the wooden Khanqah-e-Moulah mosque. Also in Srinagar are the Aali Masjid and the Tomb of Zain-ul-Abidin. Two 14th-century wooden mosques in Gilgit-Baltistan are the Chaqchan Mosque in Khaplu (1370) and the Amburiq Mosque in Shigar. Both have stone-built cores with elaborately carved wooden exterior galleries, at Amburiq on two levels, in an adaptation of traditional local styles.

==== Gujarat sultanate ====

Under the Gujarat Sultanate, independent between 1407 and 1543, Gujarat was a prosperous regional sultanate under the rule of the Muzaffarid dynasty, who built lavishly, particularly in the capital, Ahmedabad, in its distinctive style of Indo-Islamic architecture. The sultanate commissioned mosques such as the Jami Masjid of Ahmedabad, Jama Masjid at Champaner, Jami Masjid at Khambhat, Qutbuddin Mosque, Rani Rupamati Mosque, Sarkhej Roza, Sidi Bashir Mosque, Kevada Mosque, Sidi Sayyed Mosque, Nagina Mosque and Pattharwali Masjid, as well as structures such as Teen Darwaza, Bhadra Fort and the Dada Harir Stepwell in Ahmedabad.

The distinctive Indo-Islamic architecture style of Gujarat drew micro-architectural elements from earlier Maru-Gurjara architecture and employed them in mihrab, roofs, doors, minarets and facades. In the 15th century, the Indo-Islamic style of Gujarat is especially notable for its inventive and elegant use of minarets. They are often in pairs flanking the main entrance, mostly rather thin and with elaborate carving at least at the lower levels. Some designs push out balconies at intervals up the shaft; the most extreme version of this was in the lost upper parts of the so-called &quot;shaking minarets&quot; at the Jama Mosque, Ahmedabad, which fell down in an earthquake in 1819. This carving draws on the traditional skills of local stone-carvers, previously exercised on Hindu temples in the Māru-Gurjara and other local styles.

Indo-Islamic architecture style of Gujarat presages many of the architectural elements later found in Mughal architecture, including ornate &quot;mihrabs&quot; and minarets, &quot;jali&quot; (perforated screens carved in stone), and &quot;chattris&quot; (pavilions topped with cupolas).

The Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park, the 16th century capital of Gujarat Sultanate, documents the early Islamic and pre-Mughal city that has remained without any change.

=== Mughal Empire ===

The most famous Indo-Islamic style is Mughal architecture. Mughal art and architecture, a characteristic Indo-Islamic-Persian style flourished on the Indian subcontinent during the Mughal empire (1526–1857). This new style combined elements of Islamic art and architecture, which had been introduced to India during the Delhi Sultanate (1192–1398) and had produced great monuments such as the Qutb Minar, with features of Persian art and architecture. Its most prominent examples are the series of imperial mausolea, which started with the pivotal Tomb of Humayun, but is best known for the Taj Mahal.

It is known for features including monumental buildings with large, bulbous onion domes, surrounded by gardens on all four sides, and delicate ornamentation work, including &quot;pachin kari&quot; decorative work and &quot;jali&quot;-latticed screens. Pietra dura or ‘Parchinkari’ rose to prominence under patronage of Emperors specially under Shah Jahan. Originating from Italy, it found its way to Mughal courts via trade route. It adapted to its present distinct feature of floral art by the hands of local artisans and Persian influence.

Mughals brought in Persian style into Indian Architecture. The character and structure of Mughal buildings displayed a uniform character and structure. Some of the main features of the Mughal architecture are mentioned below.

# Large halls
# Very large vaulted gateways
# Delicate ornamentation
# Bulbous domes
# Slender Minarets with cupolas at the 4 corners

The Red Fort at Agra (1565–74) and the walled city of Fatehpur Sikri (1569–74) are among the architectural achievements of this time—as is the Taj Mahal, built as a tomb for Queen Mumtaz Mahal by Shah Jahan (1628–58). Employing the double dome, the recessed archway, the depiction of any animal or human—an essential part of the Indian tradition—was forbidden in places of worship under Islam.

Mughal architecture reached its zenith during the reign of the emperor Shah Jahan (1628–58), its crowning achievement being the magnificent Taj Mahal. This period is marked by a fresh emergence in India of Persian features that had been seen earlier in the tomb of Humayun. The use of the double dome, a recessed archway inside a rectangular fronton, and parklike surroundings are all typical of this period. Symmetry and balance between the parts of a building were always stressed, while the delicacy of detail in Shah Jahan decorative work has seldom been surpassed.

The Taj Mahal does contain tilework of plant ornaments. The architecture during the Mughal Period, with its rulers being of Turco-Mongol origin, has shown a notable blend of Indian style combined with the Islamic. Taj Mahal in Agra, India is one of the wonders of the world.

Mughal gardens are gardens built by the Mughals in the Islamic style. This style was influenced by Persian gardens. They are built in the &quot;char bagh&quot; structure, which is a quadrilateral garden layout based on the four gardens of Paradise mentioned in the Qur&#x27;an. This style is intended to create a representation of an earthly utopia in which humans co-exist in perfect harmony with all elements of nature.

The quadrilateral garden is divided by walkways or flowing water into four smaller parts. Significant use of rectilinear layouts are made within the walled enclosures. Some of the typical features include pools, fountains and canals inside the gardens.

== Regional styles ==
=== Rajput Architecture ===

Rajput Architecture represents different types of buildings, which may broadly be classed either as secular or religious. The secular buildings are of various scales. These include temples, forts, stepwells, gardens, and palaces. The forts were specially built for defense and military purposes due to the Islamic invasions.

Mughal architecture and painting is claimed to have influenced indigenous Rajput styles of art and architecture.

The Hill Forts of Rajasthan (Amer, Chittor, Gagron, Jaisalmer, Kumbhalgarh, Ranthambore), a group of six forts built by various Rajput kingdoms and principalities during the medieval period are among the best examples of Rajput Architecture. The ensemble is also a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Other forts include the Mehrangarh Fort and Jaigarh Fort.

Most of the population of Rajasthan is Hindu, and there has historically been a considerable Jain minority; this mixture is reflected in the many temples of the region. Māru-Gurjara architecture, or &quot;Solaṅkī style&quot; is a distinctive style that began in Rajasthan and neighbouring Gujarat around the 11th century, and has been revived and taken to other parts of India and the world by both Hindus and Jains. This represents the main contribution of the region to Hindu temple architecture. The Dilwara Jain Temples of Mount Abu built between the 11th and 13th centuries CE are the best-known examples of the style. The Mughal architecture greatly influenced indigenous Rajput styles of art and architecture.

Some architectural style innovated and influenced by Rajasthani architectural styles are:-
# Ornated buildings or Havelis
# Chhatris
# Delicate ornamentation
# Jharokha
# Stepwell or Bawdi
In Hindi, the &quot;Chhatri&quot; refers to a canopy or umbrella. Chhatris are the elevated pavilions with dome shaped porches. The Chhatris are used as a symbol to portray the fundamentals of admiration and pride in its style of architecture.

A Jharokha is a kind of suspended enclosed gallery. A significant purposes it served was to allow women to witness the events and society outside the palace life without being noticed. This eventually lead to Jharokha Darshan, adapted by Mughals, which allowed essential and direct communication between the emperors or kings and the general public.

The walled city of Jaipur was formed in 1727 by Kacchwaha Rajput ruler Jai Singh II, and is &quot;a unique example of traditional Hindu town planning&quot;, following the precepts set out in much Hindu texts. Subsequently, the City Palace, Hawa Mahal, Rambagh Palace, Jal Mahal and Albert Hall Museum were also built. Udaipur also has several palaces, including the Bagore-ki-Haveli, now a museum, built in the 18th century.

Rajput architecture continued well into the 20th and 21st centuries, as the rulers of the princely states of British India commissioned vast palaces and other buildings, such as the Albert Hall Museum, Lalgarh Palace, and Umaid Bhawan Palace. These usually incorporated European styles as well, a practice which eventually led to the Indo-Saracenic style

=== Sikh Architecture ===
Sikh architecture is heavily influenced by Mughal and Islamic styles. The onion dome, frescoes, in-lay work, and multi-foil arches, are Mughal influences, more specially from Shah Jahan&#x27;s period, whereas &quot;chattris&quot;, oriel windows, bracket supported eaves at the string-course, and ornamented friezes are derived from elements of Rajput architecture. Apart from religious buildings, Sikh architecture includes secular forts, &quot;bungas&quot; (residential places), palaces, and colleges.

====Gurudwara====
The religious structure is called &quot;gurdwara&quot; (a place where the Guru dwells). The word &quot;gurdwara&quot; is a compound of &quot;guru&quot; (guide or master) and &quot;dwara&quot; (gateway or seat). The Golden Temple in Amritsar and Hazur Sahib are examples.

Gurdwara buildings do not have to conform to any set architectural design. The only established requirements are: the installation of the Granth Sahib under a canopy or in a canopied seat, usually on a platform higher than the specific floor on which the devotees sit, and a tall Sikh pennant flag atop the building.

In the 21st century, more and more gurdwaras (especially within India) have been following the Harimandir Sahib pattern, a synthesis of Indo-Islamic and Sikh architecture. Most of them have square halls, stand on a higher plinth, have entrances on all four sides, and have square or octagonal domed sanctums usually in the middle. During recent decades, to meet the requirements of larger gatherings, bigger and better ventilated assembly halls, with the sanctum at one end, have become accepted style. The location of the sanctum, more often than not, is such as to allow space for circumambulation. Sometimes, to augment the space, verandahs are built to skirt the hall. A popular model for the dome is the ribbed lotus, topped by an ornamental pinnacle. Arched copings, kiosks and solid domelets are used for exterior decorations.

=== Maratha Architecture ===

The Maratha Rule from 17th to 19th Centuries, emerged after the Maratha&#x27;s victory over the Mughal Empire in the Maratha-Mughal Wars, Prominent buildings such as the Shaniwar Wada and Lal Mahal in Pune are examples. The decorative features of the mansions were “pointed arches, heavy carved stone brackets, narrow balconies projecting on rows of such brackets, domical shallow ceilings resting on a variety of squinches, the chief being the interwoven type”.

Many jyotirlinga temples were rebuilt by the Marathas after being destroyed by invading Islamic forces. Some examples are the Kashi Vishwanath, Mahakaleshwar, Trimbakeshwar, Grishneshwar temples. The ghats of Varanasi were also rebuilt under Maratha patronage, including the Dashashwamedh Ghat and Scindia Ghat.

The Maratha structures used both the local architectural style and the Maratha&#x27;s own distinct corinthian columns style. Because of the constant turmoil and protracted wars with Mughals, Nawabs, Afghans, and other forces, very little documentation of these efforts remain. Nevertheless, studies of these structures show that the main architectural elements were made from brick, wood, mortar and stone. Wood was most used element as it is easily and cheaply available in Maharashtra and Karnataka. The Historian Khafi Khan wrote about enchanting beauty of 16th Century wooden Palaces, temples and Forts However very few of these survived due to wars with Mughal Empire and comparatively short life of wooden structures than stone and marble structures. Forts were the main focus of Maratha architecture, decorated with Deccan-style pointed arches and elaborate woodwork.

Herman Goetz writes about their architectural style in his work ‘Five Thousand Years of Indian Art’: “The Maratha temples generally provided with a huge lampstand (deepmala), The wood work they used to decorate their palaces and other civil buildings was intricate and minute. Maratha art could have developed and attained a distinctive character but it was not possible because of the turbulent times of Medieval India.

=== Dzong Architecture ===

Dzongs are a type of fortified monastery with a distinctive architecture that are found mainly in Tibet, Bhutan and North and Northeastern part of India. The architecture is massive in style with towering exterior walls surrounding a complex of courtyards, temples, administrative offices, and monks&#x27; accommodation.Distinctive features include:
* High inward sloping walls of brick and stone painted white with few or no windows in the lower sections of the wall
* Use of a surrounding red ochre stripe near the top of the walls, sometimes punctuated by large gold circles
* Use of unique style flared roofs atop interior temples
* Massive entry doors made of wood and iron
* Interior courtyards and temples brightly colored in Buddhist-themed art motifs such as the ashtamangala or swastika
By tradition, dzongs are constructed without the use of architectural plans. Instead construction proceeds under the direction of a high lama who establishes each dimension by means of spiritual inspiration. Dzongs comprise heavy masonry walls surrounding one or more courtyards. The main functional spaces are usually arranged in two separate areas: the administrative offices; and the religious functions – including temples and monks&#x27; accommodation. This division between administrative and religious functions reflects the idealized duality of power between the religious and administrative branches of government.

This accommodation is arranged along the inside of the outer walls and often as a separate stone tower located centrally within the courtyard, housing the main temple, that can be used as an inner defensible citadel. The roofs are massively constructed in hardwood and bamboo, highly decorated at the eaves, and are constructed traditionally without the use of nails. They are open at the eaves to provide a ventilated storage area. They were traditionally finished with timber shingles weighted down with stones
=== Bengal Architecture ===
The architecture of Bengal, which comprises the modern country of Bangladesh and the Indian states of West Bengal, Tripura, and Barak Valley in Assam, has a long and rich history, blending indigenous elements from the Indian subcontinent, with influences from different parts of the world. Bengali architecture includes ancient urban architecture, religious architecture, rural vernacular architecture, colonial townhouses and country houses, and modern urban styles.

Ancient Bengali architecture reached its pinnacle during the Pala Empire (750–1120); this was Bengali-based and the last Buddhist imperial power in the Indian subcontinent. Most patronage was of Buddhist viharas, temples and stupas. Pala architecture influenced Tibetan and Southeast Asian architecture. The most famous monument built by the Pala emperors was the Grand Vihara of Somapura, now a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Historians believe Somapura was a model for the architects of Angkor Wat in Cambodia.

Distinctive architectural elements are:-
* Deul Temple - Originally influenced by Kalinga style, they were main temple style during 6th-10th century. It was the style of Jain and Hindu temple architecture of Bengal, where the temple lacks the usual mandapa beside the main shrine, and the main unit consists only of the shrine and a &quot;deul&quot; (shikhara) above it. It was revived in the 16th to 19th century. The later representatives of this style were generally smaller and included features influenced by Islamic architecture.
* Chala Temple - Chala style or Hut style temples were influenced by the vernacular architecture or rural Bengal. Thatched rooftops of the houses were either in form of &quot;do-chala&quot; type which has only two hanging roof tips on each side of a roof divided in the middle by a ridge or &quot;char-chala&quot; type, the two roof halves are fused into one unit and have a dome-like shape. The &quot;char-chala&quot; temples started coming up around the 17th century and profoundly adopted by Mughal and later the Rajput in their architectural styles.
* Ratna Temple - The curved roof of the temple is surmounted by one or more towers or pinnacles called &quot;ratna&quot; (jewel). The &quot;ratna&quot; style came up in the 15th-16th century. It was basically a mix of chala and deul architecture where small deul, or in some case domes, were used on the centre or corners of the chala (char chala) roof.
* Dalan Temple - With the comings of European colonists, a new form of temple style took place. Generally used by Zamindars or elite Bengalis, Dalan style became prominent in the 19th century. The flat-roofed (dalan) temples was easier to build and had incorporated many European elements, specially the arches. In the long run, this style lost its special identity as religious architecture and got mixed up with domestic architecture.
Deuls are located in the numerous rivers crisscrossed by stone-free alluvial and bush landscape of the southern Sundarbans settlements in the Indian state of West Bengal.

Most temples surviving in reasonable condition date from about the 17th century onwards, after temple building revived; it had stopped after the Muslim conquest in the 13th century. The roofing style of Bengali Hindu temple architecture is unique and closely related to the paddy roofed traditional building style of rural Bengal. The &quot;extensive improvisation within a local architectural idiom&quot; which the temples exhibit is often ascribed to a local shortage of expert Brahmin priests to provide the rather rigid guidance as to correct forms that governed temple architecture elsewhere. In the same way the terracotta reliefs often depict secular subjects in a very lively fashion.

In larger, and later, temples, small towers rise up from the centre or corners of the curving roof. These are straight-sided, often with conical roofs. They have little resemblance to a typical north Indian shikara temple tower. The pancharatna (&quot;five towers&quot;) and navaratna (&quot;nine towers&quot;) styles are varieties of this type.

The bungalow style is a notable architectural export of Bengal. The corner towers of Bengali religious buildings were replicated in medieval Southeast Asia. Bengali curved roofs, suitable for the very heavy rains, were adopted into a distinct local style of Indo-Islamic architecture, and used decoratively elsewhere in north India in Mughal architecture.

Structures like Rasmancha, built by King Bir Hambir, has an unusual elongated pyramidical tower, surrounded by hut-shaped turrets, which were very typical of Bengali roof structures of the time. Madan Mohan Temple was built in the &quot;ekaratna&quot; style, surmounted by a pinnacle along with carvings on the walls depicting scenes from the Ramayana, Mahabharata and the Puranas. Temples like Dakshineswar Kali Temple, features the Navratna style of roof.

Bengal is not rich in good stone for building, and traditional Bengali architecture mostly uses brick and wood, often reflecting the styles of the wood, bamboo and thatch styles of local vernacular architecture for houses. Decorative carved or moulded plaques of terracotta (the same material as the brick) are a special feature. The brick is extremely durable and disused ancient buildings were often used as a convenient source of materials by local people, often being stripped to their foundations over the centuries.

== European colonial architecture ==
As with the Mughals, under European colonial rule, architecture became an emblem of power, designed to endorse the occupying power. Numerous European countries invaded India and created architectural styles reflective of their ancestral and adopted homes. The European colonizers created architecture that symbolized their mission of conquest, dedicated to the state or religion.

The British, French, Dutch and the Portuguese were the main European powers that established colonies in India.

=== British Colonial Era: 1757–1947 ===
==== Indo-Saracenic ====

Britain&#x27;s legacy and heritage in the Indian subcontinent remains among others in buildings and infrastructure. The major cities during the period of British rule were Madras (Chennai), Calcutta, Bombay (Mumbai), New Delhi, Agra, Bangalore, Bankipore, Karachi, Nagpur, Bhopal&amp; Hyderabad, which saw the rise of Indo-Saracenic Revival architecture.

Black Town described in 1855 as &quot;the minor streets, occupied by the natives are numerous, irregular and of various dimensions. Many of them are extremely narrow and ill-ventilated ... a hallow square, the rooms opening into a courtyard in the centre.&quot; Garden houses were originally used as weekend houses for recreational use by the upper class British. Nonetheless, the garden house became ideal a full-time dwelling, deserting the fort in the 19th Century.

Mumbai (Bombay) has some of the most prominent examples of British colonial architecture. This included the gothic revival (Victoria terminus, University of Bombay, Rajabai Clock Tower, Bombay High Court, BMC Building), Indo-Saracenic (Prince of Wales Museum, Gateway of India, Taj Mahal Palace Hotel) and Art Deco (Eros Cinema, New India Assurance Building).

Madras and Calcutta were similarly bordered by water and division of Indian in the north and British in the south. An Englishwoman noted in 1750 &quot;the banks of the river are as one may say absolutely studded with elegant mansions called here as at Madras, garden houses.&quot; Esplanade-row is fronts the fort with lined palaces. Indian villages in these areas consisted of clay and straw houses which later transformed into the metropolis of brick and stone.The Chepauk Palace in the city, designed by Paul Benfield, is said to be the first Indo-Saracenic building in India. Since then, many of the colonial-era buildings in the city were designed in this style of architecture, which is most apparent around the Fort St George built in 1640. Most of these were designed by English architects Robert Fellowes Chisholm and Henry Irwin. The best examples of this style include the Madras High Court (built in 1892), Southern Railway headquarters, Ripon Building, Government Museum, Senate House of the University of Madras, Amir Mahal, Bharat Insurance Building, Victoria Public Hall and the College of Engineering. The Triumph of Labour, also known as the Labour statue, at the Marina Beach is an important landmark of Madras. Indo-Saracenic architecture evolved by combining Indian architectural features with European styles. Vincent Esch and George Wittet were pioneers in this style. The Victoria Memorial in Calcutta is the most effective symbolism of British Empire, built as a monument in tribute to Queen Victoria&#x27;s reign. The plan of the building consists of one large central part covered with a larger dome. Colonnades separate the two chambers. Each corner holds a smaller dome and is floored with marble plinth. The memorial stands on 26 hectares of garden surrounded by reflective pools.

The period of British rule saw wealthy Bengali families (especially zamindar estates) employing European firms to design houses and palaces. The Indo-Saracenic movement was strongly prevalent in the region. While most rural estates featured an elegant country house, the cities of Calcutta had widespread 19th and early 20th century urban architecture, comparable to London, Sydney or Auckland. Art deco influences began in Calcutta in the 1930s.

==== Romanesque-Italianate ====
The Italianate architectural style was popularised in early Victorian Britain and subsequently became an attractive form adopted in India in the later parts of the 19th century. The main characteristics of this style include imposing cornice structures, prominent cornice and corbels, Roman arches, arch headed or pedimented windows, flat or ‘hip’ roof, and windows with distinctive moulded caps. The one outstanding building in this class was the East Indian Railway Head Offices at Calcutta built in 1884.

==== Neoclassical ====
Neoclassical buildings are characterized by their magnificence of scale, the prominent use of columns, the use of geometric forms and symmetry, predominantly blank walls and the triangular pediment. Some large private houses were built in and around Kolkata by wealthy merchants. Examples of Neoclassical architecture in Indian public buildings include the British Residency, Hyderabad (1798) and Falaknuma Palace (1893) in Hyderabad, St Andrews Church in Madras (1821), Raj Bhawan (1803) and Metcalfe Hall (1844) in Kolkata, and Bangalore Town Hall (1935) in Bangalore.

=== Art Deco ===

The Art Deco movement of the early 20th century quickly spread to large parts of the world. The Indian Institute of Architects, founded in Bombay in 1929, played a prominent role in propagating the movement. Guided by their desire to emulate the west, the Indian architects were fascinated by the industrial modernity that Art Deco offered. The western elites were the first to experiment with the technologically advanced facets of Art Deco, and architects began the process of transformation by the early 1930s.

Mumbai has the world&#x27;s second-largest collection of Art Deco structures, after Miami. The New India Assurance Building, Eros Cinema and buildings along the Marine Drive in Mumbai are prime examples.

In Kolkata, the sole example of the Art Nouveau style, which preceded Art Deco, is the Esplanade Mansions opposite the Raj Bhavan, built in 1910.

=== Assam-type ===

Assam-type architecture is found in Assam and Sylhet region. The houses constructed using this style are generally termed as &quot;Assam-type&quot; houses, consisting usually one or more storeys. The houses are built to be earthquake proof, and are made from materials ranging from wood and bamboo to steel and concrete.

Assam Type houses are a type of designs developed by the colonial British administration in Assam after the massive earthquake of 1897. British engineers modified the traditional Assamese houses made from mud-plastered bamboo walls and thatched roofs to make Assam Type houses with wood, reed, mud plaster and hay after studying the climate and topography of the entire region.

Buildings are constructed on both flat and sloped terrains. On flat grounds, the buildings are typically rectangular or &quot;L or C&quot; layout. On other surfaces, such as highlands, they are usually rectangular in shape, accessed via the hillside. The roof is typically erected by high gables to overcome heavy rainfall in the region, where walls are usually timber-framed, plastered with cement. With high ceilings and well-ventilated rooms, the floorings are either wooden or concrete with tiled, mosaic or stone surfacing with stilts.

=== Other Colonial Powers ===
Among the other European colonies were Portuguese Goa and Damaon and Portuguese Bombay and Bassein. The Madh Fort, St. John the Baptist Church &amp; Castella de Aguada in Bombay are remnants of Portuguese colonial rule. The Churches and convents of Goa, an ensemble of seven churches built by the Portuguese in Goa are a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

The Portuguese were among the first European traders to discover the sea route to India as early as 1498. The first Portuguese encounter with the subcontinent was on 20 May 1498 AD, when Vasco da Gama reached Calicut on the coast of the Malabar region.

The settlements along the Hooghly river — a branch of the Ganges — attracted maritime traders from as many European nations, turning that part of Bengal into a little Europe. The Portuguese set up post at Bandel, the Danish at Serampore, the Dutch at Chinsurah and the French at Chandernagore. A British military base came up in Barrackpore. Thus influencing neighbouring regions&#x27; architecture to create a distinct indo-colonial architecture.

The history of Pondicherry is recorded only after the arrival of Dutch, Portuguese, British and French traders. In 1674 the French East India Company set up a trading centre at Pondicherry and this outpost eventually became the administrative centre of French settlements in India. The city has many colonial buildings, churches, temples and statues which, combined with the town planning and French style avenues in the old part of town, still preserve much of the colonial ambiance.

==India after independence (1947 onwards)==
In recent times there has been a movement of population from rural areas to urban centres of industry, leading to price rise in property in various cities of India. Urban housing in India balances space constrictions and is aimed to serve the working class. Growing awareness of ecology has influenced architecture in India during modern times.
Climate responsive architecture has long been a feature of India&#x27;s architecture but has been losing its significance as of late. Indian architecture reflects its various socio-cultural sensibilities which vary from region to region. Certain areas are traditionally held to be belonging to women. Villages in India have features such as courtyards, loggias, terraces and balconies. Calico, chintz, and palampore—of Indian origin—highlight the assimilation of Indian textiles in global interior design. Roshandans, which are skylights-cum-ventilators, are a common feature in Indian homes, especially in North India.At the time of independence in 1947, India had only about 300 trained architects in a population of what was then 330 million, and only one training institution, the Indian Institute of Architects. Thus the first generation of Indian architects were educated abroad.

Some early architects were traditionalists, such as Ganesh Deolalikar, whose design for the Supreme Court imitated the Lutyens-Baker buildings down to the last detail, and B.R. Manickam, who designed the Vidhana Soudha in Bangalore revived the Dravidian architecture.

In 1950, French architect Le Corbusier, a pioneer of modernist architecture, was commissioned by Jawaharlal Nehru to design the city of Chandigarh. His plan called for residential, commercial and industrial areas, along with parks and transportation infrastructure. In the middle was the capitol, a complex of three government buildings – the Palace of Assembly, the High Court, and the Secretariat. He also designed the Sanskar Kendra at Ahmedabad. Corbusier inspired the next generation of architects in India to work with modern, rather than revivalist styles.

Economic liberalisation and consequent prosperity enabled more radical new styles to be tried along with a sense to compete with modern and western architectural standards.

Other prominent examples of modernist architecture in India include IIM Ahmedabad by Louis Kahn (1961), IIT Delhi by Jugal Kishore Chodhury (1961), IIT Kanpur by Achyut Kanvinde (1963), IIM Bangalore by B. V. Doshi (1973), Lotus Temple by Fariborz Sahba (1986), and Jawahar Kala Kendra (1992) and Vidhan Bhawan Bhopal (1996) by Charles Correa.

Skyscrapers built in the international style are becoming increasingly common in cities. This includes The 42 (2019) and The Imperial (2010) by Hafeez Contractor. Other projects of the 21st century include IIT Hyderabad by Christopher Benninger (2015).

Notable ongoing projects in India include the city of Amaravati, Kolkata Museum of Modern Art, Sardar Patel Stadium, World One, and Navi Mumbai Airport.

==Landscape architecture==


There is less archaeological evidence of early gardens elsewhere in India but the ancient Hindu sacred books give a remarkably detailed account of gardens in Ancient India.

During Mauryan Era, palaces took a central role and with it came the gardens. The Hindu scriptures (shastras) set down a code for the orientation and organization of buildings in relation to compass points, hills, water and plants. No physical form survived but rock carvings like in Ajanta Caves or in Stupas shows an existence of airy structures with timber columns. Those illustrations show vegetation alongside the platform and columns. Emperor Ashoka&#x27;s inscriptions mention the establishment of botanical gardens for planting medicinal herbs, plants, and trees. They contained pools of water, were laid in grid patterns, and normally had &quot;chattri&quot; pavilions with them.

Hindu and Buddhist temple sites, from ancient times, have emphasized on &#x27;Sacred Grooves&#x27; or medical gardens. Hindu and Buddhist Temples like in Mahabodhi and Chinese Buddhist pilgrim Xuanzang mentions accounts of Nalanda where &quot;azure pool winds around the monasteries, adorned with the full-blown cups of the blue lotus; the dazzling red flowers of the lovely kanaka hang here and there, and outside groves of mango trees offer the inhabitants their dense and protective shade.&quot;

Manasollasa, a twelfth century text giving details on garden design, asserts that it should include rocks and raised mounds of summits, manicured with plants and trees of diverse varieties, artificial ponds, and flowing brooks. It describes the arrangement, the soils, the seeds, the distance between types of plants and trees, the methods of preparing manure, proper fertilizing and maintaining the garden, which plants and trees are best planted first, when to plant others, watering, signs of overwatering and underwatering, weeds, means of protecting the garden, and other details.
Early Islamic dynasties, like of Delhi Sultanates, never showed interests on gardens with an exception of Lodhi Dynasty. Mughals along with the Hindu Rajputs ushered a new era of Garden architecture. Concepts like &quot;Charbagh&quot; (four gardens) came from Persia. In the Charbagh at the Taj Mahal, each of the four parts contains sixteen flower beds.

Fountain and running water was a key feature of Mughal garden design. Water-lifting devices like geared Persian wheels (&quot;saqiya)&quot; were used for irrigation and to feed the water-courses at Humayun&#x27;s Tomb in Delhi, Akbar&#x27;s Gardens in Sikandra and Fatehpur Sikhri, the Lotus Garden of Babur at Dholpur and the Shalimar Bagh in Srinagar.

Royal canals were built from rivers to channel water to Delhi and Fatehpur Sikhri. The fountains and water-chutes of Mughal gardens represented the resurrection and regrowth of life, as well as to represent the cool, mountainous streams of Central Asia and Afghanistan that Babur was famously fond of.
== Arches ==
Indian architecture has utilized both false and true arches in its architecture, but structural arches have been essentially absent from Hindu temple architecture at all periods.

=== Corbel arches ===
Corbel arches in India date from Indus Valley civilisation which used corbel arch to construct drains and have been evidenced at Mohenjo daro, Harappa, and Dholavira.

The oldest arches surviving in Indian architecture are the gavaksha or &quot;chaitya arches&quot; found in ancient rock-cut architecture, and agreed to be copied from versions in wood which have all perished. These often terminate a whole ceiling with a semi-circular top; wooden roofs made in this way can be seen in carved depictions of cities and palaces. A number of small early constructed temples have such roofs, using corbelled construction, as well as an apsidal plan; the Trivikrama Temple at Ter, Maharashtra is an example. The arch shape survived into constructed Indian architecture, not as an opening in a wall but as a blind niche projection from a wall, that bears only its own weight. In this form it became a very common and important decorative motif on Hindu temples.

The &quot;fundamental architectural principle of the constructed Hindu temple is always formulated in the trabeate order&quot;, that is to say using post and lintel systems with vertical and horizontal members. According to George Michell: &quot;Never was the principle of the arch with radiating components, such as voussoirs and keystones, employed in Hindu structures, either in India or in other parts of Asia. It was not so much that Hindu architects were ignorant of these techniques, but rather that conformance to tradition and adherence to precedents were firm cultural attitudes&quot;. Harle describes the true arch as &quot;not unknown, but almost never employed by Hindu builders&quot;, and its use as &quot;rare, but widely dispersed&quot;.
=== True Arch ===
The 19th century archaeologist Alexander Cunningham, head of the Archaeological Survey of India, at first believed that due to the total absence of arches in Hindu temples, they were alien to Indian architecture, but several pre-Islamic examples bear testimony to their existence, as explained by him in the following manner:
 Archaeological evidences indicate that wedge shaped bricks and construction of wells in the Indus valley civilization and although no true arches have been discovered as of yet, these bricks would have been suitable in the construction of true arches. True arch in India dates from pre Mauryan Nanda period from the 5th century BC. Arch fragment discovered by archaeologist K. P. Jayaswal from an arch with Brahmi inscribed on it, or 1st - 2nd century CE when it first appeared in Kausambi palace architecture from Kushana period. Arches present at Vishnu temples at Deo Baranark, Amb and Kafir Kot temples from Hindu Shahi period and Hindu temple of Bhitargaon bear testimony to the use arches in the Hindu temple architecture.

Although Alexander Cunningham has persisted in the notion that the Buddhist Mahabodhi Temple&#x27;s pointed arch was added later during a Burmese restoration, given its predominant use in Islamic architecture, scholars such as Huu Phuoc Le have contested this assumption based on analysis that relieving arches could not have been added without destroying the entire temple structure, which is dated to 6th–7th century CE. Hence the pointed and relieving arches much have formed part of the original building dating from the pre-Islamic periods in proper. Moreover, pointed arches vaulted entrances have been noted in Bhitargaon temple and Kausambi Palace architecture as well.

=== Trabeate style ===
Trabeate style is one of the main style of architecture of that time
* Lintel use in this style.
* shikar also prevail in this.
* No use of minar.
* Material sand stone.

=== Arcuate style ===
Arcuate style is also one of the main style for architecture.
* In this lintel is replaced by arch.
* There is also use of dome.
* Concept of minar is also there.
* Material, brick, lime and mortar used for making of dome (Wood was primarily not used because of the geography).

=== Torana ===

Torana, also referred to as vandanamalikas, is a free-standing ornamental or arched gateway for ceremonial purposes seen in the Hindu, Buddhist and Jain architecture of the Indian subcontinent, Southeast Asia and parts of East Asia. Chinese paifang gateways, Japanese torii gateways, Korean Hongsalmun gateways, and Thai Sao Ching Cha were derived from the Indian &quot;torana&quot;.

Torana is considered sacred and honorific gateway in Hindu and Buddhist religious sites. It is built with a projecting cross-piece resting on two uprights or posts. Mostly made of wood or stone, and the cross-piece is generally of three bars placed one on the top of the other; both cross-piece and posts are usually sculpted.

Toranas are associated with Buddhist stupas like the &quot;Great Stupa&quot; in Sanchi, as well as with Jain and Hindu structures, and also with several secular structures. Symbolic toranas can also be made of flowers and even leaves and hung over the doors and at entrances, particularly in Western and Southern India. They are believed to bring good fortune and signify auspicious and festive occasions. They can also serve didactic and narrative purposes or be erected to mark the victory of a king.

During Vesak festival of Sri Lanka it is a tradition to erect electrically illuminated colorful Vesak toranas in public places. These decorations are temporary installations which remain in public display for couple of weeks starting from the day of Vesak.

=== Gavaksha ===
A Gavaksha or chandrashala are often used to describe the motif centred on an ogee, circular or horseshoe arch that decorates many examples of Indian rock-cut architecture and later Indian structural temples and other buildings. It is called a chaitya arch when used on the facade of a chaitya hall, around the single large window. In later forms it develops well beyond this type, and becomes a very flexible unit. Gavāksha is a Sanskrit word which means &quot;bulls or cows eye&quot;. In Hindu temples, their role is envisioned as symbolically radiating the light and splendour of the central icon in its sanctum. Alternatively, they are described as providing a window for the deity to gaze out into the world. Like the whole of the classic chaitya, the form originated in the shape of the wooden thatched roofs of buildings, none of which have survived; the earliest version replicating such roofs in stone is at the entrance to the non-Buddhist Lomas Rishi Cave, one of the man-made Barabar Caves in Bihar.

== Influence on neighbouring Asian countries ==
=== Influence on Southeast Asia ===
Southeast Asia was under Indian sphere of cultural influence starting around 290 BC until around the 15th century, when Hindu-Buddhist influence was absorbed by local politics. Kingdoms in the southeast coast of the Indian Subcontinent had established trade, cultural and political relations with Southeast Asian kingdoms in Burma, Thailand, Indonesia, Malay Peninsula, Philippines, Cambodia and Champa. This led to Indianisation and Sanskritisation of Southeast Asia within Indosphere, Southeast Asian polities were the Indianised Hindu-Buddhist Mandala.

==== Vietnam ====
The profile of the 13th-century Po Klong Garai Temple near Phan Rang includes all the buildings typical of a Cham temple. From left to right one can see the &quot;gopura&quot;, the saddle-shaped &quot;kosagrha&quot;, and &quot;mandapa&quot; attached to the &quot;kalan&quot; tower.

Between the 6th and the 16th century, the Kingdom of Champa flourished in present-day central and southern Vietnam. Unlike the Javanese that mostly used volcanic andesite stone for their temples, and Khmer of Angkor which mostly employed grey sandstones to construct their religious buildings, the Cham built their temples from reddish bricks. The most important remaining sites of Cham bricks temple architecture include Mỹ Sơn near Da Nang, Po Nagar near Nha Trang, and Po Klong Garai near Phan Rang.

Typically, a Cham temple complex consisted of several different kinds of buildings. They are &quot;kalan&quot;, a brick sanctuary, typically in the form of a tower with &quot;garbahgriha&quot; used to host the murti of deity. A &quot;mandapa&quot; is an entry hallway connected with a sanctuary. A &quot;kosagrha&quot; or &quot;fire-house&quot; is a temple construction typically with a saddle-shaped roof, used to house the valuables belonging to the deity or to cook for the deity. The &quot;gopura&quot; was a gate-tower leading into a walled temple complex. These building types are typical for Hindu temples in general; the classification is valid not only for the architecture of Champa, but also for other architectural traditions of Greater India.

==== Indonesia ====
Temples are called &quot;candi&quot; () in Indonesia, whether it is Buddhist or Hindu. A candi refers to a structure based on the Indian type of single-celled shrine, with a pyramidal tower above it (Meru tower in Bali), and a portico for entrance, mostly built between the 7th to 15th centuries. In Hindu Balinese architecture, a &quot;candi&quot; shrine can be found within a &quot;pura&quot; compound. The best example of Indonesian Javanese Hindu temple architecture is the 9th century Prambanan (Shivagrha) temple compound, located in Central Java, near Yogyakarta. This largest Hindu temple in Indonesia has three main prasad towers, dedicated to Trimurti gods. Shiva temple, the largest main temple is towering to 47 metre-high (154 ft).
The term &quot;candi&quot; itself is believed was derived from &quot;Candika&quot;, one of the manifestations of the goddess Durga as the goddess of death.

==== Cambodia ====
Khmer empire&#x27;s (present day Cambodia) great capital, Angkor (, &quot;Capital City&quot;, derived from Sanskrit &quot;nagara&quot;), contains some of the most important and the most magnificent example of Khmer temple architecture. The classic style of Angkorian temple is demonstrated by the 12th century Angkor Wat.The main superstructure of typical Khmer temple is a towering &quot;prasat&quot; called &quot;prang&quot; which houses the &quot;garbhagriha&quot; inner chamber, where the &quot;murti&quot; of Vishnu or Shiva, or a &quot;lingam&quot; resides. Khmer temples were typically enclosed by a concentric series of walls, with the central sanctuary in the middle; this arrangement represented the mountain ranges surrounding Mount Meru, the mythical home of the gods. Enclosures are the spaces between these walls, and between the innermost wall and the temple itself. The walls defining the enclosures of Khmer temples are frequently lined by galleries, while passage through the walls is by way of gopuras located at the cardinal points. The main entrance usually adorned with elevated causeway with cruciform terrace.

==== Thailand ====
Thailand was heavily influenced by the culture and religions of India, starting with the Kingdom of Funan around the first century until the Khmer Empire. Indianised kingdoms such as the Mon, the Khmer Empire and Malay states of the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra ruled the region.

Thailand under Khmer rule saw inclusion of Indian Hindu temple influenced Khmer architectural style. The Khmer prangs resembled north Indian temples&#x27; shikhara and rekha (temple towers) elements. The early 10th century and the late 12th century prangs in Thailand were influenced by the Khmer architects of the great temple complexes of Angkor Wat and Angkor Thom.
After the Khmer Empire collapsed, the Thai building masters of the Sukhothai Kingdom adapted the Prang form. The Thai temple falls into one of two broad categories: the &quot;stupa&quot;-style solid temple and the &quot;prang&quot;-style. The prangs can also be found in various forms in Sukhothai, Lopburi, Bangkok (Wat Arun). Sizes may vary, but usually the prangs measure between in height, and resemble a towering corn-cob like structure. They extended and developed it. The building material was no more separate small sandstone blocks, instead the Thais built the Prang in brick or laterite covered with stucco. And the cella could be reached only by stairs. An example for this is the Prang of the Wat Mahathat in Phitsanulok. Later developments of the Prang suggested the cella only. The entrance door became a niche, in which was placed the &quot;Buddharupa&quot; (Buddha statue), which had originally taken the central position inside. For reasons of symmetry the niche was repeated on all four sides. On its pinnacle was a Trishul, the &quot;weapon of Indra&quot;.

==== Malaysia ====

Indo-Saracenic architecture was a revivalist architectural style mostly used by British architects in India in the later 19th century, especially in public and government buildings in the British Raj, and the palaces of rulers of the princely states. It drew stylistic and decorative elements from native Indo-Islamic architecture, especially Mughal architecture. The basic layout and structure of the buildings tended to be close to that used in contemporary buildings in other revivalist styles, such as Gothic revival and Neo-Classical, with specific Indian features and decoration added.

According to Thomas R. Metcalf, a leading scholar of the style, &quot;the Indo-Saracenic, with its imagined past turned to the purposes of British colonialism, took shape outside India [ie the subcontinent] most fully only in Malaya&quot;.

In Malaysia, due to British colonial influence and the migration of Muslims from India, many Mughal architectural elements in the design of mosques were incorporated. British Malaya was a predominantly Muslim society, where there was hardly any recent tradition of building in brick or stone, with even mosques and the palaces of the local rulers built in the abundant local hardwoods. Kuala Lumpur was a 19th-century foundation, only a small settlement when the British decided to make it the capital of their new Federated Malay States in 1895, and needed a number of large public buildings. The British decided to use the Islamic style they were used to from India, despite it having little relationship to existing local architectural styles.

==== Myanmar ====
Much of Myanmar&#x27;s architecture is tied to ancient Indian culture, and can be traced to the country&#x27;s earliest known inhabitants. The Mon and Pyu people were the first two influential groups to migrate to Myanmar, and the first Indo-Chinese adherents of Theravada Buddhism. Beikthano, one of the first Pyu centres, contains urbanesque foundations which include a monastery and stupa-like structures. These Pyu stupas, the first Indian foundations in Myanmar, were built from 200 BC to 100 CE and were sometimes used for burial.

During Pagan period, the Pyu-style stupas were transformed into monuments reminiscent of alms bowls or gourd-shaped domes, unbaked brick, tapered and rising roofs, Buddha niches, polylobed arches and ornamental doorways influenced by Bengali Pala Empire and its monuments. The Ananda Temple (finished in 1090), one of the first temples erected in Bagan, was influenced by Indian architecture. Architectural features of the temple include brick vaulted halls, Buddha statues, tapered roofs and the absence of terraces.

Pala influence and spread of Buddhism in Myanmar also brought in terracotta tiles from Bengal. The terracotta plaques at Pagan are made with well kneaded and fired clay but all the plaques are glazed with green colour.

Another example of these cultural influences include the Ananda Temple in Bagan built in the 11th century AD under the ruling of King Kyansittha. At these times, Buddhist and Vaisnava monks travelled to Burma from Bengal and discussed commonalities about the beauty of the temples of their region. Therefore, the king heard the monks and decided to build a temple with these western inspirations. Although, the Ananda Temple display its eastern origins, the western features remain obvious and demonstrate its uniqueness.

===Influence in East Asia===

==== Torii, Paifang, Hongsalmun, Sao Ching Cha ====

Ancient Indian &quot;torana&quot; sacred gateway architecture has influenced gateway architecture across Asia, specially where Buddhism was transmitted from India; Chinese paifang gateways, Japanese torii gateways, Korean Hongsalmun gateways, and Sao Ching Cha in Thailand have been derived from the Indian &quot;torana&quot;. The functions of all are similar, but they generally differ based on their respective architectural styles.

The &quot;torii&quot;, a gateway erected on the approach to every Shinto shrine, may be derived from the Indian word &quot;torana&quot;. While the Indian term denotes a gateway, the Japanese characters can be translated as &quot;bird perch&quot;. The function of a &quot;torii&quot; is to mark the entrance to a sacred space. For this reason, the road leading to a Shinto shrine (&quot;sandō&quot;) is almost always straddled by one or more &quot;torii&quot;, which are therefore the easiest way to distinguish a shrine from a Buddhist temple.

&quot;Hongsalmun&quot; literally means ‘gate with red arrows’, referring to the set of pointed spikes on its top. In the past, spikes in between columns did not exist. The color is said to be red because of the belief that the color repels ghosts. The gate is composed of 2 round poles set vertically and 2 transverse bars. These pillars are usually over in height. There is no roof and door-gate. In the middle top gate, the symbol of the trisula and the taegeuk image are placed.

A &quot;paifang&quot;, also known as a &quot;pailou&quot;, is a traditional style of Chinese architectural arch or gateway structure derived from the torana temple-gate in ancient India, has taken on traditional Chinese architectural characteristics such as multi-tiered roofs, various supporting posts, and archway-shapes of traditional gates and towers.

== Foreign Influence on Indian Architecture ==

=== Hellenistic influence ===
The Greek conquests in India under Alexander the Great were limited in time (327–326 BCE) and in extent, but they had extensive long term effects as Greeks settled for centuries at the doorstep of India. After these events, the Greeks (described as Yona or Yavana in Indian sources from the Greek &quot;Ionian&quot;) were able to maintain a structured presence at the door of India for about three centuries, through the Seleucid Empire and the Greco-Bactrian kingdom, down to the time of the Indo-Greek kingdoms, which ended sometimes in the 1st century CE.

During that time, the city of Ai-Khanoum, capital of the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom and the cities of Sirkap, were founded in what is now Pakistan on the Greek Hippodamian grid plan, and Sagala, now located in Pakistan 10 km from the border with India, interacted heavily with the Indian subcontinent. It is considered that Ai-Khanoum and Sirkap may have been primary actors in transmitting Western artistic influence to India, for example in the creation of the quasi-Ionic Pataliputra capital or the floral friezes of the Pillars of Ashoka. Numerous Greek ambassadors, such as Megasthenes, Deimachus and Dionysius, stayed at the Mauryan court in Pataliputra.

During the Maurya period (c. 321–185 BCE), and especially during the time of Emperor Ashoka (c.268–232 BCE), Hellenistic influence seems to have played a role in the establishment of Indian monumental stone architecture. Excavations in the ancient palace of Pataliputra have brought to light Hellenistic sculptural works, and Hellenistic influence appear in the Pillars of Ashoka at about the same period.

During that period, several instance of artistic influence are known, particular in the area of monumental stone sculpture and statuary, an area with no known precedents in India. The main period of stone architectural creation seems to correspond to the period of Ashoka&#x27;s reign. Before that, Indians had a tradition of wooden architecture, remains of wooden palisades were discovered at archaeological sites in Pataliputra, confirmed the Classical accounts.

The first examples of stone architecture were also found in the palace compound of Pataliputra, with the distinctly Hellenistic Pataliputra capital and a pillared hall using polished-stone columns. The other remarkable example of monumental stone architecture is that of the Pillars of Ashoka, themselves displaying Hellenistic influence. There is also very early stone architecture in the palace at Kosambi, including true arches used in the underground chambers, from the last phase of the palace in the 1st or 2nd century CE.

==== Pataliputra capital ====
The Pataliputra capital is a monumental rectangular capital with volutes and Classical designs, that was discovered in the palace ruins of the ancient Mauryan Empire capital city of Pataliputra (modern Patna, northeastern India). It is dated to the 3rd century BCE. It is, together with the Pillars of Ashoka one of the first known examples of Indian stone architecture, as no Indian stone monuments or sculptures are known from before that period. It is also one of the first archaeological clues suggesting Hellenistic influence on the arts of India, in this case sculptural palatial art.

==== Pillars of Ashoka ====
The Pillars of Ashoka were built during the reign of the Maurya Empire Ashoka c. 250 BCE. They were new attempts at mastering stone architecture, as no Indian stone monuments or sculptures are known from before that period.

There are altogether seven remaining capitals, five with lions, one with an elephant and one with a zebu bull. One of them, the four lions of Sarnath, has become the State Emblem of India.

The animal capitals are composed of a lotiform base, with an abacus decorated with floral, symbolic or animal designs, topped by the realistic depiction of an animal, thought to each represent a traditional direction in India. Greek columns of the 6th century BCE such as the Sphinx of Naxos, a Ionic column crowned by a sitting animal in the religious centre of Delphi, may have been an inspiration for the pillars of Ashoka.

===== Flame palmette =====
The flame palmette, central decorative element of the Pataliputra pillar is considered as a purely Greek motif. The first appearance of &quot;flame palmettes&quot; goes back to the stand-alone floral akroteria of the Parthenon (447–432 BCE), and slightly later at the Temple of Athena Nike.

Flame palmettes were then introduced into friezes of floral motifs in replacement of the regular palmette. Flame palmettes are used extensively in India floral friezes, starting with the floral friezes on the capitals of the pillar of Ashoka, and they are likely to have originated with Greek or Near Eastern art. A monumental flame palmette can be seen on the top of the Sunga gateway at Bharhut.

=== Persian influence ===

==== Achaemenid influence ====
Lion Capital of Ashoka from Sarnath.The Achaemenid conquered and governed the territories of the North-western regions of the Indian subcontinent, from the 6th to 4th centuries BCE. The conquest occurred in two phases. The first invasion was conducted around 535 BCE by Cyrus the Great, who founded the Achaemenid Empire. Cyrus annexed the regions west of the Indus River, which formed the eastern border of his empire. Following the death of Cyrus, Darius the Great established his dynasty and began to reconquer former provinces and further expand the extent of the empire. Around 518 BCE Darius crossed the Himalayas into India to initiate a second period of conquest by annexing regions up to the Jhelum River in Punjab. Each invasion brought in new style and soon started to influence the art and architectural styles in India.

Various Indian artefacts tend to suggest some Perso-Hellenistic artistic influence in India, mainly felt during the time of the Mauryan Empire.

The Pataliputra palace with its pillared hall shows decorative influences of the Achaemenid palaces and Persepolis and may have used the help of foreign craftsmen. Mauryan rulers may have even imported craftsmen from abroad to build royal monuments. This may be the result of the formative influence of craftsmen employed from Persia following the disintegration of the Achaemenid Empire after the conquests of Alexander the Great.

The renowned Mauryan polish, especially used in the Pillars of Ashoka, may also have been a technique imported from the Achaemenid Empire.

==== Rock cut architecture ====
The similarity of the 4th century BCE Lycian barrel-vaulted tombs, such as the tomb of Payava, in the western part of the Achaemenid Empire, with the Indian architectural design of the Chaitya (starting at least a century later from circa 250 BCE, with the Lomas Rishi caves in the Barabar caves group), suggests that the designs of the Lycian rock-cut tombs travelled to India along the trade routes across the Achaemenid Empire.

Early on, James Fergusson, in his &quot; Illustrated Handbook of Architecture&quot;, while describing the very progressive evolution from wooden architecture to stone architecture in various ancient civilizations, has commented that &quot;In India, the form and construction of the older Buddhist temples resemble so singularly these examples in Lycia&quot;. The structural similarities, down to many architectural details, with the Chaitya-type Indian Buddhist temple designs, such as the &quot;same pointed form of roof, with a ridge&quot;, are further developed in &quot;The cave temples of India&quot;. The Lycian tombs, dated to the 4th century BCE, are either free-standing or rock-cut barrel-vaulted sarcophagi, placed on a high base, with architectural features carved in stone to imitate wooden structures. There are numerous rock-cut equivalents to the free-standing structures and decorated with reliefs. Fergusson went on to suggest an &quot;Indian connection&quot;, and some form of cultural transfer across the Achaemenid Empire. The ancient transfer of Lycian designs for rock-cut monuments to India is considered as &quot;quite probable&quot;.

===== Masarh Lion =====
The sculpture of the Masarh lion, found near the Maurya capital of Pataliputra, raises the question of the Achaemenid and Greek influence on the art of the Maurya Empire, and on the western origins of stone carving in India. The lion is carved in Chunar sandstone, like the Pillars of Ashoka, and its finish is polished, a feature of the Maurya sculpture. According to S.P. Gupta, the sculptural style is unquestionably Achaemenid. This is particularly the case for the well-ordered tubular representation of whiskers (vibrissas) and the geometrical representation of inflated veins flush with the entire face. The mane, on the other hand, with tufts of hair represented in wavelets, is rather naturalistic. Very similar examples are however known in Greece and Persepolis. It is possible that this sculpture was made by an Achaemenid or Greek sculptor in India and either remained without effect, or was the Indian imitation of a Greek or Achaemenid model, somewhere between the fifth century BCE and the first century BCE, although it is generally dated from the time of the Maurya Empire, around the 3rd century BCE.

==See also==

* Architecture of Karnataka
* Architecture of Kerala
* Architecture of Tamil Nadu
* Badami cave temples
* Hemadpanthi
* Indian vernacular architecture
* Kalinga Architecture
* List of Indian architects
* Meitei architecture
* Rajasthani architecture
* Temples of North Karnataka
;Other Indian Art and Architecture forms
* Indian art
* Indo-Greek art
* Art of Mathura
* Gupta art
* Mauryan art
* Kushan art
* Hoysala architecture
* Vijayanagara architecture
* Greco-Buddhist art
* Chola art and architecture
* Pallava art and architecture
* Badami Chalukya architecture

==Notes==
==References==
* Blair, S. S., &amp; Bloom, J. M. (1996), &quot;The art and architecture of Islam 1250-1800&quot;, Yale University Press.
* Chandra, Pramod (2008), &quot;South Asian arts&quot;, &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;
* Foekema, Gerard (1996), &quot;A Complete Guide to Hoysaḷa Temples&quot;, Abhinav Publications, .
* Gast, Klaus-Peter (2007), &quot;Modern Traditions: Contemporary Architecture in India&quot;, Birkhäuser, .
* 
* Le Huu Phuoc, &quot;Buddhist Architecture&quot;, 2009, Grafikol
* Livingston, Morna &amp; Beach, Milo (2002), &quot;Steps to Water: The Ancient Stepwells of India&quot;, Princeton Architectural Press, .
* Michell, George, (1977) &quot;The Hindu Temple: An Introduction to its Meaning and Forms&quot;, 1977, University of Chicago Press, 
* Michell, George (1990), &quot;The Penguin Guide to the Monuments of India, Volume 1: Buddhist, Jain, Hindu&quot;, 1990, Penguin Books, 
* 
* Piercey, W. Douglas &amp; Scarborough, Harold (2008), &quot;hospital&quot;, Encyclopædia Britannica.
* Possehl, Gregory L. (1996), &quot;Mehrgarh&quot;, &quot;Oxford Companion to Archaeology&quot; edited by Brian Fagan, Oxford University Press.
* Rowland, Benjamin, &quot;The Art and Architecture of India: Buddhist, Hindu, Jain&quot;, 1967 (3rd edn.), Pelican History of Art, Penguin, 
* Savage, George (2008), &quot;interior design&quot;, Encyclopædia Britannica.
* 
* Rodda &amp; Ubertini (2004), &quot;The Basis of Civilization-Water Science?&quot;, International Association of Hydrological Science, .
* Sinopoli, Carla M. (2003), &quot;The Political Economy of Craft Production: Crafting Empire in South India, C. 1350–1650&quot;, Cambridge University Press, .
* Sinopoli, Carla M. (2003), &quot;Echoes of Empire: Vijayanagara and Historical Memory, Vijayanagara as Historical Memory&quot;, &quot;Archaeologies of memory&quot; edited by Ruth M. Van Dyke &amp; Susan E. Alcock, Blackwell Publishing, .
* Singh, Vijay P. &amp; Yadava, R. N. (2003), &quot;Water Resources System Operation: Proceedings of the International Conference on Water and Environment&quot;, Allied Publishers, .
* Vastu-Silpa Kosha, Encyclopedia of Hindu Temple architecture and Vastu/S.K.Ramachandara Rao, Delhi, Devine Books, (Lala Murari Lal Chharia Oriental series) (Set)

==Further reading==
* 
* Fletcher, Banister; Cruickshank, Dan, &quot;Sir Banister Fletcher&#x27;s a History of Architecture&quot;, Architectural Press, 20th edition, 1996 (first published 1896). . Cf. Part Four, Chapter 26.

==External links==
* Kamiya, Taeko, &quot;The Architecture of India&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q61050" start="0" end="19" title="Architecture of India" label="Indian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="37" end="44" title="History of India" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q323466" start="46" end="53" title="Culture of India" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651597" start="59" end="67" title="Indian religions" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="71" end="76" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q80706" start="174" end="199" title="Hindu temple architecture" label="Hindu temple architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q825394" start="204" end="229" title="Indo-Islamic architecture" label="Indo-Islamic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299232" start="242" end="261" title="Rajput architecture" label="Rajput architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q542261" start="263" end="282" title="Mughal architecture" label="Mughal architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q171309" start="284" end="309" title="Dravidian architecture" label="South Indian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374557" start="315" end="342" title="Indo-Saracenic architecture" label="Indo-Saracenic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q388774" start="520" end="548" title="Indian rock-cut architecture" label="Indian rock-cut architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393308" start="565" end="573" title="Buddhist temple" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q842402" start="575" end="580" title="Hindu temple" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613100" start="586" end="590" title="Jain temple" label="Jain"/>
<link wikidata="Q171309" start="651" end="666" title="Dravidian architecture" label="Dravidian style"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="670" end="684" title="South India" label="southern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q123458533" start="693" end="699" title="Nagara architecture" label="Nagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="709" end="723" title="North India" label="northern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="834" end="839" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="867" end="882" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q825394" start="916" end="941" title="Indo-Islamic architecture" label="Indo-Islamic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="998" end="1011" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q542261" start="1018" end="1037" title="Mughal architecture" label="Mughal architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9141" start="1112" end="1121" title="Taj Mahal" label="Taj Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787182" start="1207" end="1213" title="Architecture of Rajasthan" label="Rajput"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621572" start="1218" end="1222" title="Sikh architecture" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="1251" end="1274" title="British Raj" label="British colonial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="1302" end="1314" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="1316" end="1330" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="1336" end="1343" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374557" start="1461" end="1475" title="Indo-Saracenic architecture" label="Indo-Saracenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="1489" end="1514" title="Indian independence movement" label="India&amp;#x27;s independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="1516" end="1525" title="Modern architecture" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724" start="1614" end="1626" title="Le Corbusier" label="Le Corbusier"/>
<link wikidata="Q43433" start="1654" end="1664" title="Chandigarh" label="Chandigarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333520" start="1748" end="1772" title="Economic liberalisation in India" label="economic reforms of 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120985" start="1910" end="1923" title="Vastu Shastra" label="Vastu Shastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="2046" end="2055" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="2115" end="2125" title="Megalithic" label="Megalithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="2247" end="2256" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="2284" end="2294" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="2354" end="2361" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="2370" end="2375" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="2380" end="2386" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="2396" end="2405" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="2407" end="2417" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="2423" end="2437" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195" start="2471" end="2480" title="Meghalaya" label="Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824397" start="2669" end="2681" title="Adichanallur" label="Adichanallur"/>
<link wikidata="Q213248" start="2688" end="2699" title="Tirunelveli" label="Tirunelveli"/>
<link wikidata="Q632235" start="2731" end="2761" title="Archaeological Survey of India" label="Archaeological Survey of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q19787278" start="3134" end="3142" title="Burzahom archaeological site" label="Burzahom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="3168" end="3180" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="3191" end="3200" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="3223" end="3238" title="Gangetic plains" label="Gangetic plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="3243" end="3259" title="peninsular India" label="peninsular India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899906" start="3417" end="3431" title="Early Harappan" label="Early Harappan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="3598" end="3603" title="Ganga" label="Ganga"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="3608" end="3614" title="Yamuna" label="Yamuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="3727" end="3752" title="Indus Valley civilization" label="Indus Valley civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="3796" end="3807" title="Indus River" label="Indus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974228" start="3826" end="3845" title="Bronze Age India" label="Bronze Age of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q185562" start="4002" end="4009" title="Harappa" label="Harappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9443" start="4011" end="4017" title="Lothal" label="Lothal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="4027" end="4053" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725" start="4054" end="4066" title="Mohenjo-daro" label="Mohenjo-daro"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="4083" end="4096" title="town planning" label="town planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q114768" start="4245" end="4254" title="granary" label="granaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473950" start="4474" end="4482" title="stepwell" label="stepwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="4874" end="4884" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="4991" end="5002" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9468" start="5075" end="5084" title="Dholavira" label="Dholavira"/>
<link wikidata="Q19882291" start="5393" end="5403" title="Bet Dwarka" label="Bet Dwarka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209403" start="5452" end="5460" title="Daimabad" label="Daimabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209403" start="5506" end="5514" title="Daimabad" label="Daimabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q48728694" start="5583" end="5596" title="Jorwe culture" label="Jorwe culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="6105" end="6118" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q388774" start="6245" end="6273" title="Indian rock-cut architecture" label="Indian rock-cut architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="6378" end="6384" title="Buddha" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785454" start="6480" end="6497" title="Jivakarama vihara" label="Jivakarama vihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="6501" end="6506" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059208" start="6649" end="6656" title="chaitya" label="chaitya"/>
<link wikidata="Q181123" start="6734" end="6740" title="Sanchi" label="Sanchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q825673" start="6799" end="6809" title="Kushinagar" label="Kushinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q863683" start="6813" end="6822" title="Rajagriha" label="Rajagriha"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6860" end="6903" title=":File:Royal cortege leaving Rajagriha.jpg" label="&amp;quot;Royal cortege leaving Rajagriha&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6907" end="6952" title=":File:War over the Buddha&amp;#x27;s Relics, South Gate, Stupa no. 1, Sanchi.jpg" label="&amp;quot;War over the Buddha&amp;#x27;s relics&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q389755" start="7101" end="7112" title="Pataliputra" label="Pataliputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q80484" start="7119" end="7124" title="Patna" label="Patna"/>
<link wikidata="Q312978" start="7163" end="7169" title="Faxian" label="Faxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q312548" start="7171" end="7182" title="Megasthenes" label="Megasthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365730" start="7359" end="7364" title="dowel" label="dowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q617256" start="7386" end="7393" title="apadana" label="apadana"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="7480" end="7490" title="Achaemenid" label="Achaemenid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154546" start="7528" end="7547" title="Pataliputra capital" label="Pataliputra capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="7560" end="7571" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153371" start="7620" end="7633" title="Ashoka column" label="Ashoka column"/>
<link wikidata="Q388774" start="7873" end="7894" title="Indian rock-cut architecture" label="rock-cut architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311736" start="7916" end="7929" title="Barabar caves" label="Barabar caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="7933" end="7938" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="7964" end="7970" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q19323329" start="8006" end="8022" title="Lomas Rishi Cave" label="Lomas Rishi Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="8252" end="8259" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55622494" start="8312" end="8326" title="Mauryan polish" label="Mauryan polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q844619" start="8368" end="8374" title="vihara" label="vihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="8452" end="8458" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="8680" end="8685" title="stupa" label="stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="8834" end="8843" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="8848" end="8857" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="8890" end="8898" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095365" start="8943" end="8953" title="Guard rail" label="Guard rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q731341" start="9197" end="9203" title="torana" label="torana"/>
<link wikidata="Q234731" start="9288" end="9293" title="torii" label="torii"/>
<link wikidata="Q181123" start="9363" end="9369" title="Sanchi" label="Sanchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473950" start="9417" end="9425" title="stepwell" label="stepwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q797437" start="9544" end="9551" title="Bhinmal" label="Bhinmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q184427" start="9736" end="9742" title="Ajanta caves" label="Ajanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q189616" start="9747" end="9753" title="Ellora Caves" label="Ellora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445420" start="9807" end="9814" title="shikara" label="shikara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4513" start="9872" end="9888" title="Mahabodhi Temple" label="Mahabodhi Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632770" start="10101" end="10106" title="Gupta" label="Gupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q388774" start="10218" end="10246" title="Indian rock-cut architecture" label="Indian rock-cut architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q184427" start="10427" end="10439" title="Ajanta Caves" label="Ajanta Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q80706" start="10648" end="10673" title="Hindu temple architecture" label="Hindu temple architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6860306" start="10678" end="10688" title="Milo Beach" label="Milo Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q184427" start="10949" end="10955" title="Ajanta Caves" label="Ajanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q649384" start="10967" end="10976" title="Elephanta Caves" label="Elephanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q189616" start="10981" end="10987" title="Ellora Caves" label="Ellora"/>
<link wikidata="Q4250472" start="11338" end="11353" title="Udayagiri Caves" label="Udayagiri Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171865" start="11417" end="11435" title="Vishnu Temple, Deogarh" label="Dashavatara Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q955652" start="11439" end="11446" title="Deogarh, Uttar Pradesh" label="Deogarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4250472" start="11580" end="11595" title="Udayagiri Caves" label="Udayagiri Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="11599" end="11613" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801329" start="11631" end="11637" title="Tigawa" label="Tigawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q181123" start="11659" end="11665" title="Sanchi" label="Sanchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726044" start="11733" end="11755" title="Nachna Hindu temples" label="Parvati Temple, Nachna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901840" start="11763" end="11773" title="Bhitargaon" label="Bhitargaon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11822" end="11851" title="Sirpur Group of Monuments#Hindu monuments" label="Lakshman Brick Temple, Sirpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q26708817" start="11863" end="11873" title="Gop Temple" label="Gop Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="11877" end="11884" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q338520" start="12088" end="12096" title="prostyle" label="prostyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4513" start="12339" end="12355" title="Mahabodhi Temple" label="Mahabodhi Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089723" start="12437" end="12464" title="Chejerla, Guntur district" label="Chejarla Kapoteswara temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059208" start="12519" end="12526" title="chaitya" label="chaitya"/>
<link wikidata="Q842402" start="12743" end="12755" title="Hindu temple" label="Hindu temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672112" start="12864" end="12875" title="garbhagriha" label="garbhagriha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781039" start="12935" end="12940" title="murti" label="murti"/>
<link wikidata="Q569867" start="13127" end="13135" title="shikhara" label="shikhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559335" start="13165" end="13171" title="Vimana (architectural feature)" label="vimana"/>
<link wikidata="Q756720" start="13218" end="13228" title="ambulatory" label="ambulatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734140" start="13256" end="13272" title="circumambulation" label="circumambulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285431" start="13287" end="13294" title="mandapa" label="mandapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852617" start="13336" end="13344" title="antarala" label="antarala"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014132" start="13620" end="13626" title="plinth" label="plinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682549" start="13634" end="13644" title="adhiṣṭhāna" label="adhiṣṭhāna"/>
<link wikidata="Q123458533" start="13975" end="13981" title="Nagara architecture" label="nagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q171309" start="13995" end="14002" title="Dravidian architecture" label="dravida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556317" start="14019" end="14025" title="vesara" label="vesara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="14137" end="14146" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q817250" start="14192" end="14202" title="Pattadakal" label="Pattadakal"/>
<link wikidata="Q404851" start="14284" end="14290" title="Aihole" label="Aihole"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="14313" end="14320" title="apse" label="apsidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059208" start="14321" end="14333" title="chaitya hall" label="chaitya hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435771" start="14804" end="14811" title="gopuram" label="gopuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="15016" end="15022" title="Deccan" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="15438" end="15451" title="Gupta dynasty" label="Gupta dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q388774" start="15479" end="15487" title="Indian rock-cut architecture" label="rock-cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4250472" start="15488" end="15503" title="Udayagiri Caves" label="Udayagiri Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q181123" start="15662" end="15668" title="Sanchi" label="Sanchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q569867" start="15721" end="15729" title="shikhara" label="shikhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4250472" start="16061" end="16076" title="Udayagiri Caves" label="Udayagiri Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="16080" end="16094" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171865" start="16104" end="16111" title="Vishnu Temple, Deogarh" label="Deogarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726044" start="16113" end="16135" title="Nachna Hindu temples" label="Parvati Temple, Nachna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947336" start="16146" end="16163" title="Lalitpur District, India" label="Lalitpur District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16174" end="16203" title="Sirpur Group of Monuments#Hindu monuments" label="Lakshman Brick Temple, Sirpur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16218" end="16237" title="Rajim#Rajiv Lochan Vishnu Mandir" label="Rajiv Lochan temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286150" start="16243" end="16248" title="Rajim" label="Rajim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522747" start="16439" end="16455" title="Group of Monuments at Mahabalipuram" label="at Mahabalipuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q404851" start="16884" end="16890" title="Aihole" label="Aihole"/>
<link wikidata="Q817250" start="16895" end="16905" title="Pattadakal" label="Pattadakal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566899" start="17196" end="17212" title="Muslim conquests of the Indian subcontinent" label="Muslim invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q167639" start="17486" end="17505" title="Vijayanagara Empire" label="Vijayanagara Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435771" start="17602" end="17609" title="gopuram" label="gopuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="17824" end="17836" title="North Indian" label="North Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496554" start="17965" end="17983" title="Latina (architecture)" label="&amp;quot;latina&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552508" start="18112" end="18122" title="urushringa" label="urushringa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447165" start="18165" end="18184" title="Sekhari (architecture)" label="&amp;quot;sekhari&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902149" start="18236" end="18243" title="bhumija" label="bhumija"/>
<link wikidata="Q26258435" start="18352" end="18372" title="Khajuraho Group of Monuments" label="complex at Khajuraho"/>
<link wikidata="Q29024970" start="18393" end="18406" title="Central India" label="Central India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365530" start="18429" end="18445" title="Lingaraja Temple" label="Lingaraja Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q171771" start="18449" end="18461" title="Bhubaneshwar" label="Bhubaneshwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="18465" end="18471" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922704" start="18473" end="18483" title="Sun Temple" label="Sun Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q749189" start="18487" end="18493" title="Konark" label="Konark"/>
<link wikidata="Q916943" start="18505" end="18526" title="Brihadeeswarar Temple" label="Brihadeeswarar Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q41496" start="18530" end="18539" title="Thanjavur" label="Thanjavur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="18543" end="18553" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="18601" end="18616" title="South East Asia" label="South East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="18633" end="18645" title="trade routes" label="trade routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556317" start="18668" end="18674" title="vesara" label="vesara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840570" start="18699" end="18727" title="Badami Chalukya Architecture" label="Badami Chalukya Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4303378" start="18729" end="18758" title="Western Chalukya architecture" label="Western Chalukya architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361582" start="18772" end="18792" title="Hoysala architecture" label="Hoysala architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="18833" end="18839" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="18841" end="18848" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787136" start="18876" end="18885" title="Architecture of Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q13640694" start="18887" end="18907" title="Kalinga architecture" label="Kalinga architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q70346829" start="18913" end="18938" title="Māru-Gurjara architecture" label="Māru-Gurjara architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361582" start="18941" end="18961" title="Hoysala architecture" label="Hoysala architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q466581" start="19028" end="19042" title="Hoysala Empire" label="Hoysala Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="19113" end="19122" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536222" start="19287" end="19306" title="Chennakeshava Temple, Belur" label="Chennakesava Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q760603" start="19310" end="19315" title="Belur, Karnataka" label="Belur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517561" start="19321" end="19340" title="Hoysaleswara temple" label="Hoysaleswara temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013556" start="19344" end="19352" title="Halebidu" label="Halebidu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537502" start="19362" end="19375" title="Chennakesava Temple at Somanathapura" label="Kesava Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q106839124" start="19379" end="19392" title="Somanathapura" label="Somanathapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821682" start="19457" end="19465" title="Belavadi" label="Belavadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3690986" start="19467" end="19478" title="Amrithapura" label="Amrithapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479891" start="19484" end="19494" title="Nuggehalli" label="Nuggehalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="19786" end="19792" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="19793" end="19813" title="World Heritage Sites" label="World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449785" start="19998" end="20017" title="Chhatarpur District" label="Chhatarpur District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039087" start="20095" end="20111" title="Chandela dynasty" label="Chandela dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="20651" end="20677" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q80706" start="21002" end="21027" title="Hindu temple architecture" label="Hindu temple architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="21092" end="21103" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q842402" start="21186" end="21198" title="Hindu temple" label="Hindu temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672112" start="21320" end="21331" title="garbhagriha" label="garbhagriha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559335" start="21354" end="21360" title="Vimana (architectural feature)" label="vimana"/>
<link wikidata="Q569867" start="21442" end="21450" title="shikhara" label="shikhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435771" start="21535" end="21541" title="gopura" label="gopura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672112" start="21912" end="21923" title="garbhagriha" label="garbhagriha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120985" start="22076" end="22089" title="Vastu Shastra" label="Vastu Shastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532146" start="22365" end="22376" title="early Chola" label="early Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q877155" start="22378" end="22383" title="Chera Dynasty" label="Chera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532152" start="22392" end="22408" title="Early Pandyan Kingdom" label="Pandyan kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q380817" start="22443" end="22452" title="Kartikeya" label="Kartikeya"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="22454" end="22459" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200549" start="22461" end="22466" title="Mariamman" label="Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="22471" end="22477" title="Vishnu" label="Vishnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824397" start="22521" end="22533" title="Adichanallur" label="Adichanallur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135463" start="22535" end="22558" title="Puhar, Nagapattinam" label="Kaveripoompuharpattinam"/>
<link wikidata="Q208000" start="22563" end="22576" title="Mahabalipuram" label="Mahabalipuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219940" start="22678" end="22695" title="Sangam literature" label="Sangam literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q388774" start="22702" end="22738" title="Indian rock-cut architecture" label="architecture of the rock-cut temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q171309" start="22894" end="22905" title="Dravidian architecture" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="23007" end="23016" title="Chalukyas" label="Chalukyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q590751" start="23061" end="23067" title="Badami" label="Badami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556317" start="23117" end="23123" title="Vesara" label="Vesara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840570" start="23137" end="23165" title="Badami Chalukya Architecture" label="Badami Chalukya Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q817250" start="23212" end="23222" title="Pattadakal" label="Pattadakal"/>
<link wikidata="Q404851" start="23224" end="23230" title="Aihole" label="Aihole"/>
<link wikidata="Q590751" start="23235" end="23241" title="Badami" label="Badami"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741320" start="23296" end="23306" title="Malaprabha" label="Malaprabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="23465" end="23476" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q189616" start="23618" end="23624" title="Ellora" label="Ellora"/>
<link wikidata="Q878062" start="23737" end="23752" title="Hindu mythology" label="Hindu mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q235102" start="23763" end="23769" title="Ravana" label="Ravana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="23771" end="23776" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q170485" start="23781" end="23789" title="Parvathi" label="Parvathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="23873" end="23879" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q569867" start="23969" end="23977" title="shikhara" label="shikhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q817250" start="24085" end="24095" title="Pattadakal" label="Pattadakal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533669" start="24111" end="24136" title="Vijayanagara architecture" label="Vijayanagara architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q167639" start="24207" end="24225" title="Vijayanagar empire" label="Vijayanagar empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="24245" end="24256" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611788" start="24279" end="24291" title="Vijayanagara" label="Vijayanagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q949183" start="24312" end="24329" title="Tungabhadra River" label="Tungabhadra River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="24345" end="24354" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="24649" end="24655" title="Deccan Plateau" label="deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="24704" end="24712" title="Chalukya" label="Chalukya"/>
<link wikidata="Q466581" start="24714" end="24721" title="Hoysala" label="Hoysala"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="24723" end="24729" title="Pandya" label="Pandya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806806" start="24734" end="24739" title="Chola" label="Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968796" start="25525" end="25538" title="Warangal Fort" label="Warangal Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797068" start="25540" end="25562" title="Thousand Pillar Temple" label="Thousand Pillar Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380656" start="25568" end="25582" title="Ramappa Temple" label="Ramappa Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q283287" start="26504" end="26512" title="Mahakuta group of temples" label="Mahakuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q590751" start="26535" end="26541" title="Badami" label="Badami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517553" start="26678" end="26700" title="Durga temple, Aihole" label="Durga temple at Aihole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059208" start="26785" end="26807" title="Chaitya" label="Buddhist chaitya halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517573" start="26917" end="26932" title="Chalukya Shiva Temple" label="Lad Khan temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q404851" start="26936" end="26942" title="Aihole" label="Aihole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="27203" end="27212" title="Chalukya dynasty" label="Chalukyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840570" start="27259" end="27287" title="Badami Chalukya architecture" label="Badami Chalukya architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q569867" start="27436" end="27444" title="shikhara" label="shikhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559335" start="27458" end="27464" title="Vimana (architectural feature)" label="vimana"/>
<link wikidata="Q817250" start="27549" end="27559" title="Pattadakal" label="Pattadakal"/>
<link wikidata="Q856691" start="27682" end="27694" title="Rashtrakutas" label="Rashtrakutas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743905" start="27698" end="27708" title="Manyakheta" label="Manyakheta"/>
<link wikidata="Q189616" start="27738" end="27744" title="Ellora" label="Ellora"/>
<link wikidata="Q14624218" start="27895" end="27912" title="Western Chalukya Empire" label="Western Chalukyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q712521" start="27916" end="27923" title="Basavakalyan" label="Kalyani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632170" start="27956" end="27964" title="Lakkundi" label="Lakkundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287741" start="27966" end="27972" title="Doddabasappa Temple" label="Dambal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732769" start="27974" end="27979" title="Mahadeva Temple, Itagi" label="Itagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q522115" start="27985" end="27990" title="Gadag" label="Gadag"/>
<link wikidata="Q466581" start="28013" end="28027" title="Hoysala empire" label="Hoysala empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q760603" start="28068" end="28073" title="Belur, Karnataka" label="Belur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013556" start="28075" end="28082" title="Halebid" label="Halebid"/>
<link wikidata="Q106839124" start="28088" end="28101" title="Somanathapura" label="Somanathapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672112" start="28555" end="28566" title="garbhagriha" label="garbhagriha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781039" start="28593" end="28598" title="murti" label="murti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820111" start="28602" end="28612" title="cult image" label="cult image"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285431" start="28681" end="28688" title="mandapa" label="mandapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q388774" start="28757" end="28785" title="Indian rock-cut architecture" label="Indian rock-cut architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536413" start="28997" end="29006" title="Udayagiri and Khandagiri Caves" label="Udayagiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110322" start="29008" end="29018" title="Bava Pyara Caves" label="Bava Pyara"/>
<link wikidata="Q404851" start="29028" end="29034" title="Aihole" label="Aihole"/>
<link wikidata="Q825236" start="29036" end="29042" title="Badami cave temples" label="Badami"/>
<link wikidata="Q24937039" start="29048" end="29059" title="Kalugumalai Jain Beds" label="Kalugumalai"/>
<link wikidata="Q189616" start="29065" end="29077" title="Ellora Caves" label="Ellora Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077817" start="29355" end="29366" title="tirthankara" label="tirthankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380679" start="29503" end="29513" title="kayotsarga" label="kayotsarga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915198" start="29570" end="29582" title="at attention" label="at attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q12424488" start="29606" end="29638" title="Gopachal rock cut Jain monuments" label="Gopachal rock cut Jain monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q48730548" start="29647" end="29663" title="Siddhachal Caves" label="Siddhachal Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q22330289" start="29747" end="29767" title="Gommateshwara statue" label="Gommateshwara statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q24936793" start="29784" end="29803" title="Statue of Vasupujya" label="Statue of Vasupujya"/>
<link wikidata="Q22813236" start="29837" end="29853" title="Statue of Ahimsa" label="Statue of Ahimsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751369" start="30723" end="30745" title="Anandji Kalyanji Trust" label="Anandji Kalyanji Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="31168" end="31175" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="31180" end="31189" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="31396" end="31404" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712405" start="31633" end="31640" title="Dilwara Temples" label="Dilwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q695221" start="31644" end="31653" title="Mount Abu" label="Mount Abu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723675" start="31655" end="31662" title="Taranga Jain temple" label="Taranga"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808567" start="31664" end="31670" title="Girnar Jain temples" label="Girnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2800980" start="31675" end="31683" title="Palitana temples" label="Palitana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145265" start="33136" end="33154" title="Islam in India" label="influence of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844828" start="33400" end="33409" title="Sasanian architecture" label="Sassanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="33414" end="33430" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="33613" end="33626" title="Islamic world" label="Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q40089" start="33634" end="33639" title="brick" label="brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q272999" start="33726" end="33733" title="masonry" label="masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q42941" start="33855" end="33859" title="Agra" label="Agra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="33861" end="33867" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q162442" start="33872" end="33881" title="Allahabad" label="Allahabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083686" start="33952" end="33958" title="Bengal Sultanate" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q507796" start="33960" end="33967" title="Gujarat Sultanate" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183649" start="33969" end="33975" title="Deccan sultanates" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q167134" start="33977" end="33984" title="Jaunpur Sultanate" label="Jaunpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q11057724" start="33989" end="34007" title="Shah Mir dynasty" label="Kashmir Sultanates"/>
<link wikidata="Q47916" start="34081" end="34088" title="Lucknow" label="Lucknow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361" start="34090" end="34099" title="Hyderabad" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q10086" start="34104" end="34110" title="Mysore" label="Mysore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336152" start="34209" end="34223" title="princely state" label="princely state"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34245" end="34272" title="Indo-Islamic architecture#Pre-Mughal Regional Architecture" label="Significant regional styles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34561" end="34566" title="Malwa Sultanate#Malwa architecture" label="Malwa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34571" end="34589" title="Jaunpur Sultanate#Art and architecture" label="Jaunpur sultanates"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="34673" end="34688" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q311151" start="34703" end="34720" title="Qutb al-Din Aibak" label="Qutb al-Din Aibak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074330" start="34806" end="34818" title="Qutb Complex" label="Qutb Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647182" start="34844" end="34860" title="Muhammad of Ghor" label="Muhammad of Ghor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34932" end="34954" title="Qutb complex#Quwwat-ul-Islam Mosque" label="Quwwat-ul-Islam Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="35089" end="35093" title="Jain" label="Jain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12550" start="35177" end="35186" title="Corbel arch" label="corbelled"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35218" end="35228" title="Qutb Minar complex#Alai Minar of Khalji" label="Alai Minar"/>
<link wikidata="Q187635" start="35258" end="35268" title="Qutb Minar" label="Qutb Minar"/>
<link wikidata="Q335362" start="35289" end="35304" title="Alauddin Khalji" label="Alauddin Khilji"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511605" start="35353" end="35369" title="Tughlaqabad Fort" label="Tughlaqabad Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496635" start="35374" end="35391" title="Hauz Khas Complex" label="Hauz Khas Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q14547483" start="35448" end="35468" title="Adhai Din Ka Jhonpra" label="Adhai Din Ka Jhonpra"/>
<link wikidata="Q200049" start="35472" end="35477" title="Ajmer" label="Ajmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="35479" end="35488" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316819" start="35942" end="35950" title="voussoir" label="voussoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818610" start="35981" end="35995" title="Tomb of Balban" label="Tomb of Balban"/>
<link wikidata="Q61638119" start="36049" end="36061" title="Alai Darwaza" label="Alai Darwaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="36295" end="36304" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="36315" end="36321" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142681" start="36541" end="36555" title="horseshoe arch" label="horseshoe arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16528" start="36693" end="36698" title="lotus flower" label="lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679747" start="36705" end="36709" title="Jali" label="Jali"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859462" start="36717" end="36725" title="openwork" label="openwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014132" start="36939" end="36945" title="plinth" label="plinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770806" start="36957" end="36966" title="Molding (decorative)" label="mouldings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324228" start="37021" end="37030" title="hypostyle" label="hypostyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985076" start="37212" end="37233" title="Lodi Gardens" label="Lodi Gardens in Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458241" start="37265" end="37273" title="charbagh" label="charbagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q37112" start="37672" end="37682" title="Gulbarga" label="Kalaburagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676751" start="37684" end="37694" title="Taj ud-Din Firuz Shah" label="Firuz Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094756" start="37928" end="37935" title="Chhajja" label="chajjas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814353" start="38065" end="38075" title="Bidar Fort" label="Bidar Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q20638757" start="38086" end="38100" title="Ali Barid Shah I" label="Ali Barid Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q669317" start="38389" end="38400" title="Barid Shahi dynasty" label="Barid Shahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q461922" start="38502" end="38507" title="Bidar" label="Bidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83821" start="38912" end="38929" title="Bijapur Sultanate" label="Bijapur Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127151" start="38969" end="38980" title="Jama Mosque, Bijapur" label="Jami Masjid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631019" start="39193" end="39203" title="Ibrahim Adil Shah II" label="Ibrahim II"/>
<link wikidata="Q123692293" start="39212" end="39225" title="Ibrahim Rauza" label="Ibrahim Rouza"/>
<link wikidata="Q374521" start="39464" end="39471" title="Bahmani Sultanate" label="Bahmani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183649" start="39476" end="39493" title="Deccan sultanates" label="Deccan sultanates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771696" start="39520" end="39529" title="Charminar" label="Charminar"/>
<link wikidata="Q536288" start="39531" end="39543" title="Makkah Masjid, Hyderabad" label="Mecca Masjid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273006" start="39545" end="39561" title="Qutb Shahi tombs" label="Qutb Shahi tombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893532" start="39563" end="39583" title="Mahmud Gawan Madrasa" label="Madrasa Mahmud Gawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192295" start="39588" end="39598" title="Gol Gumbaz" label="Gol Gumbaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q192295" start="39639" end="39649" title="Gol Gumbaz" label="Gol Gumbaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141623" start="39844" end="39870" title="Golconda" label="fortified city of Golconda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467539" start="39916" end="39939" title="Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah" label="Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361" start="39972" end="39981" title="Hyderabad" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771696" start="40068" end="40077" title="Charminar" label="Charminar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083686" start="40214" end="40230" title="Bengal Sultanate" label="Bengal Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="40362" end="40372" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q695992" start="40559" end="40564" title="Niche (architecture)" label="niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q173907" start="40565" end="40571" title="mihrab" label="mihrab"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560724" start="40649" end="40666" title="Choto Sona Mosque" label="Choto Sona Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q104852922" start="40899" end="40931" title="Bengal temple architecture" label="Bengal Hindu temple architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q64343292" start="40965" end="40973" title="do-chala" label="do-chala"/>
<link wikidata="Q104852922" start="40975" end="40991" title="Jor-bangla Style" label="Jor-bangla Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q64343292" start="40997" end="41007" title="char-chala" label="char-chala"/>
<link wikidata="Q357320" start="41348" end="41360" title="Adina Mosque" label="Adina Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="41572" end="41581" title="Sasanian" label="Sassanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q64343292" start="41809" end="41817" title="do-chala" label="do-chala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227534" start="41893" end="41899" title="Pandua, Hooghly" label="Pandua"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859654" start="42067" end="42086" title="Ilyas Shahi dynasty" label="Ilyas Shahi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126005" start="42109" end="42118" title="Jalaluddin Muhammad Shah" label="Jalaludin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11057724" start="42555" end="42571" title="Shah Mir dynasty" label="Shah Mir dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="42613" end="42630" title="Kashmir" label="region of Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q200697" start="42657" end="42673" title="Gilgit-Baltistan" label="Gilgit-Baltistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q200130" start="42675" end="42687" title="Azad Kashmir" label="Azad Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q66278313" start="42689" end="42706" title="Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q200667" start="42708" end="42714" title="Ladakh" label="Ladakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q230830" start="42720" end="42730" title="Aksai Chin" label="Aksai Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170115" start="42912" end="42920" title="Srinagar" label="Srinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817955" start="42960" end="42977" title="Sikandar Shah Miri" label="Sikandar Shah Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031965" start="42994" end="43006" title="Jamia Masjid, Srinagar" label="Jamia Masjid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19459653" start="43262" end="43277" title="Khanqah-e-Moula" label="Khanqah-e-Moula"/>
<link wikidata="Q17560898" start="43312" end="43323" title="Aali Mosque" label="Aali Masjid"/>
<link wikidata="Q200697" start="43391" end="43407" title="Gilgit-Baltistan" label="Gilgit-Baltistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424935" start="43416" end="43431" title="Chaqchan Mosque" label="Chaqchan Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740561" start="43435" end="43441" title="Khaplu" label="Khaplu"/>
<link wikidata="Q14762423" start="43457" end="43471" title="Amburiq Mosque" label="Amburiq Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496305" start="43475" end="43481" title="Shigar" label="Shigar"/>
<link wikidata="Q507796" start="43674" end="43691" title="Gujarat Sultanate" label="Gujarat Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q727118" start="43794" end="43812" title="Muzaffarids (Gujarat)" label="Muzaffarid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070" start="43863" end="43872" title="Ahmedabad" label="Ahmedabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758009" start="43976" end="44000" title="Jama Mosque, Ahmedabad" label="Jami Masjid of Ahmedabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127153" start="44002" end="44026" title="Jama Mosque, Champaner" label="Jama Masjid at Champaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q24949958" start="44028" end="44051" title="Jami Mosque, Khambhat" label="Jami Masjid at Khambhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895565" start="44053" end="44069" title="Qutbuddin Mosque" label="Qutbuddin Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q18657315" start="44071" end="44091" title="Rani Rupamati&amp;#x27;s Mosque" label="Rani Rupamati Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q15697211" start="44093" end="44105" title="Sarkhej Roza" label="Sarkhej Roza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669049" start="44107" end="44125" title="Sidi Bashir Mosque" label="Sidi Bashir Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395657" start="44127" end="44140" title="Kevada Mosque" label="Kevada Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032778" start="44142" end="44160" title="Sidi Saiyyed Mosque" label="Sidi Sayyed Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q6958836" start="44162" end="44175" title="Nagina Mosque" label="Nagina Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q18752661" start="44230" end="44242" title="Teen Darwaza" label="Teen Darwaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544561" start="44244" end="44255" title="Bhadra Fort" label="Bhadra Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251479" start="44264" end="44283" title="Dada Harir Stepwell" label="Dada Harir Stepwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q70346829" start="44405" end="44430" title="Māru-Gurjara architecture" label="Maru-Gurjara architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q173907" start="44452" end="44458" title="mihrab" label="mihrab"/>
<link wikidata="Q48356" start="44610" end="44617" title="minaret" label="minaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758009" start="44921" end="44943" title="Jama Mosque, Ahmedabad" label="Jama Mosque, Ahmedabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4554104" start="44964" end="44985" title="1819 Rann of Kutch earthquake" label="an earthquake in 1819"/>
<link wikidata="Q542261" start="45241" end="45260" title="Mughal architecture" label="Mughal architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q173907" start="45285" end="45291" title="mihrab" label="mihrab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679747" start="45319" end="45323" title="jali" label="jali"/>
<link wikidata="Q936941" start="45378" end="45385" title="chattri" label="chattri"/>
<link wikidata="Q11346334" start="45416" end="45422" title="cupola" label="cupola"/>
<link wikidata="Q844427" start="45431" end="45469" title="Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park" label="Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="45554" end="45560" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q542261" start="45666" end="45685" title="Mughal architecture" label="Mughal architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="46135" end="46143" title="Mausoleum" label="mausolea"/>
<link wikidata="Q189648" start="46176" end="46191" title="Tomb of Humayun" label="Tomb of Humayun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9141" start="46219" end="46228" title="Taj Mahal" label="Taj Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458241" start="46334" end="46359" title="Charbagh" label="gardens on all four sides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044853" start="46404" end="46427" title="Pietra dura" label="&amp;quot;pachin kari&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679747" start="46454" end="46458" title="jali" label="jali"/>
<link wikidata="Q171857" start="47140" end="47148" title="Agra Fort" label="Red Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q42941" start="47152" end="47156" title="Agra" label="Agra"/>
<link wikidata="Q179046" start="47190" end="47204" title="Fatehpur Sikri" label="Fatehpur Sikri"/>
<link wikidata="Q9141" start="47279" end="47288" title="Taj Mahal" label="Taj Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q231693" start="47316" end="47328" title="Mumtaz Mahal" label="Mumtaz Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q83672" start="47332" end="47342" title="Shah Jahan" label="Shah Jahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q669432" start="47486" end="47528" title="Aniconism in Islam" label="forbidden in places of worship under Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="48162" end="48174" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q212940" start="48307" end="48314" title="Islamic architecture" label="Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429892" start="48378" end="48392" title="Mughal gardens" label="Mughal gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114508" start="48433" end="48446" title="Islamic garden" label="Islamic style"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460" start="48477" end="48492" title="Persian gardens" label="Persian gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458241" start="48516" end="48537" title="Charbagh" label="&amp;quot;char bagh&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q835143" start="48601" end="48625" title="Jannah" label="four gardens of Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="48643" end="48654" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566899" start="49412" end="49429" title="Muslim conquests of the Indian subcontinent" label="Islamic invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="49432" end="49438" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10428494" start="49550" end="49573" title="Hill Forts of Rajasthan" label="Hill Forts of Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q456817" start="49575" end="49579" title="Amer Fort" label="Amer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695769" start="49581" end="49588" title="Chittor Fort" label="Chittor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891508" start="49590" end="49596" title="Gagron Fort" label="Gagron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634368" start="49598" end="49607" title="Jaisalmer Fort" label="Jaisalmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246283" start="49609" end="49620" title="Kumbhalgarh" label="Kumbhalgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724894" start="49622" end="49633" title="Ranthambore Fort" label="Ranthambore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483099" start="49863" end="49878" title="Mehrangarh Fort" label="Mehrangarh Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722759" start="49883" end="49895" title="Jaigarh Fort" label="Jaigarh Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="49937" end="49942" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124086" start="49978" end="50004" title="Jainism in Rajasthan" label="considerable Jain minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q70346829" start="50067" end="50092" title="Māru-Gurjara architecture" label="Māru-Gurjara architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="50187" end="50194" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q80706" start="50370" end="50395" title="Hindu temple architecture" label="Hindu temple architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712405" start="50401" end="50421" title="Dilwara Temples" label="Dilwara Jain Temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q695221" start="50425" end="50434" title="Mount Abu" label="Mount Abu"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="50526" end="50532" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q936941" start="50740" end="50747" title="Chhatri" label="Chhatri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807338" start="50776" end="50784" title="Jharokha" label="Jharokha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473950" start="50799" end="50804" title="Bawdi" label="Bawdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190979" start="51259" end="51275" title="Jharokha Darshan" label="Jharokha Darshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124044" start="51405" end="51411" title="City wall of Jaipur" label="walled"/>
<link wikidata="Q66485" start="51420" end="51426" title="Jaipur" label="Jaipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392864" start="51472" end="51484" title="Jai Singh II" label="Jai Singh II"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="51537" end="51550" title="town planning" label="town planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723395" start="51628" end="51639" title="City Palace, Jaipur" label="City Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q836531" start="51641" end="51651" title="Hawa Mahal" label="Hawa Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289168" start="51653" end="51667" title="Rambagh Palace" label="Rambagh Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757538" start="51669" end="51678" title="Jal Mahal" label="Jal Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710411" start="51683" end="51701" title="Albert Hall Museum" label="Albert Hall Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200340" start="51719" end="51726" title="Udaipur" label="Udaipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842076" start="51767" end="51783" title="Bagore-ki-Haveli" label="Bagore-ki-Haveli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336152" start="51917" end="51931" title="princely state" label="princely state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="51936" end="51949" title="Presidencies and provinces of British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710411" start="52009" end="52027" title="Albert Hall Museum" label="Albert Hall Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2771350" start="52029" end="52043" title="Lalgarh Palace" label="Lalgarh Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307382" start="52049" end="52068" title="Umaid Bhawan Palace" label="Umaid Bhawan Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374557" start="52161" end="52181" title="Indo-Saracenic architecture" label="Indo-Saracenic style"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621572" start="52209" end="52226" title="Sikh architecture" label="Sikh architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q542261" start="52252" end="52258" title="Mughal architecture" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q212940" start="52263" end="52270" title="Islamic architecture" label="Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q244621" start="52283" end="52293" title="onion dome" label="onion dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="52295" end="52301" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q83672" start="52384" end="52394" title="Shah Jahan" label="Shah Jahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q936941" start="52424" end="52432" title="Chhatri" label="chattris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787182" start="52553" end="52572" title="Architecture of Rajasthan" label="Rajput architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="52641" end="52646" title="forts" label="forts"/>
<link wikidata="Q337986" start="52771" end="52779" title="gurdwara" label="gurdwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q180422" start="52946" end="52959" title="Golden Temple" label="Golden Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694968" start="52976" end="52987" title="Hazur Sahib" label="Hazur Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="54190" end="54202" title="Maratha Confederacy" label="Maratha Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="54282" end="54295" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q139845" start="54303" end="54322" title="Mughal–Maratha Wars" label="Maratha-Mughal Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351060" start="54356" end="54369" title="Shaniwar Wada" label="Shaniwar Wada"/>
<link wikidata="Q13642664" start="54374" end="54383" title="Lal Mahal" label="Lal Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538" start="54387" end="54391" title="Pune" label="Pune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344358" start="54655" end="54674" title="Jyotirlinga" label="jyotirlinga temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675" start="54776" end="54792" title="Kashi Vishwanath Temple" label="Kashi Vishwanath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721992" start="54794" end="54807" title="Mahakaleshwar Jyotirlinga" label="Mahakaleshwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426825" start="54809" end="54822" title="Trimbakeshwar Shiva Temple" label="Trimbakeshwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092799" start="54824" end="54836" title="Grishneshwar Temple" label="Grishneshwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555933" start="54850" end="54867" title="Ghats in Varanasi" label="ghats of Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630402" start="54925" end="54943" title="Dashashwamedh Ghat" label="Dashashwamedh Ghat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433927" start="54948" end="54960" title="Scindia Ghat" label="Scindia Ghat"/>
<link wikidata="Q23017648" start="55154" end="55159" title="Nawab" label="Nawab"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689218" start="55162" end="55169" title="Afghans in India" label="Afghans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="55438" end="55449" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="55454" end="55463" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q89134073" start="55479" end="55489" title="Khafi Khan" label="Khafi Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017" start="55523" end="55535" title="16th Century" label="16th Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q16560" start="55543" end="55550" title="Palaces" label="Palaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q44539" start="55552" end="55559" title="temples" label="temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="55564" end="55569" title="Forts" label="Forts"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="55622" end="55635" title="Mughals" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="55786" end="55792" title="Deccan" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265028" start="55945" end="55952" title="Maratha" label="Maratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q12057021" start="56244" end="56258" title="Medieval India" label="Medieval India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229071" start="57042" end="57048" title="Motif (visual arts)" label="motifs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911739" start="57061" end="57073" title="ashtamangala" label="ashtamangala"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="57077" end="57085" title="swastika" label="swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509321" start="57628" end="57644" title="Dual system of government" label="duality of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="58318" end="58328" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="58337" end="58350" title="States and union territories of India" label="Indian states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="58354" end="58365" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363" start="58367" end="58374" title="Tripura" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581002" start="58380" end="58392" title="Barak Valley" label="Barak Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="58396" end="58401" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="58470" end="58489" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q930314" start="58630" end="58653" title="vernacular architecture" label="vernacular architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202402" start="58664" end="58673" title="townhouse" label="townhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="58679" end="58692" title="country house" label="country house"/>
<link wikidata="Q668412" start="58782" end="58793" title="Pala Empire" label="Pala Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q844619" start="58925" end="58931" title="vihara" label="vihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="58946" end="58951" title="stupa" label="stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q305044" start="59085" end="59109" title="Somapura Mahavihara" label="Grand Vihara of Somapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="59117" end="59143" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q305044" start="59164" end="59172" title="Somapura Mahavihara" label="Somapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q43473" start="59207" end="59217" title="Angkor Wat" label="Angkor Wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="59402" end="59406" title="Jain" label="Jain"/>
<link wikidata="Q80706" start="59411" end="59436" title="Hindu temple architecture" label="Hindu temple architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285431" start="59481" end="59488" title="mandapa" label="mandapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q104852922" start="59571" end="59575" title="deul" label="deul"/>
<link wikidata="Q64343292" start="59785" end="59796" title="Chala Style" label="Chala style"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60065" end="60075" title="Chala Style#char-chala" label="char-chala"/>
<link wikidata="Q64343295" start="60462" end="60467" title="Ratna Style" label="ratna"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065866" start="60790" end="60799" title="Zamindars of Bengal" label="Zamindars"/>
<link wikidata="Q85804103" start="61225" end="61247" title="Sundarbans settlements" label="Sundarbans settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="61255" end="61260" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="61271" end="61282" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80706" start="61496" end="61521" title="Hindu temple architecture" label="Hindu temple architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="61765" end="61772" title="Brahmin" label="Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445420" start="62186" end="62193" title="shikara" label="shikara"/>
<link wikidata="Q64343295" start="62212" end="62223" title="Pancharatna (architecture)" label="pancharatna"/>
<link wikidata="Q64343295" start="62254" end="62263" title="Navaratna (architecture)" label="navaratna"/>
<link wikidata="Q850107" start="62330" end="62338" title="bungalow" label="bungalow"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787657" start="62483" end="62503" title="Bengal roofs" label="Bengali curved roofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q825394" start="62584" end="62609" title="Indo-Islamic architecture" label="Indo-Islamic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q542261" start="62661" end="62680" title="Mughal architecture" label="Mughal architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295089" start="62699" end="62708" title="Rasmancha, Bishnupur" label="Rasmancha"/>
<link wikidata="Q37293" start="63026" end="63034" title="Ramayana" label="Ramayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="63036" end="63047" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q188602" start="63056" end="63063" title="Puranas" label="Puranas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157765" start="63078" end="63102" title="Dakshineswar Kali Temple" label="Dakshineswar Kali Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q930314" start="63329" end="63352" title="vernacular architecture" label="vernacular architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055732" start="63386" end="63393" title="Molding (process)" label="moulded"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="63405" end="63415" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q14637172" start="64176" end="64193" title="Colonial India" label="colonies in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="64304" end="64323" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="64434" end="64450" title="Madras (Chennai)" label="Madras (Chennai)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="64452" end="64460" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="64462" end="64477" title="Bombay (Mumbai)" label="Bombay (Mumbai)"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="64479" end="64488" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355" start="64496" end="64505" title="Bangalore" label="Bangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361" start="64547" end="64556" title="Hyderabad" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374557" start="64580" end="64615" title="Indo-Saracenic Revival architecture" label="Indo-Saracenic Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="65088" end="65103" title="Mumbai (Bombay)" label="Mumbai (Bombay)"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="65196" end="65210" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="gothic revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q235884" start="65212" end="65229" title="Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus railway station" label="Victoria terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q406402" start="65231" end="65251" title="University of Bombay" label="University of Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285587" start="65253" end="65272" title="Rajabai Clock Tower" label="Rajabai Clock Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q695852" start="65274" end="65291" title="Bombay High Court" label="Bombay High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936220" start="65293" end="65305" title="Municipal Corporation Building, Mumbai" label="BMC Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374557" start="65308" end="65322" title="Indo-Saracenic architecture" label="Indo-Saracenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071500" start="65324" end="65346" title="Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Vastu Sangrahalaya" label="Prince of Wales Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q864862" start="65348" end="65364" title="Gateway of India" label="Gateway of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q19104" start="65366" end="65388" title="The Taj Mahal Palace Hotel" label="Taj Mahal Palace Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="65394" end="65402" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395341" start="65404" end="65415" title="Eros Cinema" label="Eros Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008948" start="65417" end="65445" title="New India Assurance Building" label="New India Assurance Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091701" start="65916" end="65930" title="Chepauk Palace" label="Chepauk Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149310" start="65956" end="65969" title="Paul Benfield" label="Paul Benfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438739" start="66167" end="66181" title="Fort St. George, India" label="Fort St George"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374557" start="66680" end="66707" title="Indo-Saracenic architecture" label="Indo-Saracenic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q18530950" start="66781" end="66793" title="Vincent Esch" label="Vincent Esch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508644" start="66798" end="66811" title="George Wittet" label="George Wittet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356352" start="66845" end="66862" title="Victoria Memorial, Kolkata" label="Victoria Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065866" start="67329" end="67345" title="Zamindars of Bengal" label="zamindar estates"/>
<link wikidata="" start="67862" end="67878" title=":Category:Italianate architecture in India" label="adopted in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="68523" end="68530" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="68565" end="68590" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434047" start="68630" end="68658" title="British Residency, Hyderabad" label="British Residency, Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263539" start="68670" end="68686" title="Falaknuma Palace" label="Falaknuma Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q189141" start="68708" end="68725" title="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Church, Chennai" label="St Andrews Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349690" start="68744" end="68754" title="Raj Bhavan, Kolkata" label="Raj Bhawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823351" start="68766" end="68779" title="Metcalfe Hall" label="Metcalfe Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855080" start="68803" end="68822" title="Bangalore Town Hall" label="Bangalore Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="68867" end="68875" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020576" start="68959" end="68989" title="Indian Institute of Architects" label="Indian Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008948" start="69473" end="69501" title="New India Assurance Building" label="New India Assurance Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395341" start="69503" end="69514" title="Eros Cinema" label="Eros Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q985828" start="69539" end="69551" title="Marine Drive, Mumbai" label="Marine Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="69619" end="69636" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="69786" end="69791" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q459732" start="69796" end="69809" title="Sylhet region" label="Sylhet region"/>
<link wikidata="Q831691" start="69937" end="69943" title="storey" label="storey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327277" start="69973" end="69989" title="Earthquake-resistant structures" label="earthquake proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="70032" end="70036" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q738843" start="70188" end="70206" title="1897 Assam earthquake" label="earthquake of 1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="70291" end="70297" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q186131" start="70501" end="70508" title="terrain" label="terrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q878223" start="70625" end="70633" title="highland" label="highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161370" start="70740" end="70745" title="gable" label="gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q42948" start="70795" end="70799" title="wall" label="wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q629000" start="70813" end="70826" title="Timber framing" label="timber-framed"/>
<link wikidata="Q274988" start="70828" end="70835" title="plaster" label="plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="70843" end="70849" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q221706" start="70861" end="70868" title="ceiling" label="ceiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q584049" start="70874" end="70889" title="Ventilation (architecture)" label="well-ventilated"/>
<link wikidata="Q180516" start="70890" end="70894" title="room" label="room"/>
<link wikidata="Q468402" start="70946" end="70951" title="Ceramic tiles" label="tiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="70953" end="70959" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="70963" end="70968" title="Marble" label="stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q33565" start="70984" end="70990" title="Stilt house" label="stilts"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="71062" end="71087" title="Portuguese Goa and Damaon" label="Portuguese Goa and Damaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775344" start="71092" end="71121" title="Portuguese Bombay and Bassein" label="Portuguese Bombay and Bassein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977875" start="71127" end="71136" title="Madh Island" label="Madh Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588954" start="71138" end="71165" title="St. John the Baptist Church, Mumbai" label="St. John the Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049681" start="71172" end="71190" title="Castella de Aguada" label="Castella de Aguada"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726428" start="71247" end="71275" title="Churches and convents of Goa" label="Churches and convents of Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="71344" end="71370" title="World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="71560" end="71573" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="71582" end="71589" title="Calicut" label="Calicut"/>
<link wikidata="Q473181" start="71610" end="71624" title="Malabar region" label="Malabar region"/>
<link wikidata="Q739687" start="71653" end="71666" title="Hooghly River" label="Hooghly river"/>
<link wikidata="Q629006" start="71832" end="71838" title="Bandel" label="Bandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815367" start="71854" end="71863" title="Serampore" label="Serampore"/>
<link wikidata="Q20099772" start="71878" end="71887" title="Hugli-Chuchura" label="Chinsurah"/>
<link wikidata="Q695591" start="71906" end="71919" title="Chandannagar" label="Chandernagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q213663" start="72200" end="72225" title="Louis XIV&amp;#x27;s East India Company" label="French East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q646374" start="72329" end="72356" title="French India" label="French settlements in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132695" start="73337" end="73343" title="Calico (textile)" label="Calico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074462" start="73345" end="73351" title="chintz" label="chintz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361366" start="73357" end="73366" title="palampore" label="palampore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368828" start="73457" end="73466" title="Roshandan" label="Roshandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="73558" end="73569" title="North India" label="North India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020576" start="73736" end="73766" title="Indian Institute of Architects" label="Indian Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q37935943" start="73890" end="73907" title="Ganesh Bhikaji Deolalikar" label="Ganesh Deolalikar"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="73930" end="73943" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q378157" start="73957" end="73964" title="Edwin Lutyens" label="Lutyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q382771" start="73965" end="73970" title="Herbert Baker" label="Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q283257" start="74042" end="74056" title="Vidhana Soudha" label="Vidhana Soudha"/>
<link wikidata="Q171309" start="74082" end="74104" title="Dravidian architecture" label="Dravidian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724" start="74133" end="74145" title="Le Corbusier" label="Le Corbusier"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="74160" end="74182" title="Modern architecture" label="modernist architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="74204" end="74220" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q43433" start="74243" end="74253" title="Chandigarh" label="Chandigarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25931399" start="74395" end="74402" title="Chandigarh Capitol Complex" label="capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126217" start="74450" end="74468" title="Palace of Assembly (Chandigarh)" label="Palace of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q130502" start="74474" end="74484" title="Punjab and Haryana High Court" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444209" start="74490" end="74505" title="Secretariat Building (Chandigarh)" label="the Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16374" start="74528" end="74542" title="Sanskar Kendra" label="Sanskar Kendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070" start="74546" end="74555" title="Ahmedabad" label="Ahmedabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q46027" start="74914" end="74927" title="Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad" label="IIM Ahmedabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q210134" start="74931" end="74941" title="Louis Kahn" label="Louis Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194650" start="74950" end="74959" title="Indian Institute of Technology Delhi" label="IIT Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20683946" start="74963" end="74985" title="Jugal Kishore Choudhury" label="Jugal Kishore Chodhury"/>
<link wikidata="Q782682" start="74994" end="75004" title="Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur" label="IIT Kanpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673974" start="75008" end="75023" title="Achyut Kanvinde" label="Achyut Kanvinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q46021" start="75032" end="75045" title="Indian Institute of Management Bangalore" label="IIM Bangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q380449" start="75049" end="75060" title="B. V. Doshi" label="B. V. Doshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q940843" start="75069" end="75081" title="Lotus Temple" label="Lotus Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368462" start="75085" end="75099" title="Fariborz Sahba" label="Fariborz Sahba"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165903" start="75112" end="75131" title="Jawahar Kala Kendra" label="Jawahar Kala Kendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727600" start="75143" end="75163" title="Madhya Pradesh Legislative Assembly" label="Vidhan Bhawan Bhopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q699145" start="75174" end="75188" title="Charles Correa" label="Charles Correa"/>
<link wikidata="Q162324" start="75216" end="75235" title="International Style (architecture)" label="international style"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711913" start="75294" end="75300" title="The 42 (Kolkata)" label="The 42"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458919" start="75312" end="75324" title="The Imperial (Mumbai)" label="The Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638312" start="75335" end="75352" title="Hafeez Contractor" label="Hafeez Contractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808676" start="75397" end="75410" title="Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad" label="IIT Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112085" start="75414" end="75435" title="Christopher Charles Benninger" label="Christopher Benninger"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881964" start="75499" end="75508" title="Amaravati" label="Amaravati"/>
<link wikidata="Q16893599" start="75510" end="75538" title="Kolkata Museum of Modern Art" label="Kolkata Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531421" start="75540" end="75560" title="Sardar Patel Stadium" label="Sardar Patel Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q507939" start="75562" end="75571" title="World One" label="World One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015728" start="75577" end="75596" title="Navi Mumbai International Airport" label="Navi Mumbai Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q936941" start="76456" end="76463" title="Chhatri" label="chattri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4513" start="76646" end="76655" title="Mahabodhi Temple" label="Mahabodhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42063" start="76685" end="76693" title="Xuanzang" label="Xuanzang"/>
<link wikidata="Q216243" start="76715" end="76722" title="Nalanda" label="Nalanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110851" start="76992" end="77003" title="Manasollasa" label="Manasollasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11709" start="77684" end="77697" title="Lodi dynasty" label="Lodhi Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624359" start="78038" end="78052" title="Sakia" label="Persian wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q189648" start="78132" end="78151" title="Humayun&amp;#x27;s Tomb" label="Humayun&amp;#x27;s Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q416646" start="78162" end="78182" title="Akbar&amp;#x27;s tomb" label="Akbar&amp;#x27;s Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q851242" start="78261" end="78274" title="Shalimar Bagh, Srinagar" label="Shalimar Bagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="78652" end="78661" title="true arch" label="true arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="78839" end="78864" title="Indus Valley civilisation" label="Indus Valley civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071455" start="79033" end="79041" title="gavaksha" label="gavaksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059208" start="79051" end="79058" title="chaitya" label="chaitya"/>
<link wikidata="Q12537" start="79400" end="79406" title="corbel" label="corbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="79438" end="79445" title="apse" label="apsidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q56242029" start="79456" end="79473" title="Trivikrama Temple" label="Trivikrama Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q28172670" start="79477" end="79493" title="Ter, Maharashtra" label="Ter, Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q695992" start="79608" end="79619" title="blind niche" label="blind niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q30327019" start="79912" end="79927" title="post and lintel" label="post and lintel"/>
<link wikidata="Q455430" start="80566" end="80586" title="Alexander Cunningham" label="Alexander Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q632235" start="80600" end="80630" title="Archaeological Survey of India" label="Archaeological Survey of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q949268" start="81144" end="81161" title="Nanda Empire" label="pre Mauryan Nanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6322989" start="81236" end="81250" title="K. P. Jayaswal" label="K. P. Jayaswal"/>
<link wikidata="Q185083" start="81269" end="81275" title="Brahmi script" label="Brahmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194868" start="81343" end="81351" title="Kosambi" label="Kausambi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="81377" end="81384" title="Kushan Empire" label="Kushana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="81411" end="81417" title="Vishnu" label="Vishnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q24939033" start="81429" end="81441" title="Deo Barunark" label="Deo Baranark"/>
<link wikidata="Q40889216" start="81443" end="81446" title="Amb Temples" label="Amb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346127" start="81451" end="81460" title="Kafir Kot" label="Kafir Kot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955540" start="81474" end="81485" title="Hindu Shahi" label="Hindu Shahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901840" start="81513" end="81523" title="Bhitargaon" label="Bhitargaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4513" start="81668" end="81684" title="Mahabodhi Temple" label="Mahabodhi Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q57892327" start="82910" end="82915" title="Hindu architecture" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="82917" end="82925" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="82930" end="82934" title="Jain" label="Jain"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="82955" end="82974" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="82976" end="82990" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="83004" end="83013" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q681188" start="83023" end="83030" title="paifang" label="paifang"/>
<link wikidata="Q234731" start="83050" end="83055" title="torii" label="torii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216011" start="83073" end="83083" title="Hongsalmun" label="Hongsalmun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279344" start="83103" end="83116" title="Giant Swing" label="Sao Ching Cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q57892327" start="83220" end="83225" title="Hindu architecture" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047562" start="83230" end="83238" title="Buddhist architecture" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="83347" end="83351" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="83355" end="83360" title="Rock (geology)" label="stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="83532" end="83537" title="stupa" label="stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q181123" start="83554" end="83565" title="Great Stupa of Sanchi" label="Great Stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q181123" start="83575" end="83581" title="Sanchi" label="Sanchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q215700" start="84006" end="84020" title="Vesak" label="Vesak festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="84024" end="84033" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q215700" start="84249" end="84254" title="Vesak" label="Vesak"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="85767" end="85773" title="Champa" label="Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069757" start="85978" end="85999" title="Po Klong Garai Temple" label="Po Klong Garai Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q19013" start="86005" end="86014" title="Phan Rang" label="Phan Rang"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="86282" end="86288" title="Champa" label="Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="86336" end="86343" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q181908" start="86391" end="86399" title="andesite" label="andesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q201028" start="86429" end="86434" title="Khmer people" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q163607" start="86438" end="86444" title="Angkor" label="Angkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="86472" end="86481" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q383256" start="86527" end="86531" title="Cham people" label="Cham"/>
<link wikidata="Q40089" start="86565" end="86570" title="brick" label="brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q391406" start="86651" end="86657" title="Mỹ Sơn" label="Mỹ Sơn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25282" start="86663" end="86670" title="Da Nang" label="Da Nang"/>
<link wikidata="Q600269" start="86672" end="86680" title="Po Nagar" label="Po Nagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19491" start="86686" end="86695" title="Nha Trang" label="Nha Trang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16481478" start="86701" end="86715" title="Po Klong Garai" label="Po Klong Garai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736554" start="87535" end="87540" title="Candi of Indonesia" label="candi"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="87553" end="87562" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2194811" start="87710" end="87720" title="Meru tower" label="Meru tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="87724" end="87728" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q12472525" start="87816" end="87837" title="Balinese architecture" label="Balinese architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124902" start="87894" end="87898" title="Balinese temple" label="pura"/>
<link wikidata="Q47721" start="88000" end="88009" title="Prambanan" label="Prambanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568" start="88069" end="88079" title="Yogyakarta" label="Yogyakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9595" start="88163" end="88171" title="Trimurti" label="Trimurti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088394" start="88324" end="88331" title="Chandi" label="Candika"/>
<link wikidata="Q382973" start="88380" end="88385" title="Durga" label="Durga"/>
<link wikidata="Q163607" start="88489" end="88495" title="Angkor" label="Angkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43473" start="88741" end="88751" title="Angkor Wat" label="Angkor Wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107826" start="88846" end="88851" title="Prang (architecture)" label="prang"/>
<link wikidata="Q652550" start="89169" end="89179" title="Mount Meru" label="Mount Meru"/>
<link wikidata="Q867782" start="89685" end="89690" title="Funan" label="Funan"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="89726" end="89738" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014588" start="89740" end="89758" title="Indianised kingdom" label="Indianised kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446298" start="89772" end="89775" title="Mon kingdoms" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="89781" end="89793" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="89838" end="89845" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q569867" start="90020" end="90028" title="shikhara" label="shikhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q43473" start="90206" end="90216" title="Angkor Wat" label="Angkor Wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q223665" start="90221" end="90232" title="Angkor Thom" label="Angkor Thom"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="90244" end="90256" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="90301" end="90318" title="Sukhothai Kingdom" label="Sukhothai Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="90409" end="90414" title="stupa" label="stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107826" start="90454" end="90459" title="Prang (architecture)" label="prang"/>
<link wikidata="Q724970" start="90551" end="90559" title="Wat Arun" label="Wat Arun"/>
<link wikidata="Q33526" start="90844" end="90850" title="stucco" label="stucco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481294" start="90939" end="90951" title="Wat Phra Si Rattana Mahathat" label="Wat Mahathat"/>
<link wikidata="Q867579" start="90955" end="90966" title="Phitsanulok" label="Phitsanulok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000809" start="91084" end="91122" title="Buddharupa" label="&amp;quot;Buddharupa&amp;quot; (Buddha statue)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539698" start="91268" end="91275" title="Trishul (weapon)" label="Trishul"/>
<link wikidata="Q128335" start="91297" end="91302" title="Indra" label="Indra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216982" start="91365" end="91389" title="Revivalism (architecture)" label="revivalist architectural"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="91519" end="91530" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336152" start="91565" end="91579" title="princely state" label="princely state"/>
<link wikidata="Q825394" start="91636" end="91661" title="Indo-Islamic architecture" label="Indo-Islamic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q542261" start="91674" end="91693" title="Mughal architecture" label="Mughal architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="91837" end="91851" title="Gothic revival architecture" label="Gothic revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="91856" end="91869" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neo-Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793362" start="91937" end="91954" title="Thomas R. Metcalf" label="Thomas R. Metcalf"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="92332" end="92346" title="British Malaya" label="British Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="92540" end="92548" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="92551" end="92563" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400154" start="92680" end="92702" title="Federated Malay States" label="Federated Malay States"/>
<link wikidata="Q637909" start="93074" end="93077" title="Mon people" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="93168" end="93180" title="Indochina" label="Indo-Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="93194" end="93212" title="Theravada" label="Theravada Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q814730" start="93214" end="93223" title="Beikthano" label="Beikthano"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="93317" end="93322" title="stupa" label="stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q888574" start="93476" end="93488" title="Pagan Kingdom" label="Pagan period"/>
<link wikidata="Q12493" start="93585" end="93589" title="dome" label="dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q40089" start="93600" end="93605" title="brick" label="brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="93658" end="93662" title="arch" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q668412" start="93711" end="93722" title="Pala Empire" label="Pala Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q485727" start="93746" end="93759" title="Ananda Temple" label="Ananda Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q29317" start="93816" end="93821" title="Bagan" label="Bagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q641406" start="93977" end="93985" title="Terrace (building)" label="terraces"/>
<link wikidata="Q887132" start="94337" end="94352" title="Kyansittha" label="King Kyansittha"/>
<link wikidata="Q45584" start="94383" end="94391" title="Vaishnavism" label="Vaisnava"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515193" start="94941" end="94976" title="Silk Road transmission of Buddhism" label="Buddhism was transmitted from India"/>
<link wikidata="Q681188" start="94986" end="94993" title="paifang" label="paifang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216011" start="95036" end="95046" title="Hongsalmun" label="Hongsalmun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279344" start="95061" end="95074" title="Giant Swing" label="Sao Ching Cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014588" start="95351" end="95366" title="Indianization of Southeast Asia" label="the Indian word"/>
<link wikidata="Q731341" start="95373" end="95379" title="torana" label="torana"/>
<link wikidata="Q667783" start="95636" end="95641" title="sandō" label="sandō"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539698" start="96235" end="96242" title="trisula" label="trisula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084954" start="96251" end="96258" title="taegeuk" label="taegeuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q957904" start="96363" end="96384" title="Chinese architecture" label="Chinese architectural"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="96385" end="96389" title="arch" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q731341" start="96428" end="96434" title="torana" label="torana"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="96450" end="96463" title="ancient India" label="ancient India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601913" start="96717" end="96741" title="Greek conquests in India" label="Greek conquests in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="96748" end="96767" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642049" start="96962" end="96966" title="Yona" label="Yona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642049" start="96970" end="96976" title="Yavana" label="Yavana"/>
<link wikidata="Q465331" start="97016" end="97022" title="Ionians" label="Ionian"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="97134" end="97149" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q488880" start="97158" end="97180" title="Greco-Bactrian kingdom" label="Greco-Bactrian kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q215643" start="97206" end="97225" title="Indo-Greek kingdoms" label="Indo-Greek kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q857845" start="97303" end="97313" title="Ai-Khanoum" label="Ai-Khanoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340954" start="97371" end="97377" title="Sirkap" label="Sirkap"/>
<link wikidata="Q298071" start="97429" end="97440" title="Hippodamian" label="Hippodamian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069204" start="97456" end="97462" title="Sagala" label="Sagala"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154546" start="97744" end="97763" title="Pataliputra capital" label="Pataliputra capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153371" start="97793" end="97810" title="Pillars of Ashoka" label="Pillars of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q312548" start="97848" end="97859" title="Megasthenes" label="Megasthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252438" start="97861" end="97870" title="Deimachus" label="Deimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279393" start="97875" end="97884" title="Dionysius (ambassador)" label="Dionysius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="98016" end="98022" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q389755" start="98189" end="98200" title="Pataliputra" label="Pataliputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153371" start="98293" end="98310" title="Pillars of Ashoka" label="Pillars of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q389755" start="98756" end="98767" title="Pataliputra" label="Pataliputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154546" start="98932" end="98951" title="Pataliputra capital" label="Pataliputra capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153371" start="99079" end="99096" title="Pillars of Ashoka" label="Pillars of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194868" start="99204" end="99211" title="Kosambi" label="Kosambi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154546" start="99368" end="99387" title="Pataliputra capital" label="Pataliputra capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q193893" start="99416" end="99423" title="Capital (architecture)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q218626" start="99429" end="99435" title="volute" label="volute"/>
<link wikidata="Q843745" start="99441" end="99450" title="Classical Greece" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="99515" end="99529" title="Mauryan Empire" label="Mauryan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q389755" start="99546" end="99557" title="Pataliputra" label="Pataliputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q80484" start="99566" end="99571" title="Patna" label="Patna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153371" start="99655" end="99672" title="Pillars of Ashoka" label="Pillars of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153371" start="99988" end="100005" title="Pillars of Ashoka" label="Pillars of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="100041" end="100054" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="100055" end="100061" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q46889" start="100309" end="100313" title="zebu" label="zebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q324394" start="100351" end="100358" title="Sarnath" label="Sarnath"/>
<link wikidata="Q171869" start="100375" end="100396" title="State Emblem of India" label="State Emblem of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q16528" start="100437" end="100445" title="Nelumbo nucifera" label="lotiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q208454" start="100460" end="100466" title="Abacus (architecture)" label="abacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q781243" start="100675" end="100690" title="Sphinx of Naxos" label="Sphinx of Naxos"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="100762" end="100768" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136114" start="100858" end="100872" title="flame palmette" label="flame palmette"/>
<link wikidata="Q421214" start="101054" end="101063" title="Acroterion" label="akroteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10288" start="101071" end="101080" title="Parthenon" label="Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q384813" start="101122" end="101143" title="Temple of Athena Nike" label="Temple of Athena Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q651377" start="101518" end="101523" title="Sunga" label="Sunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310870" start="101535" end="101542" title="Bharhut" label="Bharhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595955" start="101603" end="101625" title="Lion Capital of Ashoka" label="Lion Capital of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q324394" start="101631" end="101638" title="Sarnath" label="Sarnath"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="101643" end="101653" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="101729" end="101748" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="101873" end="101888" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="101963" end="101974" title="Indus River" label="Indus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="102053" end="102069" title="Darius the Great" label="Darius the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q214874" start="102304" end="102316" title="Jhelum River" label="Jhelum River"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="102320" end="102326" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="102565" end="102579" title="Mauryan Empire" label="Mauryan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q389755" start="102586" end="102597" title="Pataliputra" label="Pataliputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q55622494" start="103028" end="103042" title="Mauryan polish" label="Mauryan polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153371" start="103067" end="103084" title="Pillars of Ashoka" label="Pillars of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q18927" start="103225" end="103230" title="Lycia" label="Lycia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853357" start="103266" end="103280" title="tomb of Payava" label="tomb of Payava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059208" start="103372" end="103379" title="Chaitya" label="Chaitya"/>
<link wikidata="Q19323329" start="103444" end="103455" title="Lomas Rishi" label="Lomas Rishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311736" start="103469" end="103488" title="Barabar caves" label="Barabar caves group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225014" start="103629" end="103644" title="James Fergusson (architect)" label="James Fergusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059208" start="104052" end="104059" title="Chaitya" label="Chaitya"/>
<link wikidata="" start="104445" end="104474" title=":File:Lycian rock-cut tombs.jpg" label="numerous rock-cut equivalents"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="104644" end="104661" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q56258975" start="104825" end="104836" title="Masarh lion" label="Masarh lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q389755" start="104871" end="104882" title="Pataliputra" label="Pataliputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793993" start="104960" end="104973" title="Mauryan art" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25055735" start="105051" end="105067" title="Chunar stone" label="Chunar sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153371" start="105078" end="105095" title="Pillars of Ashoka" label="Pillars of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793993" start="105142" end="105158" title="Mauryan art" label="Maurya sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653847" start="105173" end="105183" title="Swaraj Prakash Gupta" label="S.P. Gupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="105224" end="105234" title="Achaemenid art" label="Achaemenid"/>
<link wikidata="Q913572" start="105323" end="105331" title="vibrissa" label="vibrissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q129072" start="105566" end="105576" title="Persepolis" label="Persepolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="105881" end="105894" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787136" start="105941" end="105966" title="Architecture of Karnataka" label="Architecture of Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787139" start="105969" end="105991" title="Architecture of Kerala" label="Architecture of Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787199" start="105994" end="106020" title="Architecture of Tamil Nadu" label="Architecture of Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q825236" start="106023" end="106042" title="Badami cave temples" label="Badami cave temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710911" start="106045" end="106056" title="Hemadpanthi" label="Hemadpanthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022893" start="106059" end="106089" title="Indian vernacular architecture" label="Indian vernacular architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13640694" start="106092" end="106112" title="Kalinga Architecture" label="Kalinga Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573974" start="106115" end="106140" title="List of Indian architects" label="List of Indian architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q85784819" start="106143" end="106162" title="Meitei architecture" label="Meitei architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787182" start="106165" end="106188" title="Rajasthani architecture" label="Rajasthani architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698805" start="106191" end="106217" title="Temples of North Karnataka" label="Temples of North Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q831768" start="106261" end="106271" title="Indian art" label="Indian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025479" start="106274" end="106288" title="Indo-Greek art" label="Indo-Greek art"/>
<link wikidata="Q28173968" start="106291" end="106305" title="Art of Mathura" label="Art of Mathura"/>
<link wikidata="Q72343089" start="106308" end="106317" title="Gupta art" label="Gupta art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793993" start="106320" end="106331" title="Mauryan art" label="Mauryan art"/>
<link wikidata="Q85775146" start="106334" end="106344" title="Kushan art" label="Kushan art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361582" start="106347" end="106367" title="Hoysala architecture" label="Hoysala architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533669" start="106370" end="106395" title="Vijayanagara architecture" label="Vijayanagara architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008014" start="106398" end="106416" title="Greco-Buddhist art" label="Greco-Buddhist art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260101" start="106419" end="106445" title="Chola art and architecture" label="Chola art and architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906272" start="106448" end="106476" title="Pallava art and architecture" label="Pallava art and architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840570" start="106479" end="106507" title="Badami Chalukya architecture" label="Badami Chalukya architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634186" start="108822" end="108840" title="Banister Fletcher" label="Fletcher, Banister"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276881" wikidata="Q752375" url="?curid=276881" title="Extreme value theorem">
<text>In calculus, the extreme value theorem states that if a real-valued function formula_1 is continuous on the closed and bounded interval formula_2, then formula_1 must attain a maximum and a minimum, each at least once. 
That is, there exist numbers formula_4 and formula_5 in formula_2 such that:
formula_7

The extreme value theorem is more specific than the related boundedness theorem, which states merely that a continuous function formula_1 on the closed interval formula_2 is bounded on that interval; that is, there exist real numbers formula_10 and formula_11 such that:
formula_12
This does not say that formula_11 and formula_10 are necessarily the maximum and minimum values of formula_1 on the interval formula_16 which is what the extreme value theorem stipulates must also be the case.

The extreme value theorem is used to prove Rolle&#x27;s theorem. In a formulation due to Karl Weierstrass, this theorem states that a continuous function from a non-empty compact space to a subset of the real numbers attains a maximum and a minimum.

==History==
The extreme value theorem was originally proven by Bernard Bolzano in the 1830s in a work &quot;Function Theory&quot; but the work remained unpublished until 1930. Bolzano&#x27;s proof consisted of showing that a continuous function on a closed interval was bounded, and then showing that the function attained a maximum and a minimum value. Both proofs involved what is known today as the Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem.

==Functions to which the theorem does not apply==

The following examples show why the function domain must be closed and bounded in order for the theorem to apply. Each fails to attain a maximum on the given interval.

# formula_17 defined over formula_18 is not bounded from above.
# formula_19 defined over formula_18 is bounded from below but does not attain its least upper bound formula_21.
# formula_22 defined over formula_23 is not bounded from above.
# formula_24 defined over formula_23 is bounded but never attains its least upper bound formula_21.

Defining formula_27 in the last two examples shows that both theorems require continuity on formula_2.

==Generalization to metric and topological spaces==

When moving from the real line formula_29 to metric spaces and general topological spaces, the appropriate generalization of a closed bounded interval is a compact set. A set formula_30 is said to be compact if it has the following property: from every collection of open sets formula_31 such that formula_32, a finite subcollection formula_33can be chosen such that formula_34. This is usually stated in short as &quot;every open cover of formula_30 has a finite subcover&quot;. The Heine–Borel theorem asserts that a subset of the real line is compact if and only if it is both closed and bounded. Correspondingly, a metric space has the Heine–Borel property if every closed and bounded set is also compact.

The concept of a continuous function can likewise be generalized. Given topological spaces formula_36, a function formula_37 is said to be continuous if for every open set formula_38, formula_39 is also open. Given these definitions, continuous functions can be shown to preserve compactness:

In particular, if formula_40, then this theorem implies that formula_41 is closed and bounded for any compact set formula_30, which in turn implies that formula_1 attains its supremum and infimum on any (nonempty) compact set formula_30. Thus, we have the following generalization of the extreme value theorem:

Slightly more generally, this is also true for an upper semicontinuous function. (see compact space#Functions and compact spaces).

==Proving the theorems==

We look at the proof for the upper bound and the maximum of formula_1. By applying these results to the function formula_46, the existence of the lower bound and the result for the minimum of formula_1 follows. Also note that everything in the proof is done within the context of the real numbers.

We first prove the boundedness theorem, which is a step in the proof of the extreme value theorem. The basic steps involved in the proof of the extreme value theorem are:

# Prove the boundedness theorem.
# Find a sequence so that its image converges to the supremum of formula_1.
# Show that there exists a subsequence that converges to a point in the domain.
# Use continuity to show that the image of the subsequence converges to the supremum.

===Proof of the boundedness theorem===

&lt;/math&gt;. Because formula_2 is bounded, the Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem implies that there exists a convergent subsequence formula_50 of formula_51. Denote its limit by formula_52. As formula_2 is closed, it contains formula_52. Because formula_1 is continuous at formula_52, we know that formula_57 converges to the real number formula_58 (as formula_1 is sequentially continuous at formula_52). But formula_61 for every formula_62, which implies that formula_57 diverges to formula_64, a contradiction. Therefore, formula_1 is bounded above on formula_2. ∎}}

===Proofs of the extreme value theorem===

===Proof using the hyperreals===
===Proof from first principles===

Statement      If formula_58 is continuous on formula_2 then it attains its supremum on formula_2

==Extension to semi-continuous functions==

If the continuity of the function &quot;f&quot; is weakened to semi-continuity,
then the corresponding half of the boundedness theorem and the extreme value theorem hold and the values –∞ or +∞, respectively, from the extended real number line can be allowed as possible values.

A function formula_70 is said to be &quot;upper semi-continuous&quot; if formula_71 

Applying this result to −&quot;f&quot; proves a similar result for the infimums of lower semicontinuous functions. 
A function formula_70 is said to be &quot;lower semi-continuous&quot; if formula_73 

A real-valued function is upper as well as lower semi-continuous, if and only if it is continuous in the usual sense. Hence these two theorems imply the boundedness theorem and the extreme value theorem.

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* A Proof for extreme value theorem at cut-the-knot
* Extreme Value Theorem by Jacqueline Wandzura with additional contributions by Stephen Wandzura, the Wolfram Demonstrations Project.
* Mizar system proof: http://mizar.org/version/current/html/weierstr.html#T15</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="3" end="11" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q752375" start="17" end="38" title="Extreme value theorem" label="extreme value theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="68" end="76" title="Function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="90" end="100" title="Continuous function" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="108" end="114" title="Bounded interval#Classification of intervals" label="closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q726212" start="119" end="126" title="Bounded set" label="bounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q845060" start="176" end="183" title="maximum" label="maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q845060" start="190" end="197" title="minimum" label="minimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q752375" start="368" end="387" title="Extreme value theorem" label="boundedness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267362" start="482" end="489" title="Bounded function" label="bounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q193286" start="844" end="864" title="Rolle&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Rolle&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q57103" start="890" end="906" title="Karl Weierstrass" label="Karl Weierstrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="972" end="985" title="compact space" label="compact space"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="991" end="997" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="1005" end="1016" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q184735" start="1115" end="1130" title="Bernard Bolzano" label="Bernard Bolzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q468391" start="1454" end="1481" title="Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem" label="Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="2248" end="2261" title="metric spaces" label="metric spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="2274" end="2292" title="topological spaces" label="topological spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="2359" end="2370" title="compact space" label="compact set"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="2470" end="2478" title="open set" label="open set"/>
<link wikidata="Q253214" start="2687" end="2706" title="Heine–Borel theorem" label="Heine–Borel theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q253214" start="2843" end="2863" title="Heine–Borel property" label="Heine–Borel property"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="3383" end="3391" title="Infimum and supremum" label="supremum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="3396" end="3403" title="Infimum and supremum" label="infimum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3606" end="3648" title="compact space#Functions and compact spaces" label="compact space#Functions and compact spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222579" start="3707" end="3718" title="upper bound" label="upper bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="3962" end="3974" title="real numbers" label="real numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="4212" end="4217" title="Image (mathematics)" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="4235" end="4243" title="supremum" label="supremum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332977" start="4285" end="4296" title="subsequence" label="subsequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q192439" start="4330" end="4336" title="domain of a function" label="domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q468391" start="4514" end="4541" title="Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem" label="Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740469" start="4827" end="4850" title="sequentially continuous" label="sequentially continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039387" start="4946" end="4956" title="Extended real number line" label="formula_64"/>
<link wikidata="Q188722" start="5027" end="5028" title="Q.E.D." label="∎"/>
<link wikidata="Q955072" start="5349" end="5364" title="semi-continuity" label="semi-continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039387" start="5504" end="5529" title="extended real number line" label="extended real number line"/>
<link wikidata="Q56811887" start="6156" end="6168" title="cut-the-knot" label="cut-the-knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632017" start="6271" end="6301" title="Wolfram Demonstrations Project" label="Wolfram Demonstrations Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609529" start="6305" end="6317" title="Mizar system" label="Mizar system"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276883" wikidata="Q23807834" url="?curid=276883" title="Benchrest rifle">
<text>A benchrest rifle, also colloquially called a &quot;rail gun&quot;, is a rifle with its barrel and action mechanism built into a machine rest, used mainly for benchrest shooting. The rifle has no proper stock and its base uses adjustable feet to provide a stable position on the bench, and the rifle is finely aimed with horizontal and vertical adjustments built into the rest.

==Benchrest shooting==
Aside from their use for testing ammunition or components by ammunition manufacturers (almost always indoors, or in a &quot;tunnel&quot;), benchrest rifles are used in the Unlimited Class of benchrest shooting, almost always outdoors, where the effects of the wind can be considerable.

Benchrest rifles &quot;return to battery&quot;. That is, the repetition of the aiming point is assured by mechanical means. Secondly, in a properly built and functioning rail gun, aside from the forces used to aim the rifle, the forces generated in firing the rifle will be consistent from shot to shot.

However, the goal of most benchrest competitions is to achieve a high precision, mechanically returning the rifle to the same aiming point only removes problems caused by mirage. It is of no aid in dealing with shot deflection caused by wind. Indeed, since the usual practice in dealing with anticipated shot displacement cause by the wind is to &quot;hold off&quot; (i.e., use a different aiming point), some feel that the use of a return-to-battery rifle can be a disadvantage.

On the surface, this appears a valid argument, but based on match reports [IBS, NBRSA], it is not a particularly good one. While &quot;reading the wind&quot;—anticipating shot deflection caused by varying wind speed and direction—is the same problem faced by competitors using conventional benchrest rifles, return-to-battery rifles do, in fact, generally place higher than the &quot;bag guns&quot; (rifles shot off sandbags, which have to be consciously aimed for each shot). With any benchrest rifle, there are two techniques generally used to deal with the wind. The first is for the rifleman to shoot only when he considers the wind to be the same as with previous shots. Here, the return to battery rifle can be an advantage. The second is to purposefully change the point of aim, just as one would do with a conventional rifle. Due to time limits, in any given match, both techniques will usually have to be employed.

A second use of return-to-battery rifles is for the testing of components, including barrels, bullets, powder, primers, and the interaction of these and the other components of the rifle. That such testing is both useful and necessary points up that a rifle is a system, and precision shooting perforce involves all components, as well as good shooting techniques. Benchrest remove only two factors, 1) the ability to precisely return a rifle to the same point of aim, and 2) to apply constant forces to the rifle from shot to shot. A proper design and build of the rifle is difficult to achieve.

The fundamental purpose of a bench rest is to eliminate, in the shooting, inconsistent potential human interactions such as the push against the shoulder, trigger pressure, breathing, or heartbeat. This helps to provide a more consistent testing of the system components.

==References==
* Vaughn, Harold R. &quot;Rifle Accuracy Facts.&quot; Manchester, Connecticut: Precision Shooting, Inc, 1998. 
* &quot;Standard Catalog of Colt Firearms&quot;. p. 167.
* PAX Draconis: &quot;The Role-playing Game&quot; - Justin Dagna. p. 132.
* &quot;ABCs of Rifle Shooting&quot; - David Watson. pp. 29–30.
* &quot;The Official Gun Digest Book of Guns &amp; Prices 2013&quot; - Jerry Lee. p. 292.
* &quot;Gun Digest Shooter&#x27;s Guide to the 1911&quot; - Robert K. Campbell. pp. 144–145.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23807834" start="2" end="17" title="Benchrest rifle" label="benchrest rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23807834" start="52" end="60" title="Benchrest rifle" label="rail gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q124072" start="73" end="78" title="rifle" label="rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q487192" start="88" end="94" title="gun barrel" label="barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451695" start="99" end="105" title="action (firearms)" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q10863071" start="129" end="141" title="fixture (tool)" label="machine rest"/>
<link wikidata="Q495978" start="159" end="177" title="benchrest shooting" label="benchrest shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q909380" start="203" end="208" title="stock (firearms)" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q495978" start="593" end="611" title="benchrest shooting" label="benchrest shooting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1049" end="1073" title="Benchrest shooting#Types of Competition" label="achieve a high precision"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276890" wikidata="Q162629" url="?curid=276890" title="Simon Cowell">
<text>Simon Phillip Cowell (; born 7 October 1959) is an English television personality, entrepreneur, and record executive. He has judged on the British television talent competition shows &quot;Pop Idol&quot; (2001–2003), &quot;The X Factor UK&quot; (2004–2010, 2014–2018), and &quot;Britain&#x27;s Got Talent&quot; (2007–present), as well as the American television talent competition shows &quot;American Idol&quot; (2002–2010), &quot;The X Factor US&quot; (2011–2013), and &quot;America&#x27;s Got Talent&quot; (2016–present). Cowell founded the British entertainment company Syco Entertainment in 2005, as well as its defunct predecessor, Syco Music (also known as S Records) in 2002.

After some success in the 1980s and 1990s as a record producer, talent agent and consultant in the UK music industry, Cowell came to public prominence in 2001 as a judge on &quot;Pop Idol&quot;, a talent television show which he and its creator Simon Fuller successfully pitched to ITV Controller of Entertainment Claudia Rosencrantz. He subsequently created &quot;The X Factor&quot; in 2004 and &quot;Got Talent&quot; in 2006, which have become successful television franchises sold around the world.

Cowell often makes blunt and controversial comments as a television music and talent show judge, including insults and wisecracks about contestants and their singing abilities. He combines activities in both the television and music industries. Cowell has produced and promoted successful singles and albums for various recording acts whom he has signed to his record label Syco Music, including Little Mix, James Arthur, Labrinth, Leona Lewis, Fifth Harmony, Olly Murs, Noah Cyrus, Fleur East, Ella Henderson, and Susan Boyle. He has also signed successful boy bands such as Westlife, One Direction, PrettyMuch, and CNCO.

In 2004 and 2010, &quot;Time&quot; named Cowell one of the 100 most influential people in the world. In 2008, &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; ranked him sixth in their list of the &quot;100 most powerful people in British culture&quot;. The same year, he received the Special Recognition Award at the National Television Awards in London. At the 2010 British Academy Television Awards, Cowell received the BAFTA Special Award for his &quot;outstanding contribution to the entertainment industry and for his development of new talent&quot;. In 2018, he received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in the television category.

==Early life==
Simon Phillip Cowell was born on 7 October 1959 in Lambeth, London, and raised in Elstree, Hertfordshire. His mother, Julie Brett (&quot;née&quot; Josie Dalglish, 1925–2015), was a ballet dancer and socialite, and his father, Eric Selig Phillip Cowell (1918–1999), was an estate agent, property developer, and music industry executive. Cowell&#x27;s father was from a mostly Jewish family (his own mother was born in Poland), though he did not discuss his ancestry with his children. Cowell&#x27;s mother was from a Christian background. He has a younger brother, Nicholas Cowell; three half brothers, John, Tony, and Michael Cowell; and a half sister, June Cowell.

Cowell attended Radlett Preparatory School, Licensed Victuallers&#x27; School in Ascot for one year, and the private Dover College, as did his brother, but left after taking GCE O levels. He passed English Language and Literature and then attended Windsor Technical College, where he gained another GCE in Sociology. Cowell took a few menial jobs—including, according to his brother Tony, working as a runner on Stanley Kubrick&#x27;s 1980 horror film &quot;The Shining&quot;—but did not get along well with colleagues and bosses, until his father, who was an executive at EMI Music Publishing, managed to get him a job in the mail room. However, after failing to get a promotion, he left to try out other jobs before returning to EMI.

==Career==
===Early career===
In the early 1980s, Cowell left EMI to form E&amp;S Music with his former boss at EMI but quit in 1983. He then formed Fanfare Records with Iain Burton, initially selling exercise videos, and music from acts such as the Italian orchestra Rondò Veneziano. He had his first hit song in 1986 with &quot;So Macho&quot; by Sinitta. Some of Cowell&#x27;s early success came through Stock Aitken Waterman, who produced a number of hits in the 1980s. However, in 1989 the company went under, with Pete Waterman forced to put a freeze on Fanfare&#x27;s assets, and taking Cowell&#x27;s Porsche as compensation for outstanding production and royalties payments. Amid the company&#x27;s implosion Cowell nearly became bankrupt.

He then worked with BMG as an A&amp;R consultant and set up S Records under BMG. He restarted his career in the music business by creating novelty records with acts such as the puppets Zig and Zag, Power Rangers and World Wrestling Federation. In 1995, through his persistence, he persuaded two actors, Robson Green and Jerome Flynn from the UK television drama series &quot;Soldier Soldier&quot;, to sign with him and record the song &quot;Unchained Melody&quot;, which they had performed on the show. The recording by the duo, now named Robson &amp; Jerome, quickly reached number 1 in the UK, staying at the top of the chart for seven weeks. It became the best-selling single of 1995 (their next release, &quot;I Believe&quot;/&quot;Up on the Roof&quot;, was the third-best selling single), and their self-titled album released later in the year also became the best-selling album of 1995. They released another album and two more singles before disbanding, and sold 7 million albums and 5 million singles in total. According to Cowell, they made him his first million. Later acts he signed included Five, Westlife and Teletubbies.

===&quot;Idol&quot; franchise===
In 2001, Cowell was given the role of judge on the first series of &quot;Pop Idol&quot;, a show that he and the show creator Simon Fuller successfully pitched to ITV Controller of Entertainment Claudia Rosencrantz. Maggie Brown in &quot;The Guardian&quot; states, &quot;the show became a seminal reality/entertainment format once on air that autumn&quot;. Cowell&#x27;s S Records signed the top two finishers of the first season of &quot;Pop Idol&quot;, Will Young and Gareth Gates, both of whom went on to have No 1 UK hits, and they were the top 2 best-selling singles of 2002 and the decade of 2000s. He also became a judge on the first season of &quot;American Idol&quot; in 2002. With his notoriously critical reputation, Cowell has been likened to TV personalities such as Judge Judy and &quot;The Weakest Link&quot; host Anne Robinson. His closest predecessor was British TV critic Nina Myskow who, in the 1980s, became known for her harsh put-downs in &quot;New Faces&quot;, a talent show that Cowell cited as an influence. Cowell&#x27;s prominence grew, fed by his signature phrase, &quot;I don&#x27;t mean to be rude, but ...&quot;, inevitably followed by an unsparingly blunt appraisal of the contestant&#x27;s talents, personality, or even physical appearance. A lot of these one-liners were the product of coaching that Cowell received from publicist Max Clifford. Cowell also appeared on the one-off &quot;World Idol&quot; programme in 2003, in which it became clear that each country&#x27;s version of the &quot;Idol&quot; had attempted to come up with its own &quot;Simon Cowell&quot; type personality.

Cowell formed a new company, Syco, in 2005. The company is divided into three units: Syco Music, Syco TV and Syco Film. Cowell returned to music with his latest brainchild signed to Syco, the internationally successful operatic pop group Il Divo, consisting of three opera singers and one pop singer of four different nationalities. Inspired by the success of Il Divo, Cowell created a child version, Angelis, made up of six 11 to 14 year-olds from choirs across the UK, with their debut album released in November 2006.

On 11 January 2010, Cowell&#x27;s exit from &quot;American Idol&quot; was made official. One year after Cowell left &quot;American Idol&quot;, the show eventually completed eight consecutive seasons of leadership amongst all primetime programmes in the United States, marking the longest annual winning streak in the ratings in U.S. television history. The 2010 season was Cowell&#x27;s last on the show, and he was replaced by Steven Tyler. It was also announced that FOX had acquired the rights to &quot;The X Factor USA&quot;, an American version of British show &quot;The X Factor&quot; that launched in 2011.

===&quot;The X Factor&quot;===
In 2004, with Sharon Osbourne and Louis Walsh, Cowell was a judge on the first series of the British television music competition &quot;The X Factor&quot;, which he created using his production company, Syco TV. &quot;The X Factor&quot; was an instant success with the viewers and enjoyed its tenth series in 2013.

Leona Lewis, the winner of the third series of &quot;The X Factor&quot;, was signed to Cowell&#x27;s label Syco and has had number one singles and album sales around the world. Cowell returned for a fourth series on 18 August 2007 alongside Osbourne, Walsh and new judge, Dannii Minogue. Walsh had previously been sacked from the judging panel by Cowell for the fourth series, and he was subsequently replaced by Brian Friedman, who was a judge on &quot;Grease Is the Word&quot;. Walsh was later brought back by Cowell a week into the auditions when he and Osbourne realised that they missed Walsh and that without him, there was no chemistry between the judges. Cowell returned for the fifth series in 2008, with Walsh, Minogue, and new judge Cheryl Cole, as Osbourne had decided to quit before the show began. Cowell returned for series 6 and 7 as well, although series 7 was to be his last, as he left in 2011 in order to launch &quot;The X Factor&quot; in America. After placing third in the seventh series of &quot;The X Factor&quot; in the UK, boyband One Direction signed to Cowell&#x27;s label in 2011, and the group has gone on to top singles and album charts worldwide. Cowell was replaced by Gary Barlow. In 2011, UK series eight winners Little Mix signed to Cowell&#x27;s label. The girl group has sold 50 million records worldwide.

Australian &quot;The X Factor&quot; launched in 2005 on Network Ten, and it featured Mark Holden, Kate Ceberano and John Reid as the show&#x27;s judges, but it was cancelled after just one season due to poor ratings. However, the show returned in 2010 and performed strongly on the Seven Network until its eighth season in 2016, when its ratings declined. Subsequently, the show was axed for a second time in January 2017.

Cowell also launched American &quot;The X Factor&quot; in September 2011 on American broadcaster Fox. It was originally announced that he would be a judge both on the UK and US editions of the show, which aired at similar times of the year, but MTV officially reported on 17 April 2011 that this was not true. Cowell was no longer to be a judge on the UK version, but he would remain a major presence backstage. He was joined by Paula Abdul, L.A. Reid, Nicole Scherzinger and formerly Cheryl Cole. Cowell&#x27;s act Melanie Amaro won the season, making Cowell the winning judge. Cowell and Reid returned for season 2, while Demi Lovato and Britney Spears joined the judging panel as replacements for Abdul and Scherzinger. This season launched another of Cowell&#x27;s acts into worldwide fame, the group Fifth Harmony.

Cowell returned for a third season of &quot;The X Factor&quot; in September 2013 alongside Demi Lovato, while Spears and L.A. Reid announced they would not be returning and were replaced by Paulina Rubio and Kelly Rowland. Cowell&#x27;s last act Alex &amp; Sierra won the season, marking Cowell&#x27;s second season as the winning mentor after he won with Melanie Amaro in 2011.

In October 2010, Cowell signed new three-year deals with ITV for both &quot;Britain&#x27;s Got Talent&quot; and &quot;The X Factor&quot;, retaining them until 2013. On 15 November 2013, the three-year deal was extended by another three years, keeping it on air until 2016.

In October 2013, it was reported that Cowell might return to the UK version of &quot;The X Factor&quot; for series 11 in place of Gary Barlow, and on 7 February 2014, his return was officially confirmed. This resulted in the cancellation of the US version after three seasons by Fox. He joined judges Louis Walsh, Cheryl Fernandez-Versini, who replaced Sharon Osbourne, and new judge, former Spice Girls member Mel B, who replaced Nicole Scherzinger. For his eighth series, he was given the Over 26s category. On 13 December, Ben Haenow and Fleur East reached the final two, which meant that Cowell was the winning mentor for the first time since series 3 2006, when he had both Leona Lewis and Ray Quinn in the final. Ben Haenow became the eleventh winner on 14 December. In 2015, Cowell returned to the &quot;X Factor&quot; for its twelfth series, along with veteran judge Cheryl Fernandez-Versini and newcomers Rita Ora and BBC Radio 1 DJ Nick Grimshaw.

In December 2020 it was announced that Cowell will be a judge on &quot;The X Factor Israel&quot; in 2021. In late May 2021, Cowell announced he will be cancelling his appearance on the show in context of the Israeli aggression against Gaza.

===&quot;Got Talent&quot;===

Following the success of the &quot;Idol&quot; and &quot;X Factor&quot; franchises, Cowell, his company Syco, and its business partners developed a talent show format open to performers of any kind, not only singers, but also dancers, instrumentalists, magicians, comedians, novelty acts, and so on. The origins of the &quot;Got Talent&quot; format can be traced to the British talent shows &quot;Opportunity Knocks&quot; (on screen from 1956, with the winner using the now-standard method of a telephone vote) and &quot;New Faces&quot;. Immensely popular with weekly audiences of 20 million, &quot;Opportunity Knocks&quot; showcased singers, dancers and comedians in addition to non standard performers such as acrobats, animal acts and novelty acts. Cowell states, &quot;I was a fan of variety shows &quot;Opportunity Knocks&quot; and &quot;New Faces&quot;, and to be able to update that tradition, really was a buzz&quot;.

Cowell is the executive producer of &quot;America&#x27;s Got Talent&quot;, which debuted in June 2006, along with Fremantle producers of the &quot;Idol&quot; series. The show was a huge success for NBC, drawing around 12 million viewers a week and beating &quot;So You Think You Can Dance&quot; on Fox (produced by rival and &quot;Idol&quot; creator Simon Fuller).

&quot;Britain&#x27;s Got Talent&quot; debuted on ITV in June 2007. Cowell appeared as a judge alongside Amanda Holden and Piers Morgan. The show was a ratings success, and second and third seasons followed in 2008 and 2009. The third series featured a publicity coup when Susan Boyle made a global media impact comparable to that of any previous talent show series winner with her regional audition performance. In December 2019, Cowell signed a five-year deal with ITV ensuring &quot;Britain&#x27;s Got Talent&quot; will stay on the channel until 2024.

In 2014, &quot;Got Talent&quot; was named the world&#x27;s most successful reality TV format by &quot;Guinness World Records&quot;, with spin-offs in over 68 countries. Cowell stated, &quot;I am very proud that &quot;Got Talent&quot; is a home grown British show. We owe its success to a group of very talented producers all over the world who have made this happen. And of course amazing talent.&quot;

In 2015, Cowell launched &quot;La Banda&quot;, his first US show since his stint with American &quot;The X Factor&quot;. The show, designed to find male singers to form the &quot;ultimate Latino Boy Band&quot;, launched on Univision in the US on 13 September 2015. The winner of the show, boy band CNCO, signed to Cowell&#x27;s record label Syco Music.

Cowell was announced as the replacement for Howard Stern on &quot;America&#x27;s Got Talent&quot; on 22 October 2015. On 15 July 2020, it was announced that Cowell had bought out Sony Music from their joint venture, Syco Entertainment.

===Other talent shows===
On 16 March 2006, &quot;American Inventor&quot; debuted on ABC. Cowell co-produced the show with British entrepreneur Peter Jones, who had devised the concept. Having a similar format to the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Dragons&#x27; Den&quot;, a show on which Jones was one of the investors, fledgling entrepreneurs from across the United States competed to see who could come up with the best new product concept. The 2006 winner, Janusz Liberkowski, received $1 million and the opportunity to develop his idea into a business. The show returned in 2007 for a second season.

In 2006, Cowell executive-produced &quot;Celebrity Duets&quot;, which was described as &quot;an Idol show for Hollywood superstars&quot;. The show was hosted by Wayne Brady, and its judges were Marie Osmond, Little Richard, and David Foster.

Cowell was also the executive producer of &quot;Grease Is the Word&quot; for ITV. This show set out to find performers to play Danny and Sandy in the 2007 West End revival of Grease. It was hosted by Zoë Ball and judged by Britons David Ian and Sinitta and Americans David Gest and Brian Friedman. The musical theatre casting concept had already been introduced by the BBC with the ratings hit &quot;How Do You Solve a Problem like Maria?&quot;, but Cowell&#x27;s show was not the hoped-for success. He himself said, &quot;It has been slaughtered by the critics – and rightly so. It is far too similar to our other formats.&quot;

Cowell collaborated with UK production company Shed Media to produce 2008 ITV drama series &quot;Rock Rivals&quot;, which is based on an &quot;X Factor&quot; type show. In 2011, Cowell also created his first game show, titled &quot;Red or Black?&quot; and hosted by Ant &amp; Dec, for ITV. Series 1 was broadcast from 3 to 10 September. The show was recommissioned by ITV for a second series in 2012, which aired weekly.

In 2013, Cowell, in partnership with YouTube, launched a video-sharing competition called &quot;The You Generation&quot;. In 2013, he was executive producer for ITV cookery series &quot;Food Glorious Food&quot;, which was hosted by Carol Vorderman. He did the same for the ITV game show &quot;Keep it in the Family&quot;, presented by Bradley Walsh in 2016.

In 2018, it was announced that Cowell created his first show to air on the BBC, titled &quot;The Greatest Dancer&quot;, which debuted on 5 January 2019. In the show, dancers competed for a £50,000 and a performance on the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot;. A second series is scheduled to air in 2020.

In April 2020, Cowell judged a spin-off version of the former show &quot;Canada&#x27;s Got Talent&quot; called &quot;Canadian Family&#x27;s Got Talent&quot;, carried out virtually by Canadian broadcaster Citytv during the COVID-19 pandemic in Canada.

==In the media==

Cowell has been involved in charity work for many years. He is a patron of Together for Short Lives, the leading UK charity for all children with life-threatening and life-limiting conditions. He was patron of Children&#x27;s Hospices UK between 2009 and 2011 before it merged to become Together for Short Lives. He donated money to Manchester Dogs&#x27; Home in England after it was hit by a large fire. In view of his charitable works, particularly the production of the charity single &quot;Everybody Hurts&quot; in aid of victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake, as well as his services to the music industry, there was considerable media speculation as to whether Cowell would receive a knighthood in the Queen&#x27;s 2010 Birthday Honours, a proposal allegedly put forward by then Prime Minister Gordon Brown.

In November 2003, Cowell appeared on the BBC&#x27;s charity telethon &quot;Children in Need&quot; where viewers pledged thousands to see him get sawn in half. In December 2003, he published his autobiography titled &quot;I Don&#x27;t Mean to be Rude, but...&quot;. In it, he told of his childhood, his years working in music and experiences on &quot;Pop Idol&quot;, &quot;Pop Stars Rivals&quot;, and &quot;American Idol&quot;, and finally, his tips for being successful as a pop star. In 2010, he was added as a new entry to the latest edition of the UK&#x27;s &quot;Who&#x27;s Who&quot;.

Cowell has appeared as a guest voice in an episode of &quot;The Simpsons&quot; (&quot;Smart and Smarter&quot;), in which he gets beaten up by Homer Simpson (while criticising Homer&#x27;s punches). In May 2010, he portrayed himself again in an episode of &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, &quot;Judge Me Tender&quot;. His voice was heard on an episode of &quot;Family Guy&quot; (&quot;Lois Kills Stewie&quot;), in which he told Stewie that his singing was so awful that he should be dead. He made an MTV Movie Award-winning cameo appearance as himself in &quot;Scary Movie 3&quot;, where he sits in judgment during a battle rap (and is subsequently killed by gunfire for criticising the rappers). He appears in the DVD version of &quot;Shrek 2&quot; as himself in &quot;Far Far Away Idol&quot; and also provided the voice.

Cowell was once the fastest &quot;Star in a Reasonably Priced Car&quot; on BBC&#x27;s motoring show &quot;Top Gear&quot;, driving a Suzuki Liana around the show&#x27;s test track in a time of 1:47.1. When &quot;Top Gear&quot; retired the Liana along with its rankings after the eighth series, Cowell was the eighth fastest overall and the third fastest non-professional driver. On 11 November 2007 Cowell yet again appeared on &quot;Top Gear&quot;, achieving a time of 1:45.9 thus putting him ahead of chef Gordon Ramsay and back at the top of the table. His time of 1:45.9 was then tied with English rock singer Brian Johnson of AC/DC and &quot;Grand Designs&quot; host Kevin McCloud for the second fastest time, just 0.1 seconds behind Jamiroquai singer Jay Kay. In March 2015, Cowell defended &quot;Top Gear&quot; presenter Jeremy Clarkson after he was suspended by the BBC for punching a colleague, with Cowell stating on &quot;Good Morning Britain&quot;: &quot;He&#x27;s apologised. But I think what is quite obvious is that the public are behind him, but you know, that&#x27;s Jeremy.&quot;

He appeared on an episode of &quot;Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?&quot; (the original British version) and &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; in 2004. Cowell has also guest-starred (filling in for Regis Philbin) in the popular talk show &quot;Live with Regis and Kelly&quot; during &quot;American Idol&quot;&#x27;s finalist week in early 2006. Cowell introduced entertainer Dick Clark at the 2006 Primetime Emmy Awards. He was seen on the British charity telethon Comic Relief, appearing on &quot;Comic Relief Does The Apprentice&quot; where he donated £25,000 for a fun fair ticket. Cowell has also appeared on the MTV shows &quot;Cribs&quot; and &quot;Punk&#x27;d&quot;. On &quot;Punk&#x27;d&quot;, Ryan Seacrest and Randy Jackson set him up to believe his $400,000 Rolls-Royce was stolen and had caused an accident by using a nearly identical car.

Cowell was a partner in the Royal Ascot Racing Club, a thoroughbred horse racing syndicate which owned the 2005 Epsom Derby winner, Motivator. Cowell was chosen as the first subject of the re-launched British edition of &quot;This Is Your Life&quot;, in an episode broadcast on ITV on 2 June 2007. He was presented with the Red Book by Sir Trevor McDonald while presenting &quot;American Idol&quot;.

On 1 July 2007, Cowell appeared as a speaker at the Concert for Diana (alongside Randy Jackson and Ryan Seacrest) held at Wembley Stadium, London, to celebrate the life of Princess Diana almost 10 years after her death. Proceeds from the concert went to Diana&#x27;s charities as well as to charities of which her sons Princes William and Harry are patrons.

At the 2012 Pride of Britain Awards on 30 October, Cowell, along with Michael Caine, Elton John, Richard Branson and Stephen Fry, recited Rudyard Kipling&#x27;s poem &quot;If—&quot; in tribute to the 2012 British Olympic and Paralympics athletes. In October 2013 Cowell took part in a fundraising event in Los Angeles in support of the Israeli Defense Forces. The event raised $20 million and Cowell made a personal donation of $150,000.

To raise money for the families of the victims of the Grenfell Tower fire in London in June 2017 and for The London Community Foundation, Cowell arranged the recording and release of a charity single, &quot;Bridge over Troubled Water&quot;. Cowell collaborated with a number of vocalists for the single, including Robbie Williams, Dua Lipa, Roger Daltrey and Rita Ora, and the song reached number one in the UK Singles Chart.

==Personal life==
Cowell dated English presenter Terri Seymour from 2002 to 2008. Cowell was engaged to make-up artist Mezhgan Hussainy from 2010 to 2011. In 2013, Cowell allegedly began dating an American woman named Lauren Silverman. In July 2013, Silverman&#x27;s husband and Cowell&#x27;s friend, Andrew Silverman, filed for an at-fault divorce, citing adultery by his wife and naming Cowell as a co-respondent. News of the divorce filing became public two weeks later, when it was widely reported that Silverman and Cowell were expecting a baby together.

Cowell said, &quot;There are a lot of things I will eventually clear up when the time is right, but I really have to be sensitive because there&#x27;s a lot of people&#x27;s feelings involved here.&quot; The Silvermans released separate statements expressing concern for the well-being of their son during the divorce process. In August 2013, the Silvermans settled their divorce out of court, enabling Cowell to avoid being called as a witness in the divorce proceedings. He subsequently confirmed that Silverman was pregnant with his child, and she gave birth to their son Eric on 14 February 2014. The couple confirmed their engagement in January 2022.

In 2010, Cowell came out in support for then Conservative Party leader David Cameron for Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, writing in &quot;The Sun&quot;: &quot;I believe he is the Prime Minister Britain needs at this time. He has substance and the stomach to navigate us through difficult times.&quot; In 2013, Cowell contravened his previous statement about David Cameron. According to the interview, while he has supported candidates, he has never voted in an election. Cowell was in favour of the UK remaining in the EU in the 2016 EU referendum.

In 2019, Cowell became a vegan after doctors advised him to change his diet for health reasons. He was also named one of the wealthiest people in the UK by the &quot;Sunday Times Rich List&quot;, Cowell was worth £385 million in 2019.

In 2020, Cowell announced he would be writing a seven-book series titled &quot;Wishfits&quot; with his son. The series was scheduled to launch in 2023. On 8 August 2020, Cowell broke his back after he fell off his new electric motorcycle, which many press sources confused with an electric bike. The incident occurred while he was testing it at his home in Malibu, California. Cowell was taken to the hospital, where he underwent back surgery overnight. After the accident, he began eating animal-based food again in order to &quot;rebuild his strength&quot;.

==Awards and recognition==
In 2004 and 2010, &quot;Time&quot; magazine named Cowell one of the 100 most influential people in the world. In 2008, he received the Special Recognition Award (presented to him by Andrew Lloyd Webber) at the National Television Awards held at the Royal Albert Hall. &quot;New Statesman&quot; listed Cowell at number 41 in a list of &quot;50 People who Matter [in] 2010&quot;. &quot;TV Guide&quot; named him at number 10 in their 2013 list of The 60 Nastiest Villains of All Time.

In 2012, Cowell was featured in the BBC Radio 4 series &quot;The New Elizabethans&quot; to mark the diamond Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II. A panel of seven academics, journalists and historians named Cowell among the group of people in the UK &quot;whose actions during the reign of Elizabeth II have had a significant impact on lives in these islands and given the age its character&quot;. Cowell was announced to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on 22 August 2018, in the Television category.

==Filmography==

===Television===
===Film===
==Bibliography==
* &quot;I Don&#x27;t Mean to Be Rude, But...&quot; (2003) (autobiography)

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q162629" start="0" end="20" title="Simon Cowell" label="Simon Phillip Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502417" start="190" end="198" title="Pop Idol" label="Pop Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431988" start="224" end="239" title="The X Factor (British TV series)" label="The X Factor UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q556444" start="280" end="305" title="Britain&amp;#x27;s Got Talent" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s Got Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="394" end="407" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q940089" start="433" end="448" title="The X Factor (American TV series)" label="The X Factor US"/>
<link wikidata="Q467561" start="478" end="503" title="America&amp;#x27;s Got Talent" label="America&amp;#x27;s Got Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755989" start="575" end="593" title="Syco Entertainment" label="Syco Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659636" start="639" end="649" title="Syco Music" label="Syco Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q367691" start="931" end="943" title="Simon Fuller" label="Simon Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="968" end="971" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129243" start="1000" end="1019" title="Claudia Rosencrantz" label="Claudia Rosencrantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453652" start="1051" end="1063" title="The X Factor" label="The X Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8327345" start="1088" end="1098" title="Got Talent" label="Got Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q158419" start="1585" end="1595" title="Little Mix" label="Little Mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q717626" start="1597" end="1609" title="James Arthur" label="James Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q48959" start="1611" end="1619" title="Labrinth" label="Labrinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q183519" start="1621" end="1632" title="Leona Lewis" label="Leona Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087893" start="1634" end="1647" title="Fifth Harmony" label="Fifth Harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q552770" start="1649" end="1658" title="Olly Murs" label="Olly Murs"/>
<link wikidata="Q54868" start="1660" end="1670" title="Noah Cyrus" label="Noah Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18705115" start="1672" end="1682" title="Fleur East" label="Fleur East"/>
<link wikidata="Q12309788" start="1684" end="1698" title="Ella Henderson" label="Ella Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q83493" start="1704" end="1715" title="Susan Boyle" label="Susan Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q216337" start="1747" end="1755" title="boy band" label="boy band"/>
<link wikidata="Q151241" start="1765" end="1773" title="Westlife" label="Westlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q146027" start="1775" end="1788" title="One Direction" label="One Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q41359948" start="1790" end="1800" title="PrettyMuch" label="PrettyMuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q26270552" start="1806" end="1810" title="CNCO" label="CNCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="1837" end="1841" title="Time magazine" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="1872" end="1899" title="Time 100" label="100 most influential people"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="1929" end="1948" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q85787979" start="2081" end="2106" title="National Television Award for Special Recognition" label="Special Recognition Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550057" start="2114" end="2140" title="14th National Television Awards" label="National Television Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817711" start="2159" end="2197" title="British Academy Television Awards 2010" label="2010 British Academy Television Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="2219" end="2224" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="2388" end="2410" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q202059" start="2506" end="2521" title="London Borough of Lambeth" label="Lambeth, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q19931" start="2537" end="2559" title="Elstree" label="Elstree, Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q512314" start="2654" end="2663" title="socialite" label="socialite"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="2765" end="2789" title="Music industry" label="music industry executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="2830" end="2836" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194017" start="3019" end="3034" title="Nicholas Cowell" label="Nicholas Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562304" start="3063" end="3067" title="Tony Cowell" label="Tony"/>
<link wikidata="Q19772" start="3138" end="3164" title="Radlett Preparatory School" label="Radlett Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543047" start="3166" end="3199" title="Licensed Victuallers&amp;#x27; School" label="Licensed Victuallers&amp;#x27; School"/>
<link wikidata="Q723329" start="3203" end="3208" title="Ascot, Berkshire" label="Ascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418495" start="3231" end="3238" title="Private schools in the United Kingdom" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302478" start="3239" end="3252" title="Dover College" label="Dover College"/>
<link wikidata="Q13634883" start="3296" end="3308" title="GCE Ordinary Level" label="GCE O levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="3534" end="3549" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q186341" start="3580" end="3591" title="The Shining (film)" label="The Shining"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="3695" end="3715" title="EMI" label="EMI Music Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433757" start="4008" end="4023" title="Fanfare Records" label="Fanfare Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q650414" start="4127" end="4142" title="Rondò Veneziano" label="Rondò Veneziano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549383" start="4189" end="4197" title="So Macho" label="So Macho"/>
<link wikidata="Q469779" start="4207" end="4214" title="Sinitta" label="Sinitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q945153" start="4265" end="4286" title="Stock Aitken Waterman" label="Stock Aitken Waterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q836202" start="4378" end="4391" title="Pete Waterman Entertainment" label="Pete Waterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q40993" start="4466" end="4473" title="Porsche" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q770103" start="4627" end="4630" title="Bertelsmann Music Group" label="BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q610225" start="4637" end="4644" title="A&amp;amp;R" label="A&amp;amp;R"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777401" start="4792" end="4803" title="Zig and Zag (puppets)" label="Zig and Zag"/>
<link wikidata="Q333156" start="4805" end="4818" title="Power Rangers" label="Power Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="4823" end="4849" title="World Wrestling Federation" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q114801" start="4910" end="4922" title="Robson Green" label="Robson Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687736" start="4927" end="4939" title="Jerome Flynn" label="Jerome Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557319" start="4982" end="4997" title="Soldier Soldier" label="Soldier Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q949416" start="5048" end="5064" title="Unchained Melody" label="Unchained Melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353495" start="5146" end="5165" title="Robson &amp;amp; Jerome" label="Robson &amp;amp; Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5266" end="5285" title="1995 in British music#Best-selling singles" label="best-selling single"/>
<link wikidata="Q252718" start="5321" end="5330" title="I Believe (Frankie Laine song)" label="I Believe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898096" start="5343" end="5357" title="Up on the Roof (song)" label="Up on the Roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353494" start="5411" end="5428" title="Robson &amp;amp; Jerome (album)" label="self-titled album"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5472" end="5490" title="1995 in British music#Best-selling albums" label="best-selling album"/>
<link wikidata="Q24791" start="5710" end="5714" title="Five (band)" label="Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q151241" start="5716" end="5724" title="Westlife" label="Westlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q41403" start="5729" end="5740" title="Teletubbies" label="Teletubbies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229013" start="5827" end="5839" title="Pop Idol (series 1)" label="first series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502417" start="5849" end="5857" title="Pop Idol" label="Pop Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q367691" start="5901" end="5913" title="Simon Fuller" label="Simon Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="5938" end="5941" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129243" start="5970" end="5989" title="Claudia Rosencrantz" label="Claudia Rosencrantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q348906" start="6230" end="6240" title="Will Young" label="Will Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q381405" start="6245" end="6257" title="Gareth Gates" label="Gareth Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="6432" end="6445" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660811" start="6555" end="6565" title="Judy Sheindlin" label="Judge Judy"/>
<link wikidata="Q327762" start="6576" end="6592" title="The Weakest Link" label="The Weakest Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q454347" start="6604" end="6617" title="Anne Robinson" label="Anne Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038057" start="6665" end="6676" title="Nina Myskow" label="Nina Myskow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007540" start="6742" end="6751" title="New Faces" label="New Faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708515" start="6850" end="6866" title="Catch phrase" label="signature phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794659" start="7140" end="7152" title="Max Clifford" label="Max Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341976" start="7196" end="7206" title="World Idol" label="World Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755989" start="7425" end="7429" title="Syco" label="Syco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659636" start="7481" end="7491" title="Syco Music" label="Syco Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755989" start="7493" end="7500" title="Syco TV" label="Syco TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336819" start="7615" end="7627" title="operatic pop" label="operatic pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q269813" start="7634" end="7641" title="Il Divo" label="Il Divo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762785" start="7797" end="7804" title="Angelis" label="Angelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101901" start="8198" end="8227" title="List of most watched television broadcasts in the United States" label="longest annual winning streak"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="8246" end="8269" title="Nielsen ratings" label="U.S. television history"/>
<link wikidata="Q194045" start="8346" end="8358" title="Steven Tyler" label="Steven Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806985" start="8578" end="8593" title="Sharon Osbourne" label="Sharon Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q658547" start="8598" end="8609" title="Louis Walsh" label="Louis Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q664502" start="8633" end="8649" title="The X Factor (British series 1)" label="the first series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431988" start="8700" end="8712" title="The X Factor (British TV series)" label="The X Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755989" start="8767" end="8774" title="Syco TV" label="Syco TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319983" start="8853" end="8869" title="The X Factor (British series 10)" label="its tenth series"/>
<link wikidata="Q183519" start="8880" end="8891" title="Leona Lewis" label="Leona Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319975" start="8911" end="8923" title="The X Factor (British series 3)" label="third series"/>
<link wikidata="Q188461" start="9152" end="9166" title="Dannii Minogue" label="Dannii Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924900" start="9293" end="9307" title="Brian Friedman" label="Brian Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598559" start="9334" end="9352" title="Grease Is the Word" label="Grease Is the Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q212772" start="9624" end="9635" title="Cheryl Cole" label="Cheryl Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q752254" start="9876" end="9890" title="The X Factor (British series 7)" label="seventh series"/>
<link wikidata="Q146027" start="9938" end="9951" title="One Direction" label="One Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q328753" start="10083" end="10094" title="Gary Barlow" label="Gary Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319985" start="10108" end="10120" title="The X Factor (UK series 8)" label="series eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q158419" start="10129" end="10139" title="Little Mix" label="Little Mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772901" start="10226" end="10261" title="The X Factor (Australian TV series)" label="Australian &amp;quot;The X Factor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q767920" start="10282" end="10293" title="Network Ten" label="Network Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q15525704" start="10311" end="10322" title="Mark Holden" label="Mark Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375418" start="10324" end="10337" title="Kate Ceberano" label="Kate Ceberano"/>
<link wikidata="Q751972" start="10342" end="10351" title="John Reid (music manager)" label="John Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q908659" start="10508" end="10521" title="Seven Network" label="Seven Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q940089" start="10671" end="10704" title="The X Factor (American TV series)" label="American &amp;quot;The X Factor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="10747" end="10750" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q185465" start="11079" end="11090" title="Paula Abdul" label="Paula Abdul"/>
<link wikidata="Q604575" start="11092" end="11101" title="L.A. Reid" label="L.A. Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q167696" start="11103" end="11121" title="Nicole Scherzinger" label="Nicole Scherzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q212772" start="11135" end="11146" title="Cheryl Cole" label="Cheryl Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q464732" start="11166" end="11179" title="Melanie Amaro" label="Melanie Amaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q41173" start="11274" end="11285" title="Demi Lovato" label="Demi Lovato"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="11290" end="11304" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087893" start="11455" end="11468" title="Fifth Harmony" label="Fifth Harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q41173" start="11562" end="11573" title="Demi Lovato" label="Demi Lovato"/>
<link wikidata="Q202536" start="11661" end="11674" title="Paulina Rubio" label="Paulina Rubio"/>
<link wikidata="Q184249" start="11679" end="11692" title="Kelly Rowland" label="Kelly Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15623477" start="11717" end="11734" title="Alex &amp;amp; Sierra" label="Alex &amp;amp; Sierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q464732" start="11827" end="11840" title="Melanie Amaro" label="Melanie Amaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q556444" start="11927" end="11952" title="Britain&amp;#x27;s Got Talent" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s Got Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q15715463" start="12233" end="12242" title="The X Factor (British series 11)" label="series 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q328753" start="12255" end="12266" title="Gary Barlow" label="Gary Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q658547" start="12426" end="12437" title="Louis Walsh" label="Louis Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q212772" start="12439" end="12463" title="Cheryl Cole" label="Cheryl Fernandez-Versini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806985" start="12478" end="12493" title="Sharon Osbourne" label="Sharon Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="12517" end="12528" title="Spice Girls" label="Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q236005" start="12536" end="12541" title="Mel B" label="Mel B"/>
<link wikidata="Q167696" start="12556" end="12574" title="Nicole Scherzinger" label="Nicole Scherzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q18640160" start="12651" end="12661" title="Ben Haenow" label="Ben Haenow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18705115" start="12666" end="12676" title="Fleur East" label="Fleur East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319975" start="12772" end="12780" title="The X Factor (British series 3)" label="series 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q183519" start="12804" end="12815" title="Leona Lewis" label="Leona Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q386784" start="12820" end="12829" title="Ray Quinn" label="Ray Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19689937" start="12959" end="12973" title="The X Factor (British series 12)" label="twelfth series"/>
<link wikidata="Q212772" start="13000" end="13024" title="Cheryl Fernandez-Versini" label="Cheryl Fernandez-Versini"/>
<link wikidata="Q229760" start="13039" end="13047" title="Rita Ora" label="Rita Ora"/>
<link wikidata="Q547486" start="13067" end="13080" title="Nick Grimshaw" label="Nick Grimshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277035" start="13154" end="13173" title="The X Factor Israel" label="The X Factor Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q106775117" start="13291" end="13322" title="2021 Israel-Palestine conflict" label="Israeli aggression against Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q8327345" start="13679" end="13689" title="Got Talent" label="Got Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098592" start="13751" end="13769" title="Opportunity Knocks (British TV series)" label="Opportunity Knocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007540" start="13875" end="13884" title="New Faces" label="New Faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166962" start="14422" end="14445" title="Idols (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Idol&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="14479" end="14482" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q865612" start="14543" end="14569" title="So You Think You Can Dance (American TV series)" label="So You Think You Can Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q367691" start="14631" end="14643" title="Simon Fuller" label="Simon Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q237204" start="14751" end="14764" title="Amanda Holden" label="Amanda Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q557758" start="14769" end="14781" title="Piers Morgan" label="Piers Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83493" start="14919" end="14930" title="Susan Boyle" label="Susan Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="15304" end="15326" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880744" start="15637" end="15645" title="La Banda (TV series)" label="La Banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q26270552" start="15904" end="15908" title="CNCO" label="CNCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q348603" start="16004" end="16016" title="Howard Stern" label="Howard Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="16139" end="16149" title="Sony Music" label="Sony Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755989" start="16176" end="16194" title="Syco Entertainment" label="Syco Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744201" start="16246" end="16263" title="American Inventor" label="American Inventor"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="16281" end="16284" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175035" start="16340" end="16351" title="Peter Jones (entrepreneur)" label="Peter Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305406" start="16430" end="16447" title="Dragons&amp;#x27; Den (British TV programme)" label="Dragons&amp;#x27; Den"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156057" start="16643" end="16661" title="Janusz Liberkowski" label="Janusz Liberkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117016" start="16829" end="16844" title="Celebrity Duets" label="Celebrity Duets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397155" start="16949" end="16960" title="Wayne Brady" label="Wayne Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q465641" start="16982" end="16994" title="Marie Osmond" label="Marie Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q82222" start="16996" end="17010" title="Little Richard" label="Little Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q77112" start="17016" end="17028" title="David Foster" label="David Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598559" start="17079" end="17097" title="Grease Is the Word" label="Grease Is the Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="17108" end="17111" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q611626" start="17206" end="17212" title="Grease (musical)" label="Grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374832" start="17231" end="17239" title="Zoë Ball" label="Zoë Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235328" start="17262" end="17271" title="David Ian" label="David Ian"/>
<link wikidata="Q469779" start="17276" end="17283" title="Sinitta" label="Sinitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q10264401" start="17298" end="17308" title="David Gest" label="David Gest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924900" start="17313" end="17327" title="Brian Friedman" label="Brian Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917655" start="17431" end="17469" title="How Do You Solve a Problem like Maria?" label="How Do You Solve a Problem like Maria?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492286" start="17709" end="17719" title="Shed Media" label="Shed Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="17736" end="17739" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437782" start="17759" end="17770" title="Rock Rivals" label="Rock Rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245701" start="17894" end="17907" title="Red or Black?" label="Red or Black?"/>
<link wikidata="Q3596068" start="17928" end="17941" title="Ant &amp;amp; Dec" label="Ant &amp;amp; Dec"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="18121" end="18128" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927900" start="18180" end="18198" title="The You Generation" label="The You Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465259" start="18270" end="18288" title="Food Glorious Food (TV series)" label="Food Glorious Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939864" start="18316" end="18331" title="Carol Vorderman" label="Carol Vorderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160413" start="18377" end="18398" title="Keep It in the Family (British game show)" label="Keep it in the Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955063" start="18419" end="18432" title="Bradley Walsh" label="Bradley Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="18518" end="18521" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741474" start="18536" end="18555" title="The Greatest Dancer" label="The Greatest Dancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070684" start="18682" end="18703" title="Strictly Come Dancing" label="Strictly Come Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935755" start="18830" end="18854" title="Canada&amp;#x27;s Got Talent" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s Got Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935755" start="18874" end="18907" title="Canadian Family&amp;#x27;s Got Talent" label="Canadian Family&amp;#x27;s Got Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532871" start="18961" end="18967" title="Citytv" label="Citytv"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873580" start="18979" end="19006" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Canada" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909428" start="19102" end="19126" title="Together for Short Lives" label="Together for Short Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287361" start="19521" end="19536" title="Everybody Hurts" label="Everybody Hurts"/>
<link wikidata="Q43777" start="19568" end="19589" title="2010 Haiti earthquake" label="2010 Haiti earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="19716" end="19726" title="knighthood" label="knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616758" start="19734" end="19768" title="2010 Birthday Honours" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s 2010 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="19826" end="19838" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595862" start="19916" end="19932" title="Children in Need" label="Children in Need"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567271" start="20408" end="20422" title="Who&amp;#x27;s Who (UK)" label="Who&amp;#x27;s Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="20491" end="20503" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584768" start="20517" end="20534" title="Smart and Smarter" label="Smart and Smarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810" start="20573" end="20586" title="Homer Simpson" label="Homer Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044928" start="20718" end="20733" title="Judge Me Tender" label="Judge Me Tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="20784" end="20794" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q644007" start="20808" end="20825" title="Lois Kills Stewie" label="Lois Kills Stewie"/>
<link wikidata="Q837909" start="20851" end="20857" title="Stewie Griffin" label="Stewie"/>
<link wikidata="Q110145" start="20923" end="20938" title="MTV Movie Award" label="MTV Movie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q635937" start="20984" end="20997" title="Scary Movie 3" label="Scary Movie 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q485983" start="21159" end="21166" title="Shrek 2" label="Shrek 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630372" start="21281" end="21312" title="Star in a Reasonably Priced Car" label="Star in a Reasonably Priced Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="21322" end="21325" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q33162" start="21353" end="21361" title="Top Gear (2002 TV series)" label="Top Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q743470" start="21379" end="21391" title="Suzuki Liana" label="Suzuki Liana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15280" start="21754" end="21767" title="Gordon Ramsay" label="Gordon Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q295948" start="21860" end="21873" title="Brian Johnson" label="Brian Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="21877" end="21882" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548487" start="21893" end="21906" title="Grand Designs" label="Grand Designs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396896" start="21918" end="21931" title="Kevin McCloud" label="Kevin McCloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q202041" start="21985" end="21995" title="Jamiroquai" label="Jamiroquai"/>
<link wikidata="Q259691" start="22003" end="22010" title="Jay Kay" label="Jay Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q216160" start="22074" end="22089" title="Jeremy Clarkson" label="Jeremy Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982302" start="22179" end="22199" title="Good Morning Britain (2014 TV programme)" label="Good Morning Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997397" start="22380" end="22410" title="Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? (British game show)" label="Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="22458" end="22477" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q463673" start="22539" end="22552" title="Regis Philbin" label="Regis Philbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q166888" start="22585" end="22610" title="Live with Regis and Kelly" label="Live with Regis and Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q366563" start="22716" end="22726" title="Dick Clark" label="Dick Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338916" start="22734" end="22760" title="58th Primetime Emmy Awards" label="2006 Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="22806" end="22818" title="Comic Relief" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151766" start="22839" end="22871" title="Comic Relief Does The Apprentice" label="Comic Relief Does The Apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q687295" start="22974" end="22979" title="MTV Cribs" label="Cribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q912279" start="22996" end="23007" title="Punk&amp;#x27;d" label="Punk&amp;#x27;d"/>
<link wikidata="Q234803" start="23110" end="23121" title="Rolls-Royce Motor Cars" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q723336" start="23222" end="23233" title="Royal Ascot" label="Royal Ascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604213" start="23301" end="23317" title="2005 Epsom Derby" label="2005 Epsom Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344363" start="23326" end="23335" title="Motivator (horse)" label="Motivator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249607" start="23420" end="23437" title="This Is Your Life (British TV series)" label="This Is Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839312" start="23530" end="23549" title="Sir Trevor McDonald" label="Sir Trevor McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q989550" start="23647" end="23664" title="Concert for Diana" label="Concert for Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q337521" start="23676" end="23689" title="Randy Jackson" label="Randy Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q299266" start="23694" end="23707" title="Ryan Seacrest" label="Ryan Seacrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="23717" end="23732" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="23767" end="23781" title="Diana, Princess of Wales" label="Princess Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242820" start="23966" end="23989" title="Pride of Britain Awards" label="Pride of Britain Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q123351" start="24024" end="24037" title="Michael Caine" label="Michael Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="24039" end="24049" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q194419" start="24051" end="24066" title="Richard Branson" label="Richard Branson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="24071" end="24082" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="24092" end="24107" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419321" start="24126" end="24129" title="If—" label="If—"/>
<link wikidata="Q139606" start="24167" end="24174" title="Great Britain at the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080287" start="24179" end="24190" title="Great Britain at the 2012 Summer Paralympics" label="Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="24290" end="24312" title="Israeli Defense Forces" label="Israeli Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q30274958" start="24447" end="24466" title="Grenfell Tower fire" label="Grenfell Tower fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467822" start="24498" end="24529" title="The London Community Foundation" label="The London Community Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24600" end="24626" title="Bridge over Troubled Water (song)#Artists for Grenfell Tower charity single" label="Bridge over Troubled Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q47875" start="24707" end="24722" title="Robbie Williams" label="Robbie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q21914464" start="24724" end="24732" title="Dua Lipa" label="Dua Lipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q311672" start="24734" end="24747" title="Roger Daltrey" label="Roger Daltrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q229760" start="24752" end="24760" title="Rita Ora" label="Rita Ora"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="24801" end="24817" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703629" start="24869" end="24882" title="Terri Seymour" label="Terri Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="25152" end="25168" title="at-fault divorce" label="at-fault divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="25177" end="25185" title="adultery" label="adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="26083" end="26101" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="26109" end="26122" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="26127" end="26163" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="26182" end="26189" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="26573" end="26591" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="2016 EU referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="26619" end="26624" title="vegan" label="vegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q612780" start="26760" end="26782" title="Sunday Times Rich List" label="Sunday Times Rich List"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="26807" end="26808" title="Pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327077" start="27048" end="27067" title="Electric motorcycles and scooters" label="electric motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q924724" start="27111" end="27124" title="electric bike" label="electric bike"/>
<link wikidata="Q387047" start="27187" end="27205" title="Malibu, California" label="Malibu, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="27442" end="27446" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q85787979" start="27553" end="27578" title="National Television Award for Special Recognition" label="Special Recognition Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="27600" end="27619" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550057" start="27628" end="27654" title="14th National Television Awards" label="National Television Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="27667" end="27684" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566255" start="27692" end="27705" title="New Statesman" label="New Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="27802" end="27810" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="27937" end="27948" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631341" start="27962" end="27982" title="The New Elizabethans" label="The New Elizabethans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191088" start="28001" end="28038" title="diamond Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II" label="diamond Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="28338" end="28360" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276892" wikidata="Q7182965" url="?curid=276892" title="Philatelic investment">
<text>Philatelic investment is investment in collectible postage stamps for the purpose of realizing a profit. Philatelic investment was popular during the 1970s but then fell out of favour following a speculative bubble and prices of rare stamps took many years to recover.

==Overview==
Investing in rare stamps requires a high degree of expertise and can be very risky for the novice. Rare stamps are among the most portable of tangible investments, take up little space but require careful storage as condition is one of the most important factors in determining the value of a stamp. Other tangible investments include art, antiques, precious metals, rare coins and many others that are all termed alternative investments. Interest in stamps as an investment tends to increase when traditional investments are not doing well, causing investors to seek alternatives. The increasing age of the population in western countries has also been credited with a resurgence in interest in stamps.

A British auctioneer warned: &quot;Unless you know what you are doing – and this only comes with many years of experience – it is very difficult to buy sensibly and at the right prices. When you buy on a retail basis, you have to overcome the profit margins the dealer has built into his selling price, plus VAT. When you sell, you also have to overcome dealing charges, whether you sell to an auction house or a dealer. That would consume an awful lot of value. To overcome that mark-up and sell at a profit would require quite a few years of appreciation.&quot;

==Before investing==

A stamp investor should have a good knowledge of:
*Classification,
*Condition grading,
*Authentication,
*Handling and storage,
*The stamp market,
*Philatelic literature.
The prospective investor will also benefit from attending stamp clubs, auctions, philatelic shows and having a relationship with a knowledgeable dealer.

Very subtle differences in colour, perforation, overprinting, and the like may be what differentiates a valuable stamp from a common one. The investor not only has to be very knowledgeable of these issues but also know (or at least have a reputable expert available to check) whether alterations have been made to make an inexpensive stamp look like a valuable one, or indeed, whether the stamp itself is simply a counterfeit.

==The value of a stamp==
The value of a stamp is determined by a number of factors including:
*The number available on the philatelic market,
*Demand from collectors inside and outside the country of origin,
*Condition, a damaged stamp is worth only a fraction of one in fine condition,
*Thematic appeal,
*Perceptions as to current or future value,
*Current events, a news event may temporarily increase values, for instance after the death of Diana, Princess of Wales,
*The place of purchase or sale. Values vary according to where the transaction takes place. Prices vary from country to country for the same stamp and prices realised at an auction may be different from those charged by a dealer or in a private sale between collectors. 
*Historical significance and/or the rarity of the postmark on a used stamp.

Rare or unusual stamps can be submitted for Philatelic expertisation. The opinions of experts differ and have evolved over time. Conflicting expert opinions, such as on colour shade or whether a stamp has been reperforated, can have a huge effect on a stamp&#x27;s value.

== Buying stamps ==

There are a number of places where a prospective investor can buy stamps:
*The internet,
*Auctions,
*Stamp dealers,
*A few specialised stamp investment firms,
*From a collector in a private sale.

Stamps purchased for investment are usually old classic stamps in fine condition, such as British Victorian stamps or American stamps from before 1900. These may be thought of as the equivalent of buying a blue chip share. Although future prices may vary, as long as there is a hobby of stamp collecting there is likely to be good demand for these stamps.

Stamps typically included in an investment portfolio will be rare and priced in the thousands of dollars or pounds but they will probably not be the greatest rarities as those unique items are typically sold at public auctions and may reach prices approaching or exceeding $1 million US.

Some collectors and investors also try to anticipate future trends and buy low now, this however, is difficult to get right and may take a long time to pay off. Investors may try to identify a developing country with an expanding middle class who may have the time and money to pursue a hobby like stamp collecting as the developing domestic demand may help to force prices up. Recent examples have been India and China.

Some firms are developing collective or mutual funds where money from many investors is pooled and each investor owns shares or units in the fund. The fund then invests the money in stamps.

== Size of the market ==
Unlike stocks and shares, the majority of transactions in the philatelic or stamp market take place informally, by mail order, or in retail environments, and therefore the size of the market is hard to determine. The market is certainly much smaller than the financial markets but it is not trivial. It has been estimated at £5 Billion. The majority of these transactions, however, are likely to be low value items rather than investments. In a 2007 interview, Mike Hall of Stanley Gibbons estimated that &quot;About $1 billion of rare stamps trade annually in the $10 billion-a-year stamp market.&quot; The number of collectors worldwide was estimated at 30 million in 2004. In 2009, Adrian Roose of Stanley Gibbons estimated the figure at 48 million including 18 million in China. It is not known how many of these are serious collectors.

== Historical data ==
While there are long term records of retail stamp prices, the first catalogue being prepared in 1862, there is little objective historical data about the past performance of stamps as investments. No long term indices like the Dow Jones or FTSE Index exist, although some figures have been compiled by Stanley Gibbons and &quot;Stamp Magazine&quot; in the UK.

From 2002, Stanley Gibbons compiled a &quot;SG100 Stamp Index&quot; based on retail and auction prices for the &quot;top 100 most frequently traded stamps&quot; in the world. The index appeared on the list of the Bloomberg service but was discontinued and given heritage status. In 2004 they also launched an index of 30 rare British stamps. In 2012 the company launched the &quot;GB250 Rare Stamp Index&quot; &#x27;to provide a broad view of the investment market for Great Britain stamps&#x27;, listing the type of stamps they would recommend for investment purposes. The GB30 and GB250 indices are listed on both the Bloomberg Professional service and Thomson Reuters. According to Stanley Gibbons, rare stamps have averaged an annual compound return of 10 per cent over the past 50 years, however, it is important to remember that this figure has been calculated using backtesting as stamp price indexes are a recent innovation. In addition, the prices in the indexes are based in part on Stanley Gibbon&#x27;s own retail price lists and frequently traded but low value stamps have been excluded from the index.

Stamp catalogue prices are not considered reliable as they are nothing more than estimates at the top end and represent a retail selling price at the bottom end of the market. Auction realisations may be more reliable but are difficult to use as the investor has to personally analyse the realisations from many auctions over a long period of time in order to come to any useful conclusions. While most trading in shares is on a recognised stock exchange and takes place transparently in public, that is not the case with stamps where only auction transactions take place in public view.

==Selling stamps==
There are a number of ways to sell stamps, as there are to buy, and each has its own advantages and disadvantages.
*Auctions may achieve the highest prices but the costs are also high.
*Dealers may be able to act quickly or pay cash but are likely to offer a price at least one third below the normal retail sale price for the stamp as the dealer needs to make a profit on the transaction. Some dealers aim to double their money on every transaction.
*Private sales. Many sales take place between collectors, however, an investor who is not a collector is unlikely to have the personal contacts to secure such a sale.

There is no equivalent of the stock exchange for stamps.

==Risks and disadvantages==
Investing successfully in stamps requires a high degree of specialised knowledge. This takes time to acquire and there are many pitfalls for the inexperienced investor. Some of the risks and disadvantages are:
*The return is not guaranteed.
*The cost of buying is high compared to most other forms of investment.
*The cost of selling is also relatively high.
*Purchases may be liable to a sales tax, for instance VAT in the European Union, which the buyer may not be able to reclaim.
*Stamps may need to be expertised, for a fee, to ensure that they are what they appear to be.
*As tangible items, stamps may need to be insured and are at risk of physical damage or deterioration.
*The future market for the sale of philatelic items is uncertain. The demand for philatelic items comes principally from collectors, not investors, and the majority of collectors are aged over 50 in western countries. There are relatively few younger collectors in Europe and North America that would be expected to be the buyers of the future, although anecdotal evidence suggest that may not be the case in India, China and other developing countries.
*In the longer term, the future existence of postage stamps may be in doubt as people use electronic communications more and more and send fewer letters. If stamps are no longer sold for postage they may cease to be collected and if they are not collected, the vital collector demand that underpins the investment market may disappear.
*Stamps have little intrinsic value, they do not have the raw material value of a gold coin, they do not represent a share in a business like equities, and they usually lack the enduring visual appeal of a great work of art.
*Stamp investment is relatively unregulated compared with, for instance, investments in a mutual fund and investors may have little protection if things go wrong.
*The size of the philatelic market is small compared to the value of the stock market and vulnerable to aggressive buying by speculators, which may distort prices. This happened in the 1970s when a speculative bubble was followed by a collapse in prices.
*Stamps do not generate any interest or dividends.
*It may be impossible to determine the current market value of the stamps without selling them.
*Stamps packaged as &quot;investment portfolios&quot; may be charged at prices higher than their normal market value.
*There is very little reliable and independent historical information about the performance of stamps as investments.
*A long-term view is necessary. A quick purchase and sale is unlikely to be profitable.
*When more traditional investments are doing well, interest in alternative investments like stamps may quickly wane.
*Special instructions will need to be given to spouses or executors in the event of the owner&#x27;s incapacity or death as they may be unfamiliar with philatelic items.
*Stamps may take time to be sold unlike cash, equities or mutual funds which can usually be realised with minimal delay.

== Advantages ==
*Stamps are not highly correlated with other forms of investment and may therefore represent a valuable diversification within a wider portfolio.
*Stamps are highly portable stores of wealth and are easily transported over national borders.
*An ageing population in western countries means that investors approaching retirement may resume childhood hobbies, thus increasing demand.
*There are millions of enthusiastic stamp collectors around the world creating a global marketplace.
*There is a finite supply of classic stamps.
*Stamps are not a financial asset and so may perform better than cash in times of high inflation.
*As a tangible asset, a stamp cannot go out of business like a company quoted on the stock market.
*Stamps are a relatively confidential investment. Unless bought at a public auction, ownership is private and there is no public register as there is for many investments in equities.
*The investor is able to hold and admire his investment, and enjoy its aesthetic aspects.
*Many stamps have an interesting historical background.

== Regulation and investor protection ==
Stamps purchased for investment do not normally have any special regulatory protection for the purchaser. In the United Kingdom there is no regulation of this area at all from the Financial Conduct Authority. Rules elsewhere may vary. Where investment is collective through a mutual fund there may be some regulation of the activities of the fund depending on its location.

== Stamp investment scandals ==
There have been a number of scandals in this area over the years.

In Ireland in the 1950s, Paul Singer, a Bratislavian Doctor of Philosophy, ran a Ponzi scheme under the name &quot;Shanahan Stamp Auctions&quot;. The scheme collapsed when a mysterious robbery took place at the company&#x27;s office on 9 May 1959, the eve of a major auction, when more than £300,000 worth of stamps went missing. Singer was charged with fraud, but was acquitted and vanished.

In the 1970s, the bursting of a speculative bubble left investors unable to realise their investment at the price they had paid. Prices took decades to recover.

In 2006, two Spanish firms Afinsa and &quot;Forum Filatelico&quot; collapsed and left around 350,000 investors with investments worth as little as 10% of the price they had paid.

In November 2017 it was announced that Stanley Gibbons&#x27; stamp investment subsidiary in Guernsey had been placed in administration. The company was reported to have £12.6 million of philatelic stock but over £70m of liabilities, made up of £54m of &quot;buy-back&quot; guarantees, £6.5m owed to its parent company, and £11m of sundry liabilities.

==See also==
*Alternative investment
*Traditional investments
*List of most expensive philatelic items

== References ==
==Further reading==
*Datz, Stephen R. (2009) &quot;Stamp Investing&quot;. General Trade Corporation. 
*Temple, Peter. (2010) &quot;The Handbook of Alternative Assets: Making Money from Art, Rare Books, Coins and Banknotes, Forestry, Gold and Precious Metals, Stamps, Wine and Other Alternative Assets&quot;. Petersfield: Harriman House. 

==External links==
*A.S.D.A. The Stamp Dealer’s Obligations and Responsibilities When Selling Stamps as an Investment.
*Investing in Rare and Valuable Stamps by Jan Kosniowski. Archive here.
*Robert Murray article on stamp investment.
*Stanley Gibbons Investment Indices
*&quot;Portfolio Diversification benefits of Investing in Stamps&quot; by Chris Veld, University of Stirling. (Incomplete first draft)
*The Selection of Investment Grade Stamps by Gary Watson, Prestige Philately.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7182965" start="0" end="21" title="Philatelic investment" label="Philatelic investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290" start="25" end="35" title="investment" label="investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="51" end="64" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682958" start="425" end="444" title="tangible investment" label="tangible investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q271449" start="633" end="647" title="precious metal" label="precious metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736525" start="697" end="719" title="alternative investment" label="alternative investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832348" start="781" end="804" title="traditional investments" label="traditional investments"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="1296" end="1299" title="VAT" label="VAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582682" start="1626" end="1640" title="Categorization" label="Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q840622" start="1663" end="1677" title="philatelic expertisation" label="Authentication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330410" start="1722" end="1743" title="Philatelic literature" label="Philatelic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q731790" start="1934" end="1945" title="Stamp separation" label="perforation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166786" start="1947" end="1956" title="overprint" label="overprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597456" start="2536" end="2545" title="Stamp condition" label="Condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194406" start="3118" end="3126" title="postmark" label="postmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q840622" start="3189" end="3213" title="Philatelic expertisation" label="Philatelic expertisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q753878" start="3842" end="3851" title="Blue chip (stock market)" label="blue chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q791974" start="4744" end="4755" title="mutual fund" label="mutual fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q131026" start="4982" end="4992" title="philatelic" label="philatelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938876" start="5394" end="5409" title="Stanley Gibbons" label="Stanley Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q180816" start="6011" end="6020" title="Dow Jones Industrial Average" label="Dow Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q466496" start="6024" end="6034" title="FTSE 100 Index" label="FTSE Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938876" start="6086" end="6101" title="Stanley Gibbons" label="Stanley Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349604" start="6358" end="6375" title="Bloomberg terminal" label="Bloomberg service"/>
<link wikidata="Q798528" start="7018" end="7029" title="backtesting" label="backtesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691" start="8519" end="8533" title="stock exchange" label="stock exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="8964" end="8973" title="sales tax" label="sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q791974" start="10361" end="10372" title="mutual fund" label="mutual fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q186290" start="11609" end="11619" title="correlation and dependence" label="correlated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196314" start="12485" end="12493" title="equities" label="equities"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="12566" end="12575" title="aesthetics" label="aesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449586" start="12863" end="12890" title="Financial Conduct Authority" label="Financial Conduct Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q219407" start="13238" end="13250" title="Ponzi scheme" label="Ponzi scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659204" start="13740" end="13746" title="Afinsa" label="Afinsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="13985" end="13993" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q759652" start="14013" end="14027" title="Administration (law)" label="administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736525" start="14259" end="14281" title="Alternative investment" label="Alternative investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832348" start="14283" end="14306" title="Traditional investments" label="Traditional investments"/>
<link wikidata="Q97176501" start="14308" end="14347" title="List of most expensive philatelic items" label="List of most expensive philatelic items"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276894" wikidata="Q2502253" url="?curid=276894" title="Uniqueness quantification">
<text>In mathematics and logic, the term &quot;uniqueness&quot; refers to the property of being the one and only object satisfying a certain condition. This sort of quantification is known as uniqueness quantification or unique existential quantification, and is often denoted with the symbols &quot;∃!&quot; or &quot;∃=1&quot;.

For example, the formal statement

: formula_1

may be read as &quot;there is exactly one natural number formula_2 such that formula_3&quot;.

== Proving uniqueness ==

The most common technique to prove the unique existence of an object is to first prove the existence of the entity with the desired condition, and then to prove that any two such entities (say, &quot;formula_4&quot; and &quot;formula_5&quot;) must be equal to each other (i.e. formula_6).

For example, to show that the equation formula_7 has exactly one solution, one would first start by establishing that at least one solution exists, namely 3; the proof of this part is simply the verification that the equation below holds:

:formula_8

To establish the uniqueness of the solution, one would proceed by assuming that there are two solutions, namely &quot;formula_4&quot; and &quot;formula_5&quot;, satisfying formula_7. That is,

:formula_12

Then since equality is a transitive relation, 

:formula_13

Subtracting 2 from both sides then yields
:formula_14

which completes the proof that 3 is the unique solution of formula_7.

In general, both existence (there exists &quot;at least&quot; one object) and uniqueness (there exists &quot;at most&quot; one object) must be proven, in order to conclude that there exists exactly one object satisfying a said condition.

An alternative way to prove uniqueness is to prove that there exists an object formula_4 satisfying the condition, and then to prove that every object satisfying the condition must be equal to formula_4.

== Reduction to ordinary existential and universal quantification ==
Uniqueness quantification can be expressed in terms of the existential and universal quantifiers of predicate logic, by defining the formula formula_18 to mean

:formula_19
which is logically equivalent to
:formula_20

An equivalent definition that separates the notions of existence and uniqueness into two clauses, at the expense of brevity, is
:formula_21

Another equivalent definition, which has the advantage of brevity, is
:formula_22

== Generalizations ==
The uniqueness quantification can be generalized into counting quantification (or numerical quantification). This includes both quantification of the form &quot;exactly &quot;k&quot; objects exist such that …&quot; as well as &quot;infinitely many objects exist such that …&quot; and &quot;only finitely many objects exist such that…&quot;. The first of these forms is expressible using ordinary quantifiers, but the latter two cannot be expressed in ordinary first-order logic.

Uniqueness depends on a notion of equality. Loosening this to a coarser equivalence relation yields quantification of uniqueness up to that equivalence (under this framework, regular uniqueness is &quot;uniqueness up to equality&quot;). For example, many concepts in category theory are defined to be unique up to isomorphism.

The exclamation mark formula_23 can be also used as a separate quantification symbol, so formula_24, where formula_25. E.g. it can be safely used in the replacement axiom, instead of formula_26.

== See also ==
* Essentially unique
* One-hot
* Singleton (mathematics)
* Uniqueness theorem

== References ==

== Bibliography ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="19" end="24" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q592911" start="159" end="173" title="Quantifier (logic)" label="quantification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502253" start="186" end="211" title="Uniqueness quantification" label="uniqueness quantification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502253" start="215" end="248" title="Uniqueness quantification" label="unique existential quantification"/>
<link wikidata="Q773483" start="294" end="295" title="Existential quantification" label="∃"/>
<link wikidata="Q64861" start="1266" end="1285" title="transitive relation" label="transitive relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q773483" start="2000" end="2011" title="existential quantifier" label="existential"/>
<link wikidata="Q126695" start="2016" end="2025" title="universal quantifier" label="universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="2041" end="2056" title="predicate logic" label="predicate logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177156" start="2460" end="2483" title="counting quantification" label="counting quantification"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="2866" end="2883" title="first-order logic" label="first-order logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q842346" start="2920" end="2928" title="equality (mathematics)" label="equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="2958" end="2978" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914964" start="3015" end="3020" title="up to" label="up to"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="3153" end="3168" title="category theory" label="category theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="3200" end="3211" title="isomorphism" label="isomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361825" start="3367" end="3384" title="replacement axiom" label="replacement axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399590" start="3427" end="3445" title="Essentially unique" label="Essentially unique"/>
<link wikidata="Q161690" start="3448" end="3455" title="One-hot" label="One-hot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165112" start="3458" end="3481" title="Singleton (mathematics)" label="Singleton (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q26261907" start="3484" end="3502" title="Uniqueness theorem" label="Uniqueness theorem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276895" wikidata="Q29971" url="?curid=276895" title="Leeward Islands">
<text>The Leeward Islands () are a group of islands situated where the northeastern Caribbean Sea meets the western Atlantic Ocean. Starting with the Virgin Islands east of Puerto Rico, they extend southeast to Guadeloupe and its dependencies. In English, the term &quot;Leeward Islands&quot; refers to the northern islands of the Lesser Antilles chain. The more southerly part of this chain, starting with Dominica, is called the Windward Islands. Dominica was initially considered a part of the Leeward Islands but was transferred from the British Leeward Islands to the British Windward Islands in 1940.

==Origin of the name==

The name of this island group, &quot;Leeward Islands&quot;, dates from previous centuries, when sailing ships were the sole form of transportation across the Atlantic Ocean. In sailing terminology, &quot;windward&quot; means towards the source of the wind (upwind), while &quot;leeward&quot; is the opposite direction (downwind). In the West Indies, the prevailing winds, known as the trade winds, blow predominantly out of the northeast. Therefore, a sailing vessel departing from the British Gold Coast and the Gulf of Guinea, driven by the trade winds, would usually first encounter Dominica and Martinique, islands most to windward, in their west-northwesterly heading to the final destinations in the Caribbean, Central America, and Northern America. This location, Dominica and Martinique, becomes the rough dividing line between the Windward Islands and the Leeward Islands.

The early Spanish explorers called Puerto Rico and the islands to the west &quot;Sotavento&quot;, meaning &quot;leeward&quot;. The islands south and east of Puerto Rico were called &quot;Islas de Barlovento&quot;, meaning &quot;windward islands&quot;. When the British gained control of many of the Lesser Antilles, they designated Antigua, Montserrat, and the islands to the north as the Leeward Islands. Guadeloupe and the islands to the south were designated as the Windward Islands. Later on, all islands north of Martinique became known as the Leeward Islands. Dominica was transferred to the British Windward Islands in 1940 and is now considered part of the Windward Islands.

However, even in modern usage in languages other than English, notably Dutch, French, and Spanish, all of the Lesser Antilles from the Virgin Islands to Trinidad and Tobago are known as the Windward Islands (&quot;Bovenwindse Eilanden&quot; in Dutch, &quot;Îles du Vent&quot; in French, and &quot;Islas de Barlovento&quot; in Spanish). The ABC islands and the other islands along the Venezuelan coast, known in English as the Leeward Antilles, are known in languages other than English as an equivalent of the Leeward Islands.

==Geography==
The islands were created mostly by volcanoes in the Lesser Antilles subduction zone. Some are still active. Notable eruptions occurred in Montserrat in the 1990s and in 2009 to 2010. At , the highest point is La Grande Soufrière in Guadeloupe.

==History==
The Caribs, after whom the Caribbean is named, are believed to have migrated from the Orinoco River area in Venezuela in South America to settle in the Caribbean islands about 1200 AD, according to carbon dating. Over the century leading up to Columbus&#x27; arrival in the Caribbean archipelago in 1492, the Caribs mostly displaced the Maipurean-speaking Taínos, who settled the island chains earlier in history, by warfare, extermination, and assimilation.

The islands were among the first parts of the Americas to fall under the control of the Spanish Empire. European contact commenced with Christopher Columbus&#x27;s second voyage; many of the islands&#x27; names originate from this period: Montserrat was named in honour of Santa Maria de Montserrat (Our Lady of Montserrat), after the Blessed Virgin of the Monastery of Montserrat, which is located on the Mountain of Montserrat, the national shrine of Catalonia. in Catalan means &quot;saw mountain&quot;, referring to the serrated appearance of the mountain range.

===British colony of the Leeward Islands===

The Leeward Islands became a British colony in 1671, with William Stapleton as its first governor.

Although comparatively much smaller than the surrounding islands in the Caribbean, the Leeward Islands posed the most significant rebellion to the British Stamp Act, though it was decidedly less severe in comparison to that of the mainland North American colonies.

In 1660, there were about 8,000 white settlers and approximately 2,000 enslaved Africans in the Leeward Islands. However, that ratio narrowed over succeeding years. In 1678, there were 10,408 white settlers and 8,449 enslaved Black people. By 1708, there was a huge disparity between the number of white settlers, which had declined to 7,311, and the number of enslaved Black people was estimated at 23,500.

In 1816, the colony was dissolved as a federation of islands, and the individual islands were ruled individually. However, the colony of the Leeward Islands was re-established in 1833.

== List of notable islands in the Leeward Islands ==
There are two countries and eleven territories in the Leeward Islands. From the northwest to the southeast, the main islands are:

* Virgin Islands
** Spanish Virgin Islands 
*** Spanish (Puerto Rican) Islands (Puerto Rico) (United States)
*** (Municipality of Puerto Rico) (United States)
*** (Municipality of Puerto Rico) (United States)
** (United States)
*** Saint Thomas
*** Saint John
*** Saint Croix
*** Water Island
** (United Kingdom)
*** Jost Van Dyke
*** Tortola
*** Virgin Gorda
*** Anegada
* (United Kingdom)
* Saint Martin Island
** Saint Martin (France)
** (Netherlands)
* (France)
* (Netherlands)
* (Netherlands)
** 
* 
** Barbuda
** Antigua
** Redonda — uninhabited
* (United Kingdom)
* (France)
** La Désirade (dependency of Guadeloupe) — literally &#x27;The Desired&#x27;, also called La Deseada
** Îles des Saintes (dependency of Guadeloupe)
** Marie-Galante (dependency of Guadeloupe)

==See also==

* Leeward Islands moist forests
* British Leeward Islands
* Leeward Antilles
* Leeward Islands Cricket Association
* Leeward Islands cricket team
* Lesser Antilles
** 
* Windward Islands

==References==
==Further reading==
* Jeppe Mulich. 2020. &quot;In a Sea of Empires: Networks and Crossings in the Revolutionary Caribbean&quot;. Cambridge University Press.

==External links==

* Digital Library of the Caribbean−dloc.org: &quot;The Leeward Islands Gazette&quot;—freely−openly available, with full-page images and searchable text
* Digital Library of the Caribbean−dloc.org: &quot;Antigua, Montserrat and Virgin Islands Gazette&quot;—openly−freely available, with searchable text and full-page images</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q29971" start="4" end="19" title="Leeward Islands" label="Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="78" end="91" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262" start="144" end="158" title="Virgin Islands" label="Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="167" end="178" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012" start="205" end="215" title="Guadeloupe" label="Guadeloupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="325" end="340" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q784" start="401" end="409" title="Dominica" label="Dominica"/>
<link wikidata="Q183416" start="425" end="441" title="Windward Islands" label="Windward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796551" start="536" end="559" title="British Leeward Islands" label="British Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660774" start="567" end="591" title="British Windward Islands" label="British Windward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q170483" start="722" end="734" title="sailing ship" label="sailing ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q372001" start="830" end="838" title="windward and leeward" label="windward"/>
<link wikidata="Q372001" start="904" end="911" title="windward and leeward" label="leeward"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="963" end="974" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="1011" end="1022" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q503623" start="1112" end="1130" title="Gold Coast (British colony)" label="British Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="1139" end="1153" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="1332" end="1341" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="1343" end="1358" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017699" start="1364" end="1380" title="Northern America" label="Northern America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="1519" end="1536" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="Spanish explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="1544" end="1555" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="1808" end="1823" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q316390" start="1841" end="1848" title="Antigua" label="Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="1850" end="1860" title="Montserrat" label="Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012" start="1915" end="1925" title="Guadeloupe" label="Guadeloupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054" start="2027" end="2037" title="Martinique" label="Martinique"/>
<link wikidata="Q784" start="2075" end="2083" title="Dominica" label="Dominica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660774" start="2107" end="2131" title="British Windward Islands" label="British Windward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q183416" start="2174" end="2190" title="Windward Islands" label="Windward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262" start="2328" end="2342" title="Virgin Islands" label="Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="2346" end="2365" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q19386" start="2533" end="2544" title="ABC islands (Leeward Antilles)" label="ABC islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q30209" start="2619" end="2635" title="Leeward Antilles" label="Leeward Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="2770" end="2777" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531473" start="2787" end="2818" title="Lesser Antilles subduction zone" label="Lesser Antilles subduction zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="2873" end="2883" title="Montserrat" label="Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149310" start="2944" end="2963" title="La Grande Soufrière" label="La Grande Soufrière"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012" start="2967" end="2977" title="Guadeloupe" label="Guadeloupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27106" start="2996" end="3002" title="Island Caribs" label="Caribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="3019" end="3028" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q131792" start="3078" end="3085" title="Orinoco" label="Orinoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="3113" end="3126" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834414" start="3144" end="3161" title="Caribbean islands" label="Caribbean islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="3190" end="3203" title="carbon dating" label="carbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="3236" end="3244" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q626753" start="3329" end="3338" title="Maipurean" label="Maipurean"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="3348" end="3354" title="Taínos" label="Taínos"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="3540" end="3554" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="3588" end="3608" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q771935" start="3725" end="3750" title="Santa Maria de Montserrat" label="Santa Maria de Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="3787" end="3801" title="Blessed Virgin" label="Blessed Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q771935" start="3809" end="3832" title="Monastery of Montserrat" label="Monastery of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q732115" start="3858" end="3880" title="Mountain of Montserrat" label="Mountain of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="3905" end="3914" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="3919" end="3926" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q125356" start="3939" end="3942" title="saw" label="saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4094" end="4101" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568964" start="4123" end="4140" title="Sir William Stapleton, 1st Baronet" label="William Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335777" start="4320" end="4329" title="Stamp Act 1765" label="Stamp Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262" start="5212" end="5226" title="Virgin Islands" label="Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q567983" start="5258" end="5288" title="Spanish Virgin Islands" label="Spanish (Puerto Rican) Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="5290" end="5301" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q263639" start="5324" end="5336" title="Municipalities of Puerto Rico" label="Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="5340" end="5351" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q263639" start="5374" end="5386" title="Municipalities of Puerto Rico" label="Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="5390" end="5401" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q463937" start="5442" end="5454" title="Saint Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands" label="Saint Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q849441" start="5459" end="5469" title="Saint John, U.S. Virgin Islands" label="Saint John"/>
<link wikidata="Q642481" start="5474" end="5485" title="Saint Croix" label="Saint Croix"/>
<link wikidata="Q679803" start="5490" end="5502" title="Water Island, U.S. Virgin Islands" label="Water Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="5507" end="5521" title="The Crown" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330151" start="5527" end="5540" title="Jost Van Dyke" label="Jost Van Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q827604" start="5545" end="5552" title="Tortola" label="Tortola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139293" start="5557" end="5569" title="Virgin Gorda" label="Virgin Gorda"/>
<link wikidata="Q519873" start="5574" end="5581" title="Anegada" label="Anegada"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="5585" end="5599" title="The Crown" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q25596" start="5603" end="5622" title="Saint Martin (island)" label="Saint Martin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q126125" start="5626" end="5638" title="Collectivity of Saint Martin" label="Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5640" end="5646" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q29999" start="5652" end="5663" title="Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5668" end="5674" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="5679" end="5690" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="5695" end="5706" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q238752" start="5718" end="5725" title="Barbuda" label="Barbuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q316390" start="5729" end="5736" title="Antigua" label="Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q457261" start="5740" end="5747" title="Redonda" label="Redonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="5765" end="5779" title="The Crown" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q200686" start="5784" end="5790" title="French Fifth Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024682" start="5795" end="5806" title="La Désirade" label="La Désirade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044826" start="5808" end="5832" title="Dependencies of Guadeloupe" label="dependency of Guadeloupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q292657" start="5897" end="5913" title="Îles des Saintes" label="Îles des Saintes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334492" start="5944" end="5957" title="Marie-Galante" label="Marie-Galante"/>
<link wikidata="Q104631326" start="6002" end="6031" title="Leeward Islands moist forests" label="Leeward Islands moist forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796551" start="6034" end="6057" title="British Leeward Islands" label="British Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q30209" start="6060" end="6076" title="Leeward Antilles" label="Leeward Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516576" start="6079" end="6114" title="Leeward Islands Cricket Association" label="Leeward Islands Cricket Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590581" start="6117" end="6145" title="Leeward Islands cricket team" label="Leeward Islands cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="6148" end="6163" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q183416" start="6170" end="6186" title="Windward Islands" label="Windward Islands"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276897" wikidata="Q183416" url="?curid=276897" title="Windward Islands">
<text>The Windward Islands are the southern, generally larger islands of the Lesser Antilles of the Caribbean islands or West Indies. Located approximately between latitudes 10° and 16° N and longitudes 60° and 62° W, they extend from Dominica in the north to Trinidad and Tobago in the south, and lie south of the Leeward Islands and east of Leeward Antilles.

The name was also used to refer to a British colony which existed between 1833 and 1960 and originally consisted of the islands of Grenada, Saint Lucia, and Saint Vincent. Today, these islands constitute three sovereign states, the latter of which is now known as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.

The island of Dominica was traditionally considered a part of the Leeward Islands until 1940, when it was transferred from the British Leeward Islands colony to the British Windward Islands. It now composes the fourth sovereign state in the group.

Barbados (until 1885) and Tobago (until 1889) were also part of the British Windward Islands colony but are not today regarded as being part of the Windward Islands grouping. The other known as Martinique is the only windward island that is still become overseas département of France as of today since 1946 which is 7,000 kilometers away from Paris.

==Name and geography==
The prevailing trade winds in the West Indies blow east to west. The combination of trans-Atlantic currents and winds that provided the fastest route across the ocean brought sailing ships heading to the New World to the rough dividing line between two groups of islands. Those that fell to windward became the Windward Islands, to leeward the Leeward Islands.

Sailing vessels departing from Africa would first encounter the southeasternmost &quot;Windward&quot; islands of the Lesser Antilles in their west-northwesterly heading to the final destinations in the Caribbean, Central America, and Northern America. The chain of Windward Islands forms a part of the easternmost boundary of the Caribbean Sea.

However, even in modern usage in languages other than English, notably Dutch, French, and Spanish, all of the Lesser Antilles from the Virgin Islands to Trinidad and Tobago are known as the &#x27;Windward Islands&#x27; (&quot;Bovenwindse Eilanden&quot; in Dutch, &quot;Îles du Vent&quot; in French, and &quot;Islas de Barlovento&quot; in Spanish). The ABC Islands and the other islands along the Venezuelan coast, known in English as the Leeward Antilles, are known in languages other than English as the &#x27;Leeward Islands&#x27;.

==Countries and territories==
There are four countries and one territory in the Windward Islands:
* 
** Carriacou and Petite Martinique
* (France)
* 
**Grenadines
** Saint Vincent

==Politics==
==See also==

* British Windward Islands
* Deafness in the Windward Islands
* Intra-Americas Sea
* Leeward Antilles
* Leeward Islands
* Lesser Antilles
** 
* Windward Islands Cricket Board of Control
* Windward Islands cricket team

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q183416" start="4" end="20" title="Windward Islands" label="Windward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="71" end="86" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="94" end="111" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="115" end="126" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255736" start="168" end="171" title="10th parallel north" label="10°"/>
<link wikidata="Q548952" start="176" end="181" title="16th parallel north" label="16° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704789" start="197" end="200" title="60th meridian west" label="60°"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705914" start="205" end="210" title="62nd meridian west" label="62° W"/>
<link wikidata="Q784" start="229" end="237" title="Dominica" label="Dominica"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="254" end="273" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q29971" start="309" end="324" title="Leeward Islands" label="Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q30209" start="337" end="353" title="Leeward Antilles" label="Leeward Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660774" start="393" end="407" title="British Windward Islands" label="British colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q769" start="487" end="494" title="Grenada" label="Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q760" start="496" end="507" title="Saint Lucia" label="Saint Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q379656" start="513" end="526" title="Saint Vincent (Antilles)" label="Saint Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q757" start="620" end="652" title="Saint Vincent and the Grenadines" label="Saint Vincent and the Grenadines"/>
<link wikidata="Q784" start="669" end="677" title="Dominica" label="Dominica"/>
<link wikidata="Q29971" start="721" end="736" title="Leeward Islands" label="Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796551" start="782" end="805" title="British Leeward Islands" label="British Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="904" end="912" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q185111" start="930" end="936" title="Tobago" label="Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660774" start="972" end="996" title="British Windward Islands" label="British Windward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054" start="1098" end="1108" title="Martinique" label="Martinique"/>
<link wikidata="Q21022" start="1158" end="1178" title="French West Indies" label="overseas département"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1182" end="1188" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1248" end="1253" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="1294" end="1305" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="1313" end="1324" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q129558" start="1378" end="1386" title="ocean current" label="currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q170483" start="1454" end="1466" title="sailing ship" label="sailing ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="1483" end="1492" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q372001" start="1570" end="1578" title="windward and leeward" label="windward"/>
<link wikidata="Q372001" start="1611" end="1618" title="windward and leeward" label="leeward"/>
<link wikidata="Q29971" start="1623" end="1638" title="Leeward Islands" label="Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="1843" end="1852" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="1854" end="1869" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017699" start="1875" end="1891" title="Northern America" label="Northern America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="1971" end="1984" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="2097" end="2112" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262" start="2122" end="2136" title="Virgin Islands" label="Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="2140" end="2159" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q19386" start="2339" end="2350" title="ABC islands (Leeward Antilles)" label="ABC Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q30209" start="2425" end="2441" title="Leeward Antilles" label="Leeward Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044818" start="2626" end="2657" title="Carriacou and Petite Martinique" label="Carriacou and Petite Martinique"/>
<link wikidata="Q200686" start="2661" end="2667" title="French Fifth Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545297" start="2674" end="2684" title="Grenadines Parish" label="Grenadines"/>
<link wikidata="Q379656" start="2688" end="2701" title="Saint Vincent (Antilles)" label="Saint Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660774" start="2732" end="2756" title="British Windward Islands" label="British Windward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q115519348" start="2759" end="2791" title="Deafness in the Windward Islands" label="Deafness in the Windward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q470088" start="2794" end="2812" title="Intra-Americas Sea" label="Intra-Americas Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q30209" start="2815" end="2831" title="Leeward Antilles" label="Leeward Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q29971" start="2834" end="2849" title="Leeward Islands" label="Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="2852" end="2867" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024798" start="2874" end="2915" title="Windward Islands Cricket Board of Control" label="Windward Islands Cricket Board of Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590586" start="2918" end="2947" title="Windward Islands cricket team" label="Windward Islands cricket team"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276898" wikidata="Q17548110" url="?curid=276898" title="Uniqueness">
<text>Uniqueness is a state or condition wherein someone or something is unlike anything else in comparison, or is remarkable, or unusual. When used in relation to humans, it is often in relation to a person&#x27;s personality, or some specific characteristics of it, signalling that it is unlike the personality traits that are prevalent in that individual&#x27;s culture. When the term &quot;uniqueness&quot; is used in relation to an object, it is often within the realm of product, with the term being a factor used to publicize or market the product in order to make it stand out from other products within the same category.

The notion of American exceptionalism is premised on the uniqueness of the West, particularly its well-defined secularism.

==See also==
*Loner
*Scarcity

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17548110" start="0" end="10" title="Uniqueness" label="Uniqueness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="158" end="163" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q641118" start="209" end="220" title="personality" label="personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q18773" start="295" end="312" title="personality trait" label="personality trait"/>
<link wikidata="Q464148" start="640" end="663" title="American exceptionalism" label="American exceptionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="697" end="705" title="Western world" label="the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="737" end="747" title="secularism" label="secularism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310043" start="764" end="769" title="Loner" label="Loner"/>
<link wikidata="Q815758" start="771" end="779" title="Scarcity" label="Scarcity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276900" wikidata="Q517149" url="?curid=276900" title="Omega (navigation system)">
<text>OMEGA was the first global-range radio navigation system, operated by the United States in cooperation with six partner nations. It was a hyperbolic navigation system, enabling ships and aircraft to determine their position by receiving very low frequency (VLF) radio signals in the range 10 to 14 kHz, transmitted by a global network of eight fixed terrestrial radio beacons, using a navigation receiver unit. It became operational around 1971 and was shut down in 1997 in favour of the Global Positioning System.

==History==

===Previous systems===
Taking a &quot;fix&quot; in any navigation system requires the determination of two measurements. Typically these are taken in relation to fixed objects like prominent landmarks or the known location of radio transmission towers. By measuring the angle to two such locations, the position of the navigator can be determined. Alternatively, one can measure the angle and distance to a single object, or the distance to two objects.

The introduction of radio systems during the 20th century dramatically increased the distances over which measurements could be taken. Such a system also demanded much greater accuracies in the measurements – an error of one degree in angle might be acceptable when taking a fix on a lighthouse a few miles away, but would be of limited use when used on a radio station away. A variety of methods were developed to take fixes with relatively small angle inaccuracies, but even these were generally useful only for short-range systems.

The same electronics that made basic radio systems work introduced the possibility of making very accurate time delay measurements, and thus highly accurate distance measurements. The problem was knowing when the transmission was initiated. With radar, this was simple, as the transmitter and receiver were usually at the same location. Measuring the delay between sending the signal and receiving the echo allowed accurate range measurement.

For other uses, air navigation for instance, the receiver would have to know the precise time the signal was transmitted. This was not generally possible using electronics of the day. Instead, two stations were synchronized by using one of the two transmitted signals as the trigger for the second signal after a fixed delay. By comparing the measured delay between the two signals, and comparing that with the known delay, the aircraft&#x27;s position was revealed to lie along a curved line in space. By making two such measurements against widely separated stations, the resulting lines would overlap in two locations. These locations were normally far enough apart to allow conventional navigation systems, like dead reckoning, to eliminate the incorrect position solution.

The first of these hyperbolic navigation systems was the UK&#x27;s Gee and Decca, followed by the US LORAN and LORAN-C systems. LORAN-C offered accurate navigation at distances over , and by locating &quot;chains&quot; of stations around the world, they offered moderately widespread coverage.

===Atomic clocks===
Key to the operation of the hyperbolic system was the use of one transmitter to broadcast the &quot;master&quot; signal, which was used by the &quot;secondaries&quot; as their trigger. This limited the maximum range over which the system could operate. For very short ranges, tens of kilometres, the trigger signal could be carried by wires. Over long distances, over-the-air signalling was more practical, but all such systems had range limits of one sort or another.

Very long-distance radio signalling is possible, using longwave techniques (low frequencies), which enables a planet-wide hyperbolic system. However, at those ranges, radio signals do not travel in straight lines, but reflect off various regions above the Earth known collectively as the ionosphere. At medium frequencies, this appears to &quot;bend&quot; or refract the signal beyond the horizon. At lower frequencies, VLF and ELF, the signal will reflect off the ionosphere and ground, allowing the signal to travel great distances in multiple &quot;hops&quot;. However, it is very difficult to synchronize multiple stations using these signals, as they might be received multiple times from different directions at the end of different hops.

The problem of synchronizing very distant stations was solved with the introduction of the atomic clock in the 1950s, which became commercially available in portable form by the 1960s. Depending upon type, e.g. rubidium, caesium, hydrogen, the clocks had an accuracy on the order of 1 part in 1010 to better than 1 part in 1012 or a drift of about 1 second in 30 million years. This is more accurate than the timing system used by the master/secondary stations.

By this time the Loran-C and Decca Navigator systems were dominant in the medium-range roles, and short-range was well served by VOR and DME. The expense of the clocks, lack of need, and the limited accuracy of a long wave system eliminated the need for such a system for many roles.

However, the United States Navy had a distinct need for just such a system, as they were in the process of introducing the TRANSIT satellite navigation system. TRANSIT was designed to allow measurements of location at any point on the planet, with enough accuracy to act as a reference for an inertial navigation system (INS). Periodic fixes re-set the INS, which could then be used for navigation over longer periods of time and distances.

It was often believed that TRANSIT generated two possible locations for any given measurements one on either side of the orbit subtrack. Since the measurement is the Doppler shift of the carrier frequency, the rotation of the earth is sufficient to resolve the difference. The surface of the earth at the equator moves at a speed of 460 meters per second—or roughly 1,000 miles per hour.

===OMEGA===
Omega was approved for development in 1968 with eight transmitters and the ability to achieve a accuracy when fixing a position. Each Omega station transmitted a sequence of three very low frequency (VLF) signals (10.2 kHz, 13.6 kHz, 11.333... kHz in that order) plus a fourth frequency which was unique to each of the eight stations. The duration of each pulse (ranging from 0.9 to 1.2 seconds, with 0.2 second blank intervals between each pulse) differed in a fixed pattern, and repeated every ten seconds; the 10-second pattern was common to all 8 stations and synchronized with the carrier phase angle, which itself was synchronized with the local master atomic clock. The pulses within each 10-second group were identified by the first 8 letters of the alphabet within Omega publications of the time.

The envelope of the individual pulses could be used to establish a receiver&#x27;s internal timing within the 10-second pattern. However, it was the phase of the received signals within each pulse that was used to determine the transit time from transmitter to receiver. Using hyperbolic geometry and radionavigation principles, a position fix with an accuracy on the order of was realizable over the entire globe at any time of the day. Omega employed hyperbolic radionavigation techniques and the chain operated in the VLF portion of the spectrum between 10 and 14 kHz. Near the end of its service life of 26 years, Omega evolved into a system used primarily by the civil community. By receiving signals from three stations, an Omega receiver could locate a position to within using the principle of phase comparison of signals.

Omega stations used very extensive antennas to transmit at their very low frequencies (VLF). This is because wavelength is inversely proportional to frequency (wavelength in metres = 299,792,458 / frequency in Hz), and transmitter efficiency is severely degraded if the length of the antenna is shorter than 1/4 wavelength. They used grounded or insulated guyed masts with umbrella antennas, or wire-spans across both valleys and fjords. Some Omega antennas were the tallest constructions on the continent where they stood or still stand.

When six of the eight station chain became operational in 1971, day-to-day operations were managed by the United States Coast Guard in partnership with Argentina, Norway, Liberia, and France. The Japanese and Australian stations became operational several years later. Coast Guard personnel operated two US stations: one in LaMoure, North Dakota and the other in Kaneohe, Hawaii on the island of Oahu.

Due to the success of the Global Positioning System, the use of Omega declined during the 1990s, to a point where the cost of operating Omega could no longer be justified. Omega was shut down permanently on 30 September 1997. Several of the towers were then soon demolished.

Some of the stations, such as the LaMoure station, are now used for submarine communications.

==Court case==

In 1976 the Decca Navigator Company of London sued the United States government over patent infringements, claiming that the Omega system was based on a proposed earlier Decca system known as DELRAC, &quot;Decca Long Range Area Coverage&quot;, that had been disclosed to the US in 1954. Decca cited original US documents showing the Omega system was originally referred to as DELRAC/Omega. Decca won the case and was awarded $44,000,000 in damages. Decca had previously sued the US government for alleged patent infringements over the LORAN C system in 1967. Decca also won that case, but as the LORAN C navigation system was judged to be a military one without commercial use, no damages were paid by the US.

==OMEGA stations==
There were nine Omega stations in total; only eight operated at one time. Trinidad operated until 1976 and was replaced by Liberia:

=== Bratland Omega Transmitter ===

Bratland Omega Transmitter (station A – ) situated near Aldra was the only European Omega transmitter. It used a very unusual antenna, which consisted of several wires strung over a fjord between two concrete anchors apart, one at and the other at . One of the blocks was located on the Norway mainland, the other on Aldra island. The antenna was dismantled in 2002.

=== Trinidad Omega Transmitter ===

Trinidad Omega Transmitter (station B until 1976, replaced by station in Paynesville, Liberia) situated in Trinidad (at ) used a wire span over a valley as its antenna. The site buildings are still there. On April 26, 1988, the building which housed the omega transmitters was destroyed by an explosion caused by a bush fire which ignited explosives. There were severe casualties and six persons died in the blast.

On April 26, 1988, a brush fire in the vicinity of Camp Omega, Chaguaramas, quickly spread to the nearby Camp Omega Arms and Ammunition Bunker resulting in the explosion. Four firefighters and two soldiers died while attempting to bring the situation under control. Several National Security Officers suffered injuries as a result of the explosion. This explosion was recorded on the Richter Scale and parts of the bunker were found hundreds of metres away from ground zero. The Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago dedicated April 26 each year as National Security Officers Day of Appreciation for the dead.

=== Paynesville Omega Transmitter ===

Paynesville Omega Transmitter (station B – ) was inaugurated in 1976 and used an umbrella antenna mounted on a 417-metre steel lattice, grounded guyed mast. It was the tallest structure ever built in Africa. The station was turned over to the Liberian government after the Omega Navigation System shutdown on 30 September 1997. Access to the tower was unrestricted, and it was possible to climb the abandoned mast until it was demolished on 10 May 2011. The area occupied by the transmitter will be used to build a modern market complex that will provide additional space for local merchants and reduce congestion at Paynesville&#x27;s Red Light Market, Liberia&#x27;s largest food market.

=== Kaneohe Omega Transmitter ===
Kaneohe Omega Transmitter (station C – ) was one of two stations operated by the USCG. It was inaugurated in 1943 as a VLF-transmitter for submarine communication. The antenna was a wire span over Haiku Valley. At the end of the 1960s it was converted to an OMEGA transmitter.

=== La Moure Omega Transmitter ===
La Moure Omega Transmitter (station D) situated near La Moure, North Dakota, USA at ) was the other station operated by the USCG. It used a 365.25 metre tall guyed mast insulated from ground, as its antenna. After OMEGA was shut down, the station became NRTF LaMoure, a VLF submarine communications site.

=== Chabrier Omega Transmitter ===
Chabrier Omega Transmitter (station E) near Chabrier on Réunion island in the Indian Ocean at used an umbrella antenna, installed on a 428-metre grounded guyed mast. The mast was demolished with explosives on 14 April 1999.

=== Trelew Omega Transmitter ===

Station F, Trelew, Argentina. Demolished in 1998.

=== Woodside Omega Transmitter ===

Station G, near Woodside, Victoria. Ceased Omega transmissions in 1997, became a submarine communications tower, and was demolished in 2015.

=== Omega Tower, Tsushima ===
Shushi-Wan Omega Transmitter (station H) situated near Shushi-Wan on Tsushima Island at used as its antenna a 389-metre tall tubular steel mast, insulated against ground. This mast, which was built in 1973 and which was the tallest structure in Japan (and perhaps the tallest tubular steel mast ever built) was dismantled in 1998 by crane. On its former site, an approximately 8 metre-tall memorial consisting of the mast base (without the insulator) and a segment was built. On the site of the former helix building there is now a playground.

==OMEGA test locations==
In addition to the nine operational Omega towers, the tower at Forestport, NY was used for early testing of the system.

=== Forestport Tower ===

==Cultural importance==
The towers of some OMEGA-stations were the tallest structures in the country and sometimes even in the continent where they stood. In the German science-fiction novel &quot;Der Komet&quot; ( http://www.averdo.de/produkt/72105959/lutz-harald-der-komet/ ) a large comet, which threatens to hit the Earth, is defended against by a technology developed in Area 51 on the area of the abandoned OMEGA-transmission site Paynesville in Liberia, for which it delivers a required low-frequency electromagnetic field.

The season 2 finale of &quot;True Detective&quot; is called &quot;Omega Station&quot;.

Episode 3 of the Netflix series &quot;Gamera Rebirth&quot; partially takes place at the Tsushima OMEGA-station.

==See also==
* Alpha, the Russian counterpart of the Omega Navigation System, still partially in use .
* Decca Navigator Decca had earlier proposed a system known as Delrac that Omega was subsequently based on.
* LORAN, low frequency terrestrial radio navigation system, still in use (US and Canadian operations terminated 2010).
* CHAYKA, the Russian counterpart of LORAN
* SHORAN
* Oboe (navigation)
* G-H (navigation)
* GEE (navigation)

==Bibliography==

* Scott, R. E. 1969. &quot;Study and Evaluation of the Omega Navigation System for transoceanic navigation by civil aviation&quot;. FAARD-69-39.
* Asche, George P. USCG 1972. Omega system of global navigation. &quot;International Hydrographic Review&quot; 50 (1):87–99.
* Turner, Nicholas. 1973. Omega: a documented analysis. &quot;Australian Journal of International Affairs&quot;:291–305.
* Pierce, J.A. 1974. &quot;Omega: Facts, Hopes and Dreams&quot;. Cambridge Mass: Harvard Univ Div of Engineering and Applied Physics.
* Wilkes, Owen, Nils Petter Gleditsch, and Ingvar Botnen. 1987.&quot; Loran-C and Omega : a study of the military importance of radio navigation aids&quot;. Oslo; Oxford; New York: Norwegian University Press/Oxford University Press. 
* Gibbs, Graham. 1997. &quot;Teaming a product and a global market: a Canadian Marconi company success story&quot;. Reston, VA: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. ; [A case study of the commercial development of the Omega Navigation System]

== References ==
==External links==
* The Omega Navigation System (1969) – USN Training Film
* オメガ鉄塔建設工事の記録（&quot;Record of the Tsushima Omega tower construction&quot;）, Japanese, 1974
* OMEGA By Jerry Proc VE3FAB
* LF Utility Stations 10-100 kHz (compiled by ZL4ALI)
* Pictures of former OMEGA-Station La Moure
* Views of all eight Omega stations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q517149" start="0" end="5" title="Omega (navigation system)" label="OMEGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413038" start="33" end="49" title="radio navigation" label="radio navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15095273" start="138" end="159" title="hyperbolic navigation" label="hyperbolic navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q549933" start="237" end="255" title="very low frequency" label="very low frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q908488" start="362" end="374" title="radio beacon" label="radio beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="488" end="513" title="Global Positioning System" label="Global Positioning System"/>
<link wikidata="Q638949" start="567" end="570" title="Fix (position)" label="fix"/>
<link wikidata="Q39715" start="1268" end="1278" title="lighthouse" label="lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="1766" end="1771" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427822" start="1980" end="1994" title="air navigation" label="air navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q152255" start="2680" end="2694" title="dead reckoning" label="dead reckoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q15095273" start="2762" end="2783" title="hyperbolic navigation" label="hyperbolic navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485121" start="2810" end="2813" title="Gee (navigation)" label="Gee"/>
<link wikidata="Q552152" start="2818" end="2823" title="Decca Navigator System" label="Decca"/>
<link wikidata="Q596529" start="2844" end="2849" title="LORAN-A" label="LORAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931213" start="2854" end="2861" title="LORAN-C" label="LORAN-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="3816" end="3826" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q227467" start="4365" end="4377" title="atomic clock" label="atomic clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q895" start="4485" end="4493" title="rubidium" label="rubidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="4495" end="4502" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="4504" end="4512" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931213" start="4754" end="4761" title="Loran-C" label="Loran-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q552152" start="4766" end="4781" title="Decca Navigator" label="Decca Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q820036" start="4866" end="4869" title="VHF omnidirectional range" label="VOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q856627" start="4874" end="4877" title="Distance measuring equipment" label="DME"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="5035" end="5053" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q651136" start="5145" end="5152" title="Transit (satellite)" label="TRANSIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q179435" start="5153" end="5173" title="satellite navigation" label="satellite navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q570607" start="5315" end="5341" title="inertial navigation system" label="inertial navigation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q209306" start="7125" end="7135" title="Hyperbolic geometry" label="hyperbolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="7239" end="7242" title="Hertz" label="kHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="8150" end="8175" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="8196" end="8205" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="8215" end="8222" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018736" start="8368" end="8389" title="LaMoure, North Dakota" label="LaMoure, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484530" start="8407" end="8414" title="Kaneohe" label="Kaneohe"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="8416" end="8422" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q131347" start="8440" end="8444" title="Oahu" label="Oahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="8473" end="8498" title="Global Positioning System" label="Global Positioning System"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711164" start="8757" end="8772" title="Naval Radio Transmitter Facility LaMoure" label="LaMoure station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379628" start="8791" end="8815" title="Communication with submarines" label="submarine communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q552152" start="8846" end="8861" title="Decca Navigator System" label="Decca Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="8880" end="8884" title="Lawsuit" label="sued"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="8919" end="8925" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q596529" start="9369" end="9376" title="LORAN" label="LORAN C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458194" start="9789" end="9794" title="Aldra" label="Aldra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458194" start="10050" end="10055" title="Aldra" label="Aldra"/>
<link wikidata="Q128323" start="10244" end="10252" title="Trinidad" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q38768" start="10937" end="10950" title="Richter Scale" label="Richter Scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622819" start="11360" end="11370" title="guyed mast" label="guyed mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639154" start="12137" end="12142" title="Haiku Stairs" label="Haiku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018736" start="12306" end="12328" title="La Moure, North Dakota" label="La Moure, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622819" start="12411" end="12421" title="guyed mast" label="guyed mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711164" start="12507" end="12519" title="Naval Radio Transmitter Facility LaMoure" label="NRTF LaMoure"/>
<link wikidata="Q549933" start="12523" end="12526" title="VLF" label="VLF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="12527" end="12536" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="12650" end="12657" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622819" start="12748" end="12758" title="guyed mast" label="guyed mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q52051" start="13181" end="13196" title="Tsushima Island" label="Tsushima Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843780" start="13745" end="13759" title="Forestport, New York" label="Forestport, NY"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="14181" end="14191" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q20667730" start="14365" end="14373" title="True Detective (season 2)" label="season 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847400" start="14390" end="14404" title="True Detective" label="True Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q112861162" start="14427" end="14440" title="Omega Station" label="Omega Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="14466" end="14473" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q117310079" start="14487" end="14501" title="Gamera Rebirth" label="Gamera Rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q585979" start="14577" end="14582" title="Alpha (radio navigation)" label="Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q552152" start="14667" end="14682" title="Decca Navigator" label="Decca Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q596529" start="14775" end="14780" title="LORAN" label="LORAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q948271" start="14894" end="14900" title="CHAYKA" label="CHAYKA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390226" start="14937" end="14943" title="SHORAN" label="SHORAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760015" start="14946" end="14963" title="Oboe (navigation)" label="Oboe (navigation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529743" start="14966" end="14982" title="G-H (navigation)" label="G-H (navigation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485121" start="14985" end="15001" title="GEE (navigation)" label="GEE (navigation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276906" wikidata="Q2859648" url="?curid=276906" title="The Workers Circle">
<text>The Workers Circle or Der Arbeter Ring (), formerly The Workmen&#x27;s Circle, is an American Jewish nonprofit organization that promotes social and economic justice, Jewish community and education, including Yiddish studies, and Ashkenazic culture. It operates schools and Yiddish education programs, and year-round programs of concerts, lectures and secular holiday celebrations. The organization has community branch offices throughout North America, with a national headquarters in New York City.

Formed in 1900 by Yiddish-speaking Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe, The Workmen&#x27;s Circle at first acted as a mutual aid society, helping its members to adapt to their new life in America. It provided life insurance, unemployment relief, healthcare, social interaction, burial assistance and general education through its branches throughout the US as well as through its national office. Soon, the organization was joined by more politically focused socialist Bundists who advocated the anti-assimilationist idea of Yiddish cultural autonomy, led by education in Yiddish and socialist ideals. The Circle formed the Folksbiene Yiddish theatre troupe and promoted Jewish arts and music, Yiddish school programs for children and Yiddish summer camps. It became influential in the American labor movement and grew to serve more than 84,000 members through hundreds of branches around North America. It also became involved with the Yiddish newspaper &quot;The Forward&quot; and operated old-age homes, medical clinics and other services.

Politically, the Circle moved away from socialism towards liberalism by the time of the New Deal. By the 1960s, the Circle&#x27;s membership began to decline, as Jews joined the middle class and moved from cities to suburbs; the Circle no longer seemed as essential to many as it had been. In the new century, the organization ended its direct health insurance program, streamlined its operations, separated from &quot;The Forward&quot;, and rededicated its mission to education and promoting Jewish community, secular Yiddish culture and social justice activism. It sold its former East side building and moved to new offices in the Garment District of New York City in 2011. The Workers Circle is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) organization.

==History==
===Inception to 1930===
With the pogroms in the 1880s and succeeding decades, more than 2 million Yiddish-speaking Jews fled Eastern Europe with their families, and most immigrated to the United States, many to New York City. They usually arrived penniless, and the bulk of them entered the fast-growing, but exploitative garment industry. Others found work as peddlers, jewelers, launderers, Hebrew tutors and even shopkeepers. To assist each other in adapting to their challenging new life in America, they formed several mutual aid societies.

The Workingmen&#x27;s Circle Society of New York formed in 1892 thanks to the efforts of two Jewish cloak makers. The Workmen&#x27;s Circle was established in New York City on September 4, 1900, as a national organization. The group held its first convention in 1901. It immediately provided to its members life insurance, some unemployment relief, healthcare, social interaction such as dances, and financial assistance in obtaining a graveyard plot. It also held general education sessions on the natural sciences and had the generally pro-labor and socialist goal &quot;of helping to develop in working people a sense of solidarity, a clear, enlightened outlook, the striving, by means of their unity, to acquire that influence in ultimately, bringing on the day of their complete emancipation from exploitation and oppression.&quot; Unlike other mutual aid groups, the organization had a workers&#x27; social agenda that it took seriously. It &quot;agitated to abolish child labor, establish social security and shorten the work day.&quot;

The organization began to form a national network of autonomous branches soon after its founding, chartered through the national organization, that provided services to their local members. From 1905, greatly increased Jewish immigration to the US, following new pogroms in Russia, brought to America large numbers of politically sophisticated socialist Bundists. The Bundists advocated the anti-Zionist, anti-assimilationist idea of Yiddish cultural autonomy and a secular Jewish identity, led by education in Yiddish language and literature, socialist ideals, Jewish history and ethical and aesthetic culture, an idea championed by Chaim Zhitlowsky. Many of the Bundists joined The Workmen&#x27;s Circle and pushed it both to fight exploitative labor practices and to expand its national activities toward Yiddish education and to focus on Yiddish culture, rather than simply providing financial aid. Many of the older members argued that the organization could barely afford to provide its traditional aid to members; this discussion continued for two decades. Zhitlowsky and the Bundists succeeded in persuading the organization to establish a range of cultural activities meant to inform and express the secular Jewish spirit, such as the Folksbiene Yiddish theatre troupe (1915), Yiddish book publishing, orchestras, and art expositions sponsored by the branches around the country, Yiddish after school programs for children and teens (beginning in 1918), adult lecture circuits, Camp Kinderland (1923) and the organization&#x27;s own literary and political journal, &quot;The Friend&quot;, and &quot;Unser Schul&quot; (&quot;Our School&quot;), a monthly pedagogical journal for the teachers in its schools.

In the meantime, especially after a series of garment workers&#x27; strikes in New York beginning in 1910, the Circle became influential in the American labor movement through the United Hebrew Trades, later helping to found the Jewish Labor Committee. Members of The Workers Circle helped found such labor unions as the International Ladies Garment Workers Union and the Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America.

At the same time, the Workmen&#x27;s Circle continued its role as a mutual aid society. In 1917 it adopted the National Fraternal Congress of America mortuary table, and by 1920 it established a sanatorium for tuberculosis patients at Liberty, New York, where members could receive free treatment for nine months. In the 1920s, the organization reached its peak of 84,000 members, 125 schools nationwide and numerous branches nationwide; for example, the Philadelphia district had 17 branches in 1924. But during that decade, members of The Workmen&#x27;s Circle sympathetic to the Communist Party initiated a power-struggle in the Circle&#x27;s national organization and many of its branches around the country, but they were rejected in 1929 and formed a separate organization, taking with them about 5,000 members and some of the Circle&#x27;s establishments, like Camp Kinderland.

===1930s to 2000===

In 1930, the International Workers Order split off form The Workmen&#x27;s Circle as a parallel Communist fraternal benefit society.

In the middle of the 20th century, The Workmen&#x27;s Circle continued to operate old age homes and medical clinics and offer burial assistance, affordable health and life insurance; it established Camp Kinder Ring to replace Camp Kinderland (and some branches also operated camps); and it continued to have a hand in operating the Yiddish-language newspaper &quot;The Forward&quot;, which shared its office building in New York. The organization continued to emphasize Yiddish education and the arts (klezmer music; Folksbiene theatre; choral groups), mutual aid and social interaction. It also emphasized social justice, such as efforts to oppose the repression of Soviet Jewry, and support of humanitarian relief efforts, as its political perspective had moved away from socialism towards liberalism by the time of the New Deal, and its members enthusiastically supported America&#x27;s entry into World War II and even became pro-Israel. In 1949, the Workmen&#x27;s Circle included 700 local branches with 70,000 members in the United States and Canada.

Beginning by the 1960s, the Circle&#x27;s membership slowly declined, reaching a level of about 50,000 members by the 1980s. When the federal Medicare program began in 1966, the Circle&#x27;s healthcare programs became less urgently needed. More generally, as its then-president Dr. Barnett Zumhoff explained to &quot;The New York Times&quot; in 1985, with the opening up opportunities for Jews in American society, and their move into the middle class and dispersion geographically from cities to suburbs and small towns, the Circle was no longer as essential to the Jewish community as it had been. Its membership was no longer predominantly workers, but had become small-business owners, professionals and schoolteachers. Still, the Circle believed that it offered a secular alternative to synagogue attendance and Zionist groups in its preservation of Ashkenazic Yiddish culture.

By 1996, the Circle&#x27;s membership had declined to 28,000. By then, it considered itself the only organization promoting Eastern European Yiddish culture. It continued to teach Yiddish language and literature, to promote secular Jewish community and Jewish arts, music and culture, to provide its aid and insurance programs, to operate its old age homes, schools, camps and to host &quot;holiday observances interpreting Jewish history in the traditionally secular Workmen&#x27;s Circle spirit.&quot; It also continued its liberal agenda, supporting universal health care, for example. Its then-president, Mark Mlotek, noted: &quot;this is an organization that says that the language of the murdered people in Eastern Europe was Yiddish ... there is a vibrant Yiddish culture [that] has to be maintained. Without it, a heart and soul will really go away.&quot;

===21st century===

In the first decade of the 21st century, the organization ended its direct health insurance program and closed its old age homes, streamlined its operations, separated itself from &quot;The Forward&quot;, hired a new executive director, Ann Toback, in 2008, reorganized its board and appointed a new president, Madelon &quot;Maddy&quot; Braun, in 2010. It rededicated its mission to education and promoting Jewish community, Yiddish culture and social justice activism. &quot;The plan is to reboot by offering something [the Circle] feels religious Judaism has failed to provide: an education toward a cultural Jewish identity that uses religion as a trigger for activism and connects with a legacy of progressivism and commitment to universal values.&quot; The organization sold its former East side building and moved to new offices in the Garment District of New York City in 2011.

By 2010, the Circle had 10,000 members and 20 branches. It used proceeds from the sale of its building to begin to regrow its membership and community and school network, and to hire more educators. Toback said, &quot;Our expression of Judaism is through activism, and we also believe that young people come to activism through being literate Jews. The two things go together.&quot; Continuing to teach children Yiddish is &quot;a way of opening their minds and souls to something in our collective past that it is extremely important to connect to.&quot; In 2012, the Circle commissioned a study that showed that one in six American Jews &quot;are actively seeking Jewish expression and engagement outside of synagogue life.&quot;

The Circle continues to sponsor holiday and community events, coordinate its branches around the country and partner with Jewish school programs. No longer a mutual aid society, it operates seven schools for children (kindershuls) and offers the largest adult Yiddish language instruction program in the world, which also collaborates with New Yiddish Rep. to teach a Yiddish language through theatre class. Its social justice activism includes opposing unfair labor practices, genocide and racism and supporting comprehensive immigration reform, single-payer universal health care, gun control, strong relations between the US and Israel, humanitarian relief, human rights, environmental conservation, women&#x27;s equality, an increased minimum wage and separation of church and state.

On December 2, 2019, the organization unveiled its new name: the Workers Circle. This name embraces the tenor of the times in gender-neutral fashion and with a nod to the organization&#x27;s century of activism at the fore of the labor movement, supporting worker rights to this day.

On September 28, 2023, the organization announced it was separating from Camp Kinder Ring and that both organizations will continue to operate independently.

==Publications==

As an organization organically linked to the historic Jewish labor movement, many of the Workmen&#x27;s Circle&#x27;s leaders were involved from its inception until the start of the 21st century with &quot;The Forward&quot;. Through much of the 20th century, the organization&#x27;s newsletter was called &quot;The Workmen&#x27;s Circle Call&quot;. From 2005 to 2009, The Workmen&#x27;s Circle published &quot;Jewish Currents&quot; magazine and supplied it to the members of the Circle.

==Youth programs==
The youth section of the Workmen&#x27;s Circle in its early years was the Young Circle League of America (YCLA), established in 1930. The group self-identified as &quot;first and foremost a &quot;cultural&quot; organization,&quot; sponsoring lectures, debates, and educational and recreational programs for its members. The YCLA also published its own magazine, &quot;The Call of Youth.&quot;

The Arbeter Ring runs seven kindershuls, or children&#x27;s schools of Jewish culture, as after-school and Sunday school programs for elementary through middle schoolers. These are located in the Northeastern US and Chicago. Kindershuls emphasize the teaching of Jewish history, from Abraham onward. Jewish culture, including klezmer music and traditional Jewish cooking, is also emphasized, along with the Yiddish language and surrounding culture. Students learn to sing traditional songs in Yiddish, as well as in English and Hebrew. At the end of a student&#x27;s time at kindershul, when he or she reaches age 12, a secular Bar/Bas Mitzvah ceremony, called a commencement, is held. Commencement students prepare a research paper, a family history paper, and a writeup on community service they have performed through the year. At the group commencement itself, students give a talk on their research topic of choice, often also telling their family history.

==See also==
*United Jewish People&#x27;s Order
*Arbeiter Ring Publishing, Winnipeg, Canada
*List of North American ethnic and religious fraternal orders
* International Workers Order (IWO)

==Footnotes==
==Further reading==
* Michels, Tony. &quot;A Fire in Their Hearts: Yiddish Socialists in New York.&quot; Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press (2005)
* Tarasova Chomard, Maria. &quot;The Fertile Soil of Growth, Life and Ideas: Jewish Anarchist Solidarity in Winnipeg.&quot; &quot;Canadian Jewish Studies / Études Juives Canadiennes&quot;, &quot;34&quot;, 13–35 (2022).

==External links==
* The Workers Circle Official website
* Guide to the Records of the Workmen&#x27;s Circle, 1903–1993, New York
* Guide to the Records of Boston Workmen&#x27;s Circle 1927–1999
* I.L. Peretz Jewish School
* Arbeter Ring in Paris
* National Executive Committee of the Workmen&#x27;s Circle in 1921, 1922, 1926 and 1933</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2859648" start="0" end="18" title="The Workers Circle" label="The Workers Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859648" start="22" end="38" title="The Workers Circle" label="Der Arbeter Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859648" start="52" end="77" title="The Workers Circle" label="The Workmen&amp;#x27;s Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="94" end="100" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="101" end="123" title="nonprofit organization" label="nonprofit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="209" end="216" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="230" end="240" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazic"/>
<link wikidata="Q569868" start="560" end="574" title="Pale of Settlement" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445536" start="622" end="640" title="benefit society" label="mutual aid society"/>
<link wikidata="Q647460" start="973" end="981" title="General Jewish Labour Bund in Lithuania, Poland and Russia" label="Bundists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464602" start="1128" end="1138" title="Folksbiene" label="Folksbiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="1299" end="1313" title="Labour movement" label="labor movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q154301" start="1465" end="1476" title="The Forward" label="The Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="1606" end="1616" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="1636" end="1644" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494337" start="2182" end="2198" title="Garment District, Manhattan" label="Garment District"/>
<link wikidata="Q18325436" start="2259" end="2281" title="501(c)(3) organization" label="501(c)(3) organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q247735" start="2329" end="2372" title="Anti-Jewish pogroms in the Russian Empire" label="pogroms in the 1880s and succeeding decades"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="2394" end="2401" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445536" start="2820" end="2840" title="benefit society" label="mutual aid societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="3395" end="3404" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q647460" start="4242" end="4250" title="General Jewish Labour Bund in Lithuania, Poland and Russia" label="Bundists"/>
<link wikidata="Q982059" start="4522" end="4538" title="Chaim Zhitlowsky" label="Chaim Zhitlowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464602" start="5132" end="5142" title="Folksbiene" label="Folksbiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027309" start="5375" end="5390" title="Camp Kinderland" label="Camp Kinderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="5757" end="5771" title="labor movement" label="labor movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887839" start="5784" end="5804" title="United Hebrew Trades" label="United Hebrew Trades"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189864" start="5833" end="5855" title="Jewish Labor Committee" label="Jewish Labor Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227087" start="5925" end="5967" title="International Ladies Garment Workers Union" label="International Ladies Garment Workers Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739345" start="5976" end="6015" title="Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America" label="Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154149" start="6129" end="6167" title="National Fraternal Congress of America" label="National Fraternal Congress of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="6228" end="6240" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541521" start="6253" end="6270" title="Liberty, New York" label="Liberty, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="6473" end="6485" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="6600" end="6615" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16237738" start="6938" end="6965" title="International Workers Order" label="International Workers Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027308" start="7257" end="7273" title="Camp Kinder Ring" label="Camp Kinder Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q154301" start="7424" end="7435" title="The Forward" label="The Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q212944" start="7561" end="7574" title="klezmer music" label="klezmer music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="7851" end="7861" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="7881" end="7889" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="8436" end="8454" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="8974" end="8984" title="Ashkenazic" label="Ashkenazic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494337" start="10730" end="10746" title="Garment District, Manhattan" label="Garment District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021512" start="12054" end="12088" title="single-payer universal health care" label="single-payer universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305384" start="12090" end="12101" title="Gun control in the United States" label="gun control"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189807" start="13168" end="13183" title="Jewish Currents" label="Jewish Currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q548478" start="13730" end="13744" title="Jewish culture" label="Jewish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043121" start="14434" end="14451" title="community service" label="community service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550704" start="14636" end="14669" title="United Jewish People&amp;#x27;s Order" label="United Jewish People&amp;#x27;s Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784652" start="14671" end="14695" title="Arbeiter Ring Publishing" label="Arbeiter Ring Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715823" start="14715" end="14775" title="List of North American ethnic and religious fraternal orders" label="List of North American ethnic and religious fraternal orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q16237738" start="14778" end="14805" title="International Workers Order" label="International Workers Order"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276909" wikidata="Q193475" url="?curid=276909" title="Menhir">
<text>A menhir (; from Brittonic languages: &quot;maen&quot; or &quot;men&quot;, &quot;stone&quot; and &quot;hir&quot; or &quot;hîr&quot;, &quot;long&quot;), standing stone, orthostat, or lith is a large upright stone, emplaced in the ground by humans, typically dating from the European middle Bronze Age. They can be found individually as monoliths, or as part of a group of similar stones. Menhirs&#x27; size can vary considerably, but they often taper toward the top. 

Menhirs are found across Europe, Africa, and Asia, with a concentration in Western Europe, notably in Ireland, Great Britain, and Brittany. Theories concerning their purpose remain speculative, with hypotheses ranging from druidic rituals to territorial markers or elements of an ideological system. Some menhirs feature engravings, including anthropomorphic figures and symbols, and are often associated with ancient religious ceremonies and burial chambers. 

== Etymology ==
The word &quot;menhir&quot; was adopted from French by 19th-century archaeologists. The introduction of the word into general archaeological usage has been attributed to the 18th-century French military officer Théophile Corret de la Tour d&#x27;Auvergne. It is a combination of two words of the Breton language: &quot;maen&quot; and &quot;hir&quot;. In modern Welsh, they are described as &quot;maen hir&quot;, or &quot;long stone&quot;. In modern Breton, the word &quot;peulvan&quot; is used, with &quot;peul&quot; meaning &quot;stake&quot; or &quot;post&quot; and &quot;van&quot; which is a soft mutation of the word &quot;maen&quot; which means &quot;stone&quot;. In Germany and Scandinavia the word &quot;Bauta&quot; is used (German: Bautastein; Norwegian: bautastein) and this occasionally makes its way into English with the term &quot;bauta stone&quot;.
==History==
Almost nothing is known of the social organization or religious beliefs of the people who erected the menhirs. Their language is also unknown. It is known, however, that they buried their dead and had the skills to grow crops, farm and make pottery, stone tools and jewelry. Identifying the purpose or use of menhirs remains speculative. Until recently, standing stones were associated with the Beaker people, who inhabited Europe during the European late Neolithic and early Bronze Age—later third millennium BC, –1800 BC. However, recent research into the age of megaliths in Brittany strongly suggests a far older origin, perhaps back to six to seven thousand years ago.

During the European Middle Ages, standing stones were believed to have been built by the giants who lived before the biblical flood. Many of the megaliths were destroyed or defaced by early Christians; it is estimated that some 50,000 megaliths once stood in Northern Europe, where almost 10,000 now remain. Menhirs have also been found in many other parts of the world.

Many menhirs are engraved with megalithic art, some with anthropomorphic features. Other common carvings are identified as images of stone axes, ploughs, shepherds&#x27; crooks, and yokes; and are named after these motifs. However, these identifications are not secure except for those of the stone axe images, and the names used to describe them are largely a matter of convenience. Some menhirs were broken up and incorporated into later passage graves, where they had new megalithic art carved with little regard for the previous pictures. It is not known if this re-use was deliberate or if the passage grave builders just saw menhirs as a convenient source of stone.

Where menhirs appear in groups, often in a circular, oval, henge, or horseshoe formation, they are sometimes called megalithic monuments. These are sites of ancient religious ceremonies, sometimes containing burial chambers. The exact function of menhirs has provoked more debate than practically any other issue in European prehistory. Over the centuries, they have variously been thought to have been used by druids for human sacrifice, used as territorial markers, or elements of a complex ideological system, used as mnemonic systems for oral cultures, or functioning as early calendars. Until the nineteenth century, antiquarians did not have substantial knowledge of prehistory, and their only reference points were provided by classical literature. The developments of radiocarbon dating and dendrochronology have significantly advanced scientific knowledge in this area.

==Geographical distribution==

Menhirs are widely distributed across Europe, Africa, and Asia, but are most numerous in Western Europe; particularly in Ireland, Great Britain, and Brittany, where there are about 50,000 examples, and northwestern France, where there are some 1,200 further examples. Standing stones are usually difficult to date. They were constructed during many different periods across prehistory as part of the larger megalithic cultures in Europe and near areas. Some menhirs stand next to buildings that have an early or current religious significance. One example is the South Zeal Menhir in Devon, which formed the basis for a 12th-century monastery built by lay monks. The monastery later became the Oxenham Arms hotel, at South Zeal, and the standing stone remains in place in the snug bar at the hotel.

It is believed that practitioners of megalithic religions travelled via the sea, as the mass majority of menhirs are located on coasts, islands, and peninsulas.

==In popular culture==
The French comic book series &quot;Asterix&quot; features the character Obelix, who is known for carrying menhirs, as a sculptor and deliveryman.
==See also==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*. Also matzeva/mazzeva/maseba/masseba/massebah.
*
*. Also stone alignment.
*. Also ship setting.
*
==Notes==
==Further reading==

==External links==
*Rows of menhirs in Russia, South Ural
*List of menhirs and their related stories in Czech Republic
*Ancient Europe Placemarks Google Earth file downloads.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193475" start="2" end="8" title="Menhir" label="menhir"/>
<link wikidata="Q156877" start="17" end="36" title="Brittonic languages" label="Brittonic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q193475" start="152" end="166" title="Menhir" label="standing stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193475" start="168" end="177" title="Menhir" label="orthostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q193475" start="182" end="186" title="Menhir" label="lith"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="206" end="211" title="rock (geology)" label="stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="282" end="299" title="middle Bronze Age" label="middle Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q653208" start="335" end="343" title="monolith" label="monolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="543" end="557" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="570" end="577" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="579" end="592" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="598" end="606" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q263031" start="691" end="706" title="Ancient Celtic religion" label="druidic rituals"/>
<link wikidata="Q139106" start="789" end="799" title="Engraving" label="engravings"/>
<link wikidata="Q358316" start="911" end="926" title="Chamber tomb" label="burial chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q727653" start="1157" end="1200" title="Théophile Corret de la Tour d&amp;#x27;Auvergne" label="Théophile Corret de la Tour d&amp;#x27;Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="1300" end="1312" title="Welsh language" label="modern Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q83757" start="1540" end="1553" title="Breton mutations" label="soft mutation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1685" end="1695" title=":de:Bautastein" label="Bautastein"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1708" end="1718" title=":no:bautastein" label="bautastein"/>
<link wikidata="Q470867" start="2215" end="2228" title="Beaker people" label="Beaker people"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="2276" end="2285" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2296" end="2306" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707571" start="2584" end="2590" title="Giant (mythology)" label="giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532837" start="2612" end="2626" title="biblical flood" label="biblical flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="2640" end="2648" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573930" start="2898" end="2912" title="megalithic art" label="megalithic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="2924" end="2939" title="Anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="3000" end="3009" title="stone axe" label="stone axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426772" start="3307" end="3321" title="passage graves" label="passage graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035294" start="3599" end="3604" title="henge" label="henge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995225" start="3856" end="3875" title="Prehistoric Europe" label="European prehistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q131081" start="3951" end="3957" title="druids" label="druids"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="4061" end="4069" title="mnemonic" label="mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084976" start="4082" end="4086" title="Orality" label="oral"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="4316" end="4334" title="radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q80205" start="4339" end="4355" title="dendrochronology" label="dendrochronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="4600" end="4608" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="4858" end="4866" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569019" start="5014" end="5024" title="South Zeal" label="South Zeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="5084" end="5093" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="5227" end="5235" title="The snug" label="snug bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42490" start="5471" end="5478" title="Asterix" label="Asterix"/>
<link wikidata="Q715597" start="5508" end="5514" title="Obelix" label="Obelix"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276917" wikidata="Q408151" url="?curid=276917" title="Airbrush">
<text>An airbrush is a small, air-operated tool that atomizes and sprays various media, most often paint, but also ink, dye, and make-up. Spray painting developed from the airbrush and is considered to employ a type of airbrush.

==History==
Up until the mid-2000s, it was widely published that the airbrush was invented in 1893, but following research undertaken in collaboration with New York University&#x27;s Conservation Department, and personal support from Professor Margaret Holben Ellis, a more detailed history emerged, which required many authorities such as Oxford Art to update their dictionaries and references.

Depending on the definition requiring compressed air or not, the first spray painting device that could be called an airbrush was patented in 1876 () by Francis Edgar Stanley of Newton, Massachusetts. This worked akin to a diffuser/atomizer and did not have a continuous air supply. Stanley and his twin brother later invented a process for continuously coating photographic plates (Stanley Dry Plate Company) but are perhaps best known for their Stanley Steamer. No artistic images that used this &#x27;paint distributor/atomiser&#x27; exist or are as yet known.

According to the research prepared by Professor Andy Penaluna, the first instrument to use a compressed air supply was named the &quot;paint distributor&quot; was developed by Abner Peeler &quot;for the painting of watercolors and other artistic purposes&quot; and used a hand-operated compressor to supply continuous air. It was rather crude, being based on a number of spare parts in a jeweller&#x27;s workshop such as old screwdrivers and welding torches. It took four years of further development before a working prototype was developed by Liberty Walkup of Mt. Morris, Illinois. Walkup patented the work under the name of &quot;air-brush&quot;, a name his wife Phoebe Walkup came up with. The birth of the name &#x27;Air Brush&#x27; can be traced to a stakeholders&#x27; meeting of the new Air Brush Manufacturing Co. at 7:00 p.m. on October 6, 1883, when the name was formally born. In modern times the date is used to celebrate airbrush art around the world, using the Twitter hashtag #. Walkup&#x27;s wife would later go on to be the founder of the Illinois Art School where airbrushing was taught to students from all over the world. In that same rented 4-story building Rockford Air-Brush would be established under Liberty Walkup. Among others, the Walkups taught airbrush technique to American Impressionist master Wilson Irvine at the Air Brush School in Rockford, Illinois. The first certain &#x27;atomizing&#x27; type airbrush was invented by Charles Burdick in 1893 and presented by Thayer and Chandler art materials company at the World Columbian Exposition in Chicago. Burdick founded the Fountain Brush Company in the US, and launched the first series of airbrushes onto the market. However, Burdick initially re-cased the Walkup design into a finger-operated instrument, and as many of his designs echoed those being developed by Walkup, a legal row resulted over the name Air Brush. This device was essentially the same as a modern airbrush, resembling a pen and working in a different manner than Peeler&#x27;s device. Aerograph, Burdick&#x27;s original company, still makes and sells airbrushes in England. Thayer and Chandler were acquired by Badger Air-Brush Co. in 2000. Badger Air-Brush continues the Thayer and Chandler tradition of manufacturing quality airbrush guns, tools and compressors out of Franklin Park, Illinois.

==Design==
An airbrush works by passing a stream of fast moving (compressed) air through a venturi, which creates a local reduction in air pressure (suction) that allows paint to be pulled from an interconnected reservoir at normal atmospheric pressure. The high velocity of the air atomizes the paint into very tiny droplets as it blows past a very fine paint-metering component. The paint is carried onto paper or other surfaces. The operator controls the amount of paint being blown by using a variable trigger which manipulates the position of a very fine tapered needle that is the control element of the paint-metering component. An extremely fine degree of atomization is what allows an artist to create such smooth blending effects using the airbrush.

The technique allows for the blending of two or more colors in a seamless way, with one color slowly becoming another color. Freehand airbrushed images, without the aid of stencils or friskets, have a floating quality, with softly defined edges between colors, and between foreground and background colors. A skilled airbrush artist can produce paintings of photographic realism or can simulate almost any painting medium. Painting at this skill level involves supplementary tools, such as masks and friskets, and very careful planning.

Some airbrushes use pressures as low as 20 psi (1.38 bar) while others use pressures in the region of 30-35 psi (2-2.4 bar). Larger &quot;spray guns&quot; as used for automobile spray-painting need 100 psi (6.8 bar) or more to adequately atomize a thicker paint using less solvent. They are capable of delivering a heavier coating more rapidly over a wide area. Even with small artist airbrushes using acrylic paint, artists must be careful not to breathe in the atomized paint, which floats in the air for minutes and can go deep into the lungs. With commercial spray guns for automobiles, it is vital that the painter have a clean air source to breathe, because automotive paint is far more harmful to the lungs than acrylic. Certain spray guns, called High-Volume Low-Pressure (HVLP) spray guns, are designed to deliver the same high volumes of paint without requiring such high pressures.

==Types==
Airbrushes are usually classified by three characteristics. The first characteristic is the action performed by the user to trigger the paint flow. The second is the mechanism for feeding the paint into the airbrush. The third is the point at which the paint and air mix.

===Trigger action===
Most airbrushes can be grouped into two types of trigger action: Single-action or double-action.

The simplest airbrushes work with a &quot;single-action&quot; mechanism, where the depression of the trigger actuates air flow through the airbrush, immediately outputting paint. The airbrush&#x27;s color flow and spray pattern are adjusted separately from the trigger action. This is done through an adjustment of the airbrush&#x27;s needle placement within its paint tip, by the turning of the paint tip on an external mix airbrush (Badger 350 or Paasche Model H are good examples of single-action external mix airbrushes) or the turning of a needle setting dial on an internal mix airbrush (Badger 200 or Iwata SAR are good examples of single-action internal mix airbrushes). The color volume and spray pattern are maintained at a fixed level until the airbrush user re-adjusts the setting. Adjusting the color volume and spray pattern while painting is possible, but not by design. Single-action airbrushes are simpler to use and are generally less expensive, but they present limitations in applications in which the user wishes to do something more artistic than simply apply a large, uniform coat of color.

&quot;Dual-action&quot; (or &quot;double-action&quot;) airbrushes enable the simultaneous adjustment of both air and color at the trigger, by allowing the user to actuate air by depressing the trigger and simultaneously adjust color and spray pattern by rocking the trigger back and forth. This ability to adjust color flow while spraying the airbrush, coupled with the user&#x27;s adjustment of distance from the painting surface allows for the variation of fine to wide lines without stopping to re-adjust the spray pattern (as is necessary with a single-action airbrush). This allows for greater spray control and enables a wider variety of artistic effects. The use of this type of airbrush requires practice to achieve proficiency, both with triggering technique and control. The effort is worthwhile, as airbrushing offers greater artistic versatility. Dual-action airbrushes (Badger Patriot 105, Paasche VL, Iwata CM-C are all good examples of dual-action airbrushes) are of a more sophisticated design model than single-action airbrushes, which tends to make them the more expensive of the two.

===Feed system===
Paint can be fed into the airbrush by gravity from a paint reservoir sitting atop the airbrush (called
&quot;gravity feed&quot; or &quot;top feed&quot;), or siphoned from a reservoir mounted below (&quot;bottom/suction/siphon feed&quot;), or on the side (&quot;side feed&quot;). Each feed type carries unique advantages and disadvantages. Gravity feed airbrushes require less air pressure to operate, as gravity helps assist the flow of paint into the mixing chamber. Typically instruments with the finest mist atomization and detail requirements use this method since less air pressure allows for finer control of paint flow and less overspray. However, the paint capacity of gravity feed airbrushes is limited. Side- and bottom-feed airbrushes allow the artist to see over the top of the airbrush, with the former sometimes offering left-handed and right-handed options to suit the artist. The bottom paint reservoir can be a variety of sizes, and so a bottom feed airbrush typically holds a larger capacity of paint than the other types, and is often preferable for larger scale work such as automotive applications and clothing design. Side feed airbrushes are a hybrid of the two, and are able to use both a gravity style cup or a suction-style bottle.

===Mix point===
Airbushes can be divided into &quot;internal mix&quot; and &quot;external mix.&quot; With an &quot;internal mix&quot; airbrush, the paint and air mix inside the airbrush body (in the tip), creating a finer atomized &quot;mist&quot; of paint. With an &quot;external mix&quot; airbrush, the air and paint meet outside of the tip before mixing with each other, which creates a larger, coarser atomization pattern. External mix airbrushes are cheaper and more suited for covering larger areas with more viscous paints or varnishes, while internal mix airbrushes are more expensive and more suited for fine detail work with thinner paints.

== Spray guns ==
The airbrush led to the development of the spray gun: a similar device that typically delivers a higher volume of paint and for painting larger areas.

The first paint spraying machine was developed in 1887.
Equipment by DeVilbiss and Binks is typical of modern sprayguns.

The addition of a simple pistol grip adapter to an aerosol paint spray can create a cheap alternative to a spray gun.

==Technique==
Airbrush technique is the freehand manipulation of the airbrush, medium, air pressure, and distance from the surface being sprayed in order to produce a certain predictable result on a consistent basis with or without shields or stencils. Airbrush technique will differ with the type of airbrush being used (single-action or dual/double-action).

Double-action airbrush technique involves depressing the trigger on the top of the airbrush with the index finger to release air only, and drawing it back gradually to the paint release threshold. The most important procedural dynamic is to always begin with air only and end with air only. By observing this rule, precise control of paint volume and line width and character can be achieved. The single most important airbrush stroke consistently utilized by professionals is the dagger stroke. This describes a stroke which begins wide and ends as a narrow line, created by starting with the brush far from the support and moving it evenly closer as the line is drawn.

Single-action airbrush technique derives its name from the fact that only one action is required for operation. The single action of depressing the trigger releases a fixed ratio of paint to air.
Achieving different line widths requires either changing the tip and nozzle combination or adjusting the spray volume manually between spray width changes. The most important aspect of proper single-action airbrush technique is to keep the hand moving before the trigger is depressed and after the trigger is released. This avoids the &quot;bar bell&quot; line.

== Use ==

=== Art and illustration ===
Since the inception of airbrush technology, commercial artists and illustrators realized airbrushes allowed them to create highly rendered images and a high level of realism. Artists often use the airbrush in combination with cut stencils or items held freehand to block in controlled manner the flow of paint onto the paper (or digital alternatives) with fantasy and science fiction artists. Airbrush images can be found in advertising, publishing (e.g., book covers), comic books and graphic novels.

=== Photo retouching ===

Airbrushing was long used to alter photographs in the pre-digital era, and prior to airbrush a similar effect was achieved through the use of a pastel type of crayon. The very first design by Stanley alluded to this: &quot;My invention relates to such improvements in atomizers that may be employed for finishing photographs in water-colors, india-ink, and crayon&quot;. In skilled hands an airbrush can be used to help hide signs that an image has been extensively retouched or &quot;doctored&quot;.

In the 20th century Soviet Union, as a result of Stalin&#x27;s purges and later destalinization, many photographs of officials from the periods show extensive airbrushing; often entire human figures have been removed. The term &quot;airbrushed out&quot; has come to mean rewriting history to pretend that something was never there. In contemporary academic discourse, the process of removing components from an image is formally known as &quot;object removal.&quot;

The term &quot;airbrushed&quot; or &quot;airbrushed photo&quot; has also been used to describe glamour photos in which a model&#x27;s imperfections have been removed, or in which their attributes have been enhanced. The term has often been applied in a pejorative manner to describe images of unrealistic female perfection and has been particularly common in reference to pictures in &quot;Playboy&quot;, and later &quot;Maxim&quot;.

Using digital imaging technology, this kind of picture editing is now usually done with a raster image editor, which is capable of even more subtle work in the hands of a skilled touch-up artist. In the fine retouching industry, the airbrushing technique is often considered a low-end practice, with significantly inferior quality to that found in the most important fashion photography publications.

=== Murals ===
Airbrushes are also suitable for painting murals.

===Hobby===
Airbrushes are commonly used by scale modeling enthusiasts to paint models because finer coats can be laid down, as well as opaque effects like weathering, adding stains etc. The fine atomization of paint in modern airbrushes also makes it possible to accurately reproduce soft-edged mottled camouflage schemes, which are very hard to do convincingly by hand-brushing (Luftwaffe aircraft are a good example of this).

Many radio-controlled model hobbyists also use the airbrush to create works of art on the Lexan bodies. The paint jobs range from a basic one-color paint job to fine detailed works of art.

Airbrushes have also become common tools in cosplay, costuming, and prop-making.

===Airbrush makeup application===
====History====
Airbrushed makeup was used in Hollywood movies at least as early as the 1930s. Monte Westmore is sometimes credited with developing the technique for &quot;Gone With the Wind&quot;, but his brother Wally was using it at least five years earlier in Pre-Code films such as &quot;Murder at the Vanities&quot;.

Airbrush makeup has recently been re-popularized by the advent of high-definition television and digital photography, wherein the camera sees more detail than ever before. Liquid foundations that are high in coverage but thin in texture are applied with the airbrush for full coverage without a heavy build-up of product. It is also a highly popular technique for special effects makeup as well as for the funeral industry.

Alcohol-based mediums are best suited for waterproof make-up; this makeup lasts longer, is smudge proof, is rich and opaque in colour. But alcohol-based foundations can be too matte, and can lead to over-drying of the skin. They also can rub off due to excessive itching or fidgeting.

Water based mediums are great for clown make-up, i.e., for short-term artistic or skin-friendly make-ups, these are easy to apply, and easy to remove, with minimal damage to the skin, but water-based make-up does not last a long while, and comes off easily, even more so with perspiration.

Silicone-based airbrush foundation, S/B foundation, is found in professional and premium retail airbrush brands, primarily for bridal make-ups, or mature skin. Silicone based foundations have the advantage of being medium to high coverage.

Silicone-based airbrush foundation has another advantage of mimicking the skin texture, as to give no obvious sign of make-up, thereby giving a more natural look to the model.

Silicone-based airbrush foundations are comparatively water-resistant but not waterproof; they do not overdry the skin, and are relatively easy to apply and remove with a mild make-up remover.

=== Temporary airbrush tattoos (TATs) ===

Airbrushes can also be used to apply temporary airbrush tattoos. An artist sprays ink onto the skin through a stencil. Often, the resulting design mirrors the look of a permanent tattoo, without any pain or discomfort. In the past, TATs might only last a week, but now, the best inks can last up to two weeks or longer.

===Airbrush tanning===
Airbrushes are used to apply special tanning solutions as a form of sunless tanning that simulates the appearance of a natural sun tan. It is promoted as a safer and healthier alternative to the damaging effects of long term exposure to the sun. It is often performed by companies also offering other sun tanning alternatives like sun beds.

=== Finger nail art ===
Airbrushes are also used to apply images onto human finger nails as well as synthetic ones that are later glued to the person&#x27;s actual finger nail.

=== Clothing ===
T-shirt airbrushing is popular—many T-shirt airbrush shops offer to paint any textile that will hold paint, including jeans, denim jackets, leather apparel, pillow cases, and hoodies.

One well-known producer of airbrushed clothing is Marc Ecko, who used to airbrush T-shirts when he started his clothing company.

=== Automotive ===
Airbrushes are used to spray murals, graphics, and other artwork on automobiles, motorcycles and helmets. This art form has been around since at least the fifties, but more recently it has seen an increase in popularity thanks to such shows as &quot;Rides&quot; and &quot;American Chopper&quot;.
Most professionals prefer to use automotive grade bases through top-of-the-line gravity fed airbrushes. The cost to hire a professional artist will vary from a few hundred to several thousand dollars, depending on location, skill level and reputation.

=== Planetary cartography ===
Airbrush was a novel technique in the scientific portraying of the Moon and other planets in the 1960s. Airbrush maps were produced by USGS Astrogeology Branch to support the NASA Apollo missions.

=== Street artists ===
Many street artists use airbrushing to create names and pictures for tourists, such as around Jackson Square in New Orleans. In the mid-1970s, Panama City Beach, Florida was the airbrush capital of the world, with hundreds of artists painting custom designs on T-shirts.

==Safety==
When inhaled, finely dispersed paint and solvents can produce serious health hazards. Regulatory provisions such as those issued by the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration dictate strict requirements to prevent unsafe use in work environments.

==See also==
* Atomizer – more detail and applications on the atomizer
* Frederick William Lawrence – an early airbrush artist
* Syd Brak – a contemporary airbrush artist
* H. R. Giger – Swiss sculptor, airbrush, and sketch artist, who is famous for his work on the feature films, &quot;Alien&quot; and &quot;Species&quot;
* &quot;Airbrush Action Magazine&quot; – established in 1985, longest running publication for airbrushing and custom culture
* Aerosol paint – similar technique with pressurised aerosol propellant in a can
* List of art techniques
* Alberto Vargas - airbrush artist, and the Vargas Award named after him awarded annually by Airbrush Action Magazine
* Man Ray, an airbrush art pioneer
* Cassandre, another airbrush art pioneer

==References==
==External links==

* Airbrush Museum – history, photos and patent diagrams
* ArteKaos Airbrush – Airbrush Manuals and parts PDF</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q408151" start="3" end="11" title="Airbrush" label="airbrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q211500" start="24" end="36" title="Pneumatics" label="air-operated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167111" start="47" end="55" title="Atomizer nozzle" label="atomizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q174219" start="93" end="98" title="paint" label="paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q127418" start="109" end="112" title="ink" label="ink"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="114" end="117" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q131207" start="123" end="130" title="make-up" label="make-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066608" start="132" end="146" title="Spray painting" label="Spray painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480826" start="774" end="795" title="Francis Edgar Stanley" label="Francis Edgar Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q49196" start="799" end="820" title="Newton, Massachusetts" label="Newton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q507456" start="1068" end="1083" title="Stanley Steamer" label="Stanley Steamer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1362" end="1374" title="Abner Peeler" label="Abner Peeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q50030" start="1401" end="1411" title="watercolor" label="watercolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178898" start="1472" end="1482" title="Gas compressor" label="compressor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1731" end="1745" title="Liberty Walkup" label="Liberty Walkup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369711" start="1749" end="1769" title="Mt. Morris, Illinois" label="Mt. Morris, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="2163" end="2178" title="Twitter hashtag" label="Twitter hashtag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477787" start="2484" end="2506" title="American Impressionism" label="American Impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023101" start="2514" end="2527" title="Wilson Irvine" label="Wilson Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q233892" start="2555" end="2573" title="Rockford, Illinois" label="Rockford, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2645" end="2660" title="Charles Burdick" label="Charles Burdick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2686" end="2705" title="Thayer and Chandler" label="Thayer and Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="2735" end="2761" title="World Columbian Exposition" label="World Columbian Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="2765" end="2772" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3354" end="3374" title="Badger Air-Brush Co." label="Badger Air-Brush Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q2671244" start="3514" end="3537" title="Franklin Park, Illinois" label="Franklin Park, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q899390" start="3631" end="3638" title="venturi pump" label="venturi"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="3679" end="3687" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q504073" start="4473" end="4480" title="stencil" label="stencil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087900" start="4801" end="4809" title="Frisket (art material)" label="friskets"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="4859" end="4867" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q626299" start="4882" end="4885" title="Pounds per square inch" label="psi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513845" start="6584" end="6591" title="Paasche Airbrush Company" label="Paasche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066608" start="10343" end="10352" title="spray gun" label="spray gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991742" start="10521" end="10530" title="DeVilbiss Automotive Refinishing" label="DeVilbiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510378" start="10535" end="10540" title="Illinois Tool Works" label="Binks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055935" start="10625" end="10638" title="aerosol paint" label="aerosol paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="12795" end="12805" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="12811" end="12824" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q125191" start="12889" end="12899" title="photograph" label="photograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q141130" start="13320" end="13329" title="Photo manipulation" label="retouched"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="13376" end="13388" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="13405" end="13425" title="Great Purge" label="Stalin&amp;#x27;s purges"/>
<link wikidata="Q277560" start="13436" end="13451" title="destalinization" label="destalinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134992" start="13800" end="13814" title="Clone tool" label="object removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010947" start="13918" end="13932" title="glamour photography" label="glamour photos"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="14213" end="14220" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552325" start="14244" end="14249" title="Maxim (magazine)" label="Maxim"/>
<link wikidata="Q974213" start="14264" end="14279" title="digital imaging" label="digital imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="14348" end="14360" title="raster image" label="raster image"/>
<link wikidata="Q219423" start="14717" end="14722" title="mural" label="mural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051308" start="15161" end="15183" title="radio-controlled model" label="radio-controlled model"/>
<link wikidata="Q62246" start="15246" end="15251" title="Lexan" label="Lexan"/>
<link wikidata="Q142554" start="15390" end="15397" title="cosplay" label="cosplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q942297" start="15414" end="15418" title="Theatrical property" label="prop"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="15508" end="15524" title="Hollywood movies" label="Hollywood movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904957" start="15557" end="15571" title="Monte Westmore" label="Monte Westmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875" start="15634" end="15652" title="Gone with the Wind (film)" label="Gone With the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565571" start="15676" end="15681" title="Wally Westmore" label="Wally"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408764" start="15726" end="15734" title="Pre-Code" label="Pre-Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282624" start="15755" end="15777" title="Murder at the Vanities" label="Murder at the Vanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="15852" end="15878" title="high-definition television" label="high-definition television"/>
<link wikidata="Q173095" start="15883" end="15902" title="digital photography" label="digital photography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15958" end="15976" title="Cosmetics#Types" label="Liquid foundations"/>
<link wikidata="Q381243" start="16150" end="16172" title="special effect" label="special effects makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q332997" start="16192" end="16208" title="Embalming" label="funeral industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358" start="16531" end="16536" title="clown" label="clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q146439" start="16788" end="16796" title="Silicone" label="Silicone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418455" start="16963" end="16974" title="Foundation (cosmetics)" label="foundations"/>
<link wikidata="Q995634" start="17855" end="17870" title="sunless tanning" label="sunless tanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q321458" start="17914" end="17921" title="Sun tanning" label="sun tan"/>
<link wikidata="Q646347" start="18118" end="18125" title="sun bed" label="sun bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023328" start="18559" end="18568" title="Marc Ecko" label="Marc Ecko"/>
<link wikidata="Q751439" start="19377" end="19389" title="Astrogeology" label="Astrogeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157436" start="19552" end="19566" title="Jackson Square, New Orleans" label="Jackson Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="19570" end="19581" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075852" start="19601" end="19627" title="Panama City Beach, Florida" label="Panama City Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q131151" start="19719" end="19727" title="T-shirts" label="T-shirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q746186" start="19882" end="19927" title="Occupational Safety and Health Administration" label="Occupational Safety and Health Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167111" start="20016" end="20024" title="Atomizer nozzle" label="Atomizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499090" start="20074" end="20100" title="Frederick William Lawrence" label="Frederick William Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659656" start="20130" end="20138" title="Syd Brak" label="Syd Brak"/>
<link wikidata="Q312640" start="20174" end="20185" title="H. R. Giger" label="H. R. Giger"/>
<link wikidata="Q124216" start="20188" end="20193" title="Swiss people" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="20194" end="20202" title="sculptor" label="sculptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q103569" start="20288" end="20293" title="Alien (film)" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q337747" start="20310" end="20317" title="Species (film)" label="Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698472" start="20332" end="20356" title="Airbrush Action Magazine" label="Airbrush Action Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055935" start="20451" end="20464" title="Aerosol paint" label="Aerosol paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q659495" start="20502" end="20520" title="aerosol propellant" label="aerosol propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851468" start="20532" end="20554" title="List of art techniques" label="List of art techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q675001" start="20557" end="20571" title="Alberto Vargas" label="Alberto Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698472" start="20648" end="20672" title="Airbrush Action Magazine" label="Airbrush Action Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46139" start="20675" end="20682" title="Man Ray" label="Man Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q278945" start="20710" end="20719" title="Cassandre" label="Cassandre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276918" wikidata="Q3961002" url="?curid=276918" title="Division sign">
<text>The division sign () is a mathematical symbol consisting of a short horizontal line with a dot above and another dot below, used in Anglophone countries to indicate the operation of division. This usage, though widespread in some countries, is not universal and the symbol has a different meaning in other countries. Its use to denote division is not recommended in the ISO 80000-2 standard for mathematical notation.

==In mathematics==

The obelus, a historical glyph consisting of a horizontal line with (or without) one or more dots, was first used as a symbol for division in 1659, in the algebra book &quot;&quot; by Johann Rahn, although previous writers had used the same symbol for subtraction. Some near-contemporaries believed that John Pell, who edited the book, may have been responsible for this use of the symbol. Other symbols for division include the slash or solidus , the colon , and the fraction bar (the horizontal bar in a vertical fraction). The ISO 80000-2 standard for mathematical notation recommends only the solidus or &quot;fraction bar&quot; for division, or the &quot;colon&quot; for ratios; it says that the sign &quot;should not be used&quot; for division.

In Italy, Poland and Russia, the sign was sometimes used to denote a range of values, and in Scandinavian countries it was, and sometimes still is, used as a negation sign: the Unicode Consortium has allocated a separate code point, for this usage uniquely; the exact form of the symbol displayed is typeface (font) dependent.

==In computer systems==
===Encoding===
The symbol was assigned to code point 0xF7 in ISO 8859-1, as the &quot;division sign&quot;. This encoding was transferred to Unicode as U+00F7. In HTML, it can be encoded as or (at HTML level 3.2), or as .

Unicode provides various division symbols:
==See also==
* Plus and minus signs
* Multiplication sign

==Notes==
==External links==
*Jeff Miller: &quot;Earliest Uses of Various Mathematical Symbols&quot;
*Michael Quinion: &quot;Where our arithmetic symbols come from&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3961002" start="4" end="17" title="Division sign" label="division sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q180159" start="26" end="45" title="Glossary of mathematical symbols" label="mathematical symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="132" end="142" title="Anglophone" label="Anglophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226939" start="182" end="190" title="Division (mathematics)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q568496" start="370" end="381" title="ISO 80000-2" label="ISO 80000-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140046" start="395" end="416" title="mathematical notation" label="mathematical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q633466" start="443" end="449" title="obelus" label="obelus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36975" start="464" end="469" title="glyph" label="glyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="594" end="601" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180572" start="623" end="634" title="Johann Rahn" label="Johann Rahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q471794" start="743" end="752" title="John Pell (mathematician)" label="John Pell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684340" start="868" end="873" title="slash (punctuation)" label="slash"/>
<link wikidata="Q177449" start="891" end="896" title="colon (punctuation)" label="colon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="907" end="919" title="fraction (mathematics)#Vocabulary" label="fraction bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481047" start="1115" end="1120" title="ratio" label="ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1194" end="1199" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="1201" end="1207" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="1212" end="1218" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185148" start="1260" end="1275" title="Interval (mathematics)" label="range of values"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="1284" end="1295" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572774" start="1368" end="1386" title="Unicode Consortium" label="Unicode Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105784" start="1412" end="1422" title="code point" label="code point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105784" start="1585" end="1595" title="code point" label="code point"/>
<link wikidata="Q935289" start="1604" end="1614" title="ISO 8859-1" label="ISO 8859-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="1683" end="1690" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="1705" end="1709" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q184756" start="1721" end="1728" title="Character encodings in HTML" label="encoded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567428" start="1739" end="1749" title="List of XML and HTML character entity references" label="HTML level"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="1765" end="1772" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q747083" start="1823" end="1843" title="Plus and minus signs" label="Plus and minus signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900125" start="1846" end="1865" title="Multiplication sign" label="Multiplication sign"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276919" wikidata="Q320592" url="?curid=276919" title="Krautrock">
<text>Krautrock (also called , German for ) is a broad genre of experimental rock that developed in West Germany in the late 1960s and early 1970s. It originated among artists who blended elements of psychedelic rock, avant-garde composition, and electronic music, among other eclectic sources. Common elements included hypnotic rhythms, extended improvisation, musique concrète techniques, and early synthesizers, while the music generally moved away from the rhythm &amp; blues roots and song structure found in traditional rock music. Prominent groups associated with the krautrock label included Neu!, Can, Faust, Tangerine Dream, Kraftwerk, Cluster, Ash Ra Tempel, Popol Vuh, Amon Düül II and Harmonia.

The term &quot;krautrock&quot; was popularised by British music journalists as a humorous umbrella-label for the diverse German scene, and although many such artists disliked the term, it is no longer considered controversial by German artists in the 21st century. Despite this, English-language authors remain critical of it. The movement was partly born out of the radical student protests of 1968, as German youth rebelled against their country&#x27;s legacy in World War II and sought a popular music distinct from traditional German music and American pop. The period contributed to the development of ambient music and techno, and influenced subsequent genres such as post-punk, new-age music, and post-rock.

== Characteristics ==
Krautrock has been described as a broad genre encompassing varied approaches, but commonly drawing on psychedelia, avant-garde collage, electronic sounds, and rock music, while typically featuring &quot;improvisation and hypnotic, minimalistic rhythms.&quot; &quot;Los Angeles Magazine&quot; summarized the genre as &quot;American psychedelica meets icy Germanic detachment.&quot; &quot;Melody Maker&quot; described the style as &quot;where the over-reaching ambition and untethered freakitude of late &#x27;60s acid rock is checked and galvanised by a proto-punk minimalism ... music of immense scale that miraculously avoided prog-rock&#x27;s bombastics.” AllMusic described it as expanding on the territory associated with art rock and progressive rock, but diverging from the American and British groups&#x27; emphasis on jazz and classical elements in favor of &quot;a droning, pulsating sound that owed more to the avant garde than to rock &amp; roll.&quot;

Some common musical features exhibited by krautrock artists include:

* A blend of elements from psychedelic rock with electronic music or avant-garde sources
* Hypnotic or minimalistic rhythms, including the common 4/4 &quot;motorik&quot; beat pattern
* Emphasis on long-form repetition, texture, and drone elements rather than song structure
* Use of synthesizers and musique concrète techniques
* A movement away from rock&#x27;s traditional rhythm &amp; blues roots
* Extended improvisation

Despite a common approach and generational attitude among artists, the &quot;New Statesman&quot; argues that &quot;in truth, no two Krautrock acts sound remotely alike. Compare the dreamy synthesiser washes of Tangerine Dream with the alien noise collages of Faust or the psychedelic funk of Can.&quot; However, a common feature is the &quot;motorik&quot; beat: the 4/4 beat often used by drummers associated with krautrock, characterised by a kick drum-heavy, pulsating groove, that created a forward-flowing feel. The motorik beat was used by Can in the song &quot;Mother Sky&quot;, by Neu! on their debut album, and by Kraftwerk in the song &quot;Autobahn&quot; on their album of the same name, later being adopted by other krautrock bands. It has been widely used in many different styles of music beyond krautrock. According to &quot;XLR8R&quot;, the term krautrock is often used by critics to signify the &quot;mesmerizing motorik rhythms pioneered by Can and Neu!&quot;, but contested that &quot;they represent merely a tiny fraction of the music that emerged from Germany during krautrock&#x27;s Golden Age&quot;.

==Origins and influences==

Krautrock emerged in West Germany during the 1960s and early 1970s. The music was partially inspired by broad cultural developments such as the revolutionary 1968 German student movement, with many young people having both political and aesthetic concerns. Youth rebelled against both dominant American influence and conservative German entertainment such as schlager music, seeking to liberate themselves from Germany&#x27;s Nazi legacy in World War II and create a new popular culture. Dieter Moebius, of the bands Cluster and Harmonia, noted that &quot;we were a lot of the times on the streets instead of studying. As young people we were not very proud to be German [...] we were all tired of listening to bad German music and imitations of American music. Something had to happen.&quot; The movement saw artists merge elements of varied genres such as psychedelic rock, avant-garde forms of electronic music, funk rhythm, jazz improvisation and &quot;ethnic&quot; music styles, typically reflecting a &quot;genuine sense of awe and wonder.&quot;
Core influences on these German artists included avant-garde composers Karlheinz Stockhausen and Terry Riley, and bands such as the Mothers of Invention, the Velvet Underground, the Beatles, and Pink Floyd. A significant influence was the work of American minimalists such as Riley, Tony Conrad, and La Monte Young, as well as the late &#x27;60s albums of jazz musician Miles Davis, particularly his jazz fusion work on &quot;In a Silent Way&quot; (1969). The influence of Jimi Hendrix and James Brown on krautrock musicians was also notable. Some artists drew on ideas from 20th century classical music and musique concrète, particularly composer Stockhausen (with whom, for example, Irmin Schmidt and Holger Czukay of Can had previously studied), and from the new experimental directions that emerged in jazz during the 1960s and 1970s (mainly the free jazz pieces by Ornette Coleman or Albert Ayler). Moving away from the patterns of song structure and melody of much rock music in America and Britain, some in the movement were drawn to a more mechanical and electronic sound.

==Etymology==
Until around 1973, the word (&quot;German Rock&quot;) was used to refer to the new groups from West Germany. Other names thrown around by the British and American music press were &quot;Teutonic rock&quot;, &quot;Überrock&quot; and &quot;Götterdämmer rock&quot;. West Germany&#x27;s music press initially used as a pejorative, but the term lost its stigma after the music gained success in Britain. The term derives from the ethnic slur &quot;kraut&quot;. &quot;Kraut&quot; in German can refer to herbs, weeds, and drugs.

The term was originally used by Virgin records in 1972. Various sources claim that &quot;krautrock&quot; was originally a humorous term coined in the early 1970s, either by British disc jockey John Peel or by the UK music newspaper &quot;Melody Maker&quot;, in which experimental German bands found an early and enthusiastic following. The first use of the term however, was found in a full-page advertisement from &quot;Popo Music Management&quot; and &quot;Bacillus Records&quot; promoting German Rock in the UK, in April 1971. The music emerging in Germany was first covered extensively in three concurrent issues of the UK music paper New Musical Express in the month of December 1972, by journalist Ian MacDonald.

Its musicians tended to reject the name &quot;krautrock&quot;. This was also the case for &quot;kosmische Musik&quot;. Musicologist Julian Cope, in his book &quot;Krautrocksampler&quot;, says &quot;krautrock is a subjective British phenomenon&quot;, based on the way the music was received in the UK rather than on the actual West German music scene out of which it grew. For instance, while one of the main groups originally tagged as krautrock, Faust, recorded a seminal 12-minute track they titled &quot;Krautrock&quot;, they would later distance themselves from the term, saying: &quot;When the English people started talking about krautrock, we thought they were just taking the piss... and when you hear the so-called &#x27;krautrock renaissance&#x27;, it makes me think everything we did was for nothing.&quot;

== Kosmische Musik ==

 (&quot;cosmic music&quot;) is a term which came into regular use before &quot;krautrock&quot; and was preferred by some German artists who disliked the English label; today, it is often used synonymously with krautrock. More specifically, it may describe 1970s German electronic music which uses synthesizers and incorporates themes related to space or otherworldliness; it is also used as a German analogue to the English term &quot;space rock&quot;. The style was often instrumental and characterized by &quot;spacy&quot;, ambient soundscapes. Artists used synthesizers such as the EMS VCS 3 and Moog Modular, as well as sound processing effects and tape-based approaches. They often rejected rock music conventions, and instead drew on &quot;serious&quot; electronic compositions.

The term &quot;kosmische Musik&quot; was coined by Edgar Froese and later used by record producer Rolf-Ulrich Kaiser as a marketing name for bands such as Ash Ra Tempel, Tangerine Dream, and Klaus Schulze. The following year, Rolf-Ulrich Kaiser&#x27;s Ohr Records used the term when he released the compilation &quot;Kosmische Musik&quot; (1972) featuring tracks by Tangerine Dream, Klaus Schulze, Ash Ra Tempel, and Popol Vuh. Kaiser eventually began referring to the style as &quot;cosmic rock&quot; to signify that the music belonged in a rock idiom. German producer Conny Plank was a central figure in the kosmische sound, emphasizing texture, effects processing, and tape-based editing techniques. Plank oversaw kosmische recordings such as Kraftwerk&#x27;s &quot;Autobahn&quot;, Neu!&#x27;s &quot;Neu! 75&quot;, and Cluster&#x27;s &quot;Zuckerzeit&quot;.

Several of these artists would later distance themselves from the term. Other names for the style, and for sub-genres were &quot;Berlin School&quot; and &quot;Dusseldorf School&quot;, both of which are recognised and actively contributed to by artists such as Node, Martin Sturtzer, Propaganda, Kraftwerk, Tannheuser and Fritz Mayr, from the 1980s through to the present day. The style would later lead to the development of new-age music, with which it shared several characteristics. It would also exert lasting influence on subsequent electronic music and avant-garde rock.

==Legacy and influence==

Krautrock has proved to be highly influential on a succession of other musical styles and developments. Early contemporary enthusiasts outside Germany included Hawkwind and in particular Dave Brock who supposedly penned the sleeve notes for the British edition of Neu!&#x27;s first album. Faust&#x27;s budget release &quot;The Faust Tapes&quot; has been cited as a formative teenage influence by several musicians growing up in the early 1970s such as Julian Cope, who has always cited krautrock as an influence, and wrote the book &quot;Krautrocksampler&quot; on the subject. Krautrock was a significant influence on Simple Minds albums &quot;Real To Real Cacophony&quot; (1979) and &quot;Empires and Dance&quot; (1980), as well as on artists such as Brian Eno, Gary Numan and Ultravox. The genre also had a strong influence on David Bowie&#x27;s &quot;Station to Station&quot; (1976) and the experimentation it inspired led to his &#x27;Berlin Trilogy&#x27;. 

Ash Ra Tempel&#x27;s first album, released in 1971, informed later krautrock music.

Modern bands, such as Osees, King Gizzard &amp; the Lizard Wizard, and Minami Deutsch have been described as krautrock, or have noted krautrock as influential on their styles.

==See also==
==References==
Citations
Bibliography
* 
*
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
*Krautrock @ pHinnWeb
*krautrock website
*Krautrocksite – online magazine from Germany</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q320592" start="0" end="9" title="Krautrock" label="Krautrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q320592" start="23" end="23" title="Krautrock" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q188451" start="49" end="54" title="music genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641839" start="58" end="75" title="experimental rock" label="experimental rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="94" end="106" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="194" end="210" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332751" start="212" end="223" title="avant-garde music" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="241" end="257" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049625" start="341" end="354" title="musical improvisation" label="improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q823560" start="356" end="372" title="musique concrète" label="musique concrète"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="395" end="406" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="455" end="473" title="rhythm &amp;amp; blues" label="rhythm &amp;amp; blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561199" start="484" end="498" title="song structure" label="song structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="520" end="530" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q181874" start="594" end="598" title="Neu!" label="Neu!"/>
<link wikidata="Q170132" start="600" end="603" title="Can (band)" label="Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q679697" start="605" end="610" title="Faust (band)" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q153616" start="612" end="627" title="Tangerine Dream" label="Tangerine Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q44892" start="629" end="638" title="Kraftwerk" label="Kraftwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q705382" start="640" end="647" title="Cluster (band)" label="Cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q700817" start="649" end="662" title="Ash Ra Tempel" label="Ash Ra Tempel"/>
<link wikidata="Q706764" start="664" end="673" title="Popol Vuh (band)" label="Popol Vuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319707" start="675" end="687" title="Amon Düül II" label="Amon Düül II"/>
<link wikidata="Q568238" start="692" end="700" title="Harmonia (band)" label="Harmonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="824" end="830" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q445571" start="1078" end="1102" title="German student movement" label="student protests of 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1168" end="1180" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="1194" end="1207" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q193207" start="1310" end="1323" title="ambient music" label="ambient music"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="1328" end="1334" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="1377" end="1386" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q213121" start="1388" end="1401" title="new-age music" label="new-age music"/>
<link wikidata="Q209137" start="1407" end="1416" title="post-rock" label="post-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q666011" start="1543" end="1554" title="psychedelia" label="psychedelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332751" start="1556" end="1567" title="avant-garde music" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327500" start="1577" end="1587" title="electronic instrument" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="1600" end="1610" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="1672" end="1682" title="minimalist" label="minimalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681932" start="1706" end="1726" title="Los Angeles Magazine" label="Los Angeles Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="1828" end="1840" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q236932" start="1953" end="1962" title="acid rock" label="acid rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q27190" start="1994" end="2004" title="proto-punk" label="proto-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="2069" end="2078" title="prog-rock" label="prog-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="2099" end="2107" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217467" start="2167" end="2175" title="art rock" label="art rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="2267" end="2271" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="2276" end="2285" title="classical music" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332751" start="2362" end="2373" title="Avant garde music" label="avant garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="2503" end="2519" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="2525" end="2541" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332751" start="2545" end="2556" title="avant-garde music" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949856" start="2632" end="2639" title="motorik" label="motorik"/>
<link wikidata="Q650316" start="2708" end="2713" title="drone music" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="2759" end="2770" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q823560" start="2776" end="2792" title="musique concrète" label="musique concrète"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="2851" end="2869" title="rhythm &amp;amp; blues" label="rhythm &amp;amp; blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049625" start="2887" end="2900" title="improvisation (music)" label="improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566255" start="2979" end="2992" title="New Statesman" label="New Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q153616" start="3112" end="3127" title="Tangerine Dream" label="Tangerine Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q726239" start="3143" end="3148" title="noise music" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q679697" start="3161" end="3166" title="Faust (band)" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q29025044" start="3174" end="3190" title="psychedelic funk" label="psychedelic funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q170132" start="3194" end="3197" title="Can (band)" label="Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949856" start="3244" end="3251" title="motorik" label="motorik"/>
<link wikidata="Q211028" start="3346" end="3355" title="kick drum" label="kick drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170132" start="3447" end="3450" title="Can (band)" label="Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917431" start="3469" end="3479" title="Mother Sky" label="Mother Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q181874" start="3490" end="3494" title="Neu!" label="Neu!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566338" start="3504" end="3515" title="Neu! (album)" label="debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q44892" start="3524" end="3533" title="Kraftwerk" label="Kraftwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076440" start="3552" end="3560" title="Autobahn (song)" label="Autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q544099" start="3576" end="3598" title="Autobahn (album)" label="album of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570402" start="3741" end="3746" title="XLR8R" label="XLR8R"/>
<link wikidata="Q445571" start="4216" end="4239" title="German student movement" label="German student movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q959583" start="4412" end="4426" title="schlager music" label="schlager music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="4479" end="4483" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4494" end="4506" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q973580" start="4541" end="4555" title="Dieter Moebius" label="Dieter Moebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q705382" start="4570" end="4577" title="Cluster (band)" label="Cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q568238" start="4582" end="4590" title="Harmonia (band)" label="Harmonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="4911" end="4927" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="4929" end="4940" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="4950" end="4966" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="4968" end="4972" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6168370" start="4981" end="4999" title="jazz improvisation" label="jazz improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="5004" end="5028" title="ethnic music" label="&amp;quot;ethnic&amp;quot; music"/>
<link wikidata="Q154556" start="5176" end="5197" title="Karlheinz Stockhausen" label="Karlheinz Stockhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q365243" start="5202" end="5213" title="Terry Riley" label="Terry Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q530362" start="5233" end="5257" title="the Mothers of Invention" label="the Mothers of Invention"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="5259" end="5281" title="the Velvet Underground" label="the Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="5283" end="5294" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="5300" end="5310" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q572901" start="5361" end="5372" title="minimal music" label="minimalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q481477" start="5388" end="5399" title="Tony Conrad" label="Tony Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q432822" start="5405" end="5419" title="La Monte Young" label="La Monte Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="5475" end="5486" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="5505" end="5516" title="jazz fusion" label="jazz fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q917685" start="5531" end="5546" title="In a Silent Way" label="In a Silent Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="5578" end="5590" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950" start="5595" end="5606" title="James Brown" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q612024" start="5680" end="5708" title="contemporary classical music" label="20th century classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q823560" start="5713" end="5729" title="musique concrète" label="musique concrète"/>
<link wikidata="Q664494" start="5790" end="5803" title="Irmin Schmidt" label="Irmin Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q699355" start="5808" end="5821" title="Holger Czukay" label="Holger Czukay"/>
<link wikidata="Q170132" start="5825" end="5828" title="Can (band)" label="Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="5911" end="5915" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q211781" start="5955" end="5964" title="free jazz" label="free jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q208797" start="5975" end="5990" title="Ornette Coleman" label="Ornette Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q457125" start="5994" end="6006" title="Albert Ayler" label="Albert Ayler"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="6168" end="6178" title="Electronic music" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q272029" start="6439" end="6451" title="Götterdämmerung" label="Götterdämmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676388" start="6644" end="6649" title="kraut" label="kraut"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="6917" end="6926" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="6962" end="6974" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="7363" end="7382" title="New Musical Express" label="New Musical Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630321" start="7428" end="7441" title="Ian MacDonald" label="Ian MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371735" start="7576" end="7587" title="Julian Cope" label="Julian Cope"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436460" start="7607" end="7623" title="Krautrocksampler" label="Krautrocksampler"/>
<link wikidata="Q679697" start="7891" end="7896" title="Faust (band)" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q383246" start="7951" end="7960" title="Faust IV" label="Krautrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678383" start="8117" end="8132" title="taking the piss" label="taking the piss"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="8555" end="8571" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="8583" end="8595" title="synthesizers" label="synthesizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572179" start="8613" end="8636" title="Space-themed music" label="themes related to space"/>
<link wikidata="Q236913" start="8721" end="8731" title="space rock" label="space rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q193207" start="8812" end="8819" title="ambient music" label="ambient"/>
<link wikidata="Q514109" start="8871" end="8880" title="EMS VCS 3" label="EMS VCS 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q426035" start="8885" end="8897" title="Moog modular synthesizer" label="Moog Modular"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="8982" end="8992" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q505957" start="9123" end="9135" title="Edgar Froese" label="Edgar Froese"/>
<link wikidata="Q111004" start="9170" end="9188" title="Rolf-Ulrich Kaiser" label="Rolf-Ulrich Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q700817" start="9227" end="9240" title="Ash Ra Tempel" label="Ash Ra Tempel"/>
<link wikidata="Q168015" start="9263" end="9276" title="Klaus Schulze" label="Klaus Schulze"/>
<link wikidata="Q111004" start="9298" end="9316" title="Rolf-Ulrich Kaiser" label="Rolf-Ulrich Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518623" start="9324" end="9335" title="Ohr Records" label="Ohr Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q706764" start="9489" end="9498" title="Popol Vuh (band)" label="Popol Vuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q61428" start="9642" end="9653" title="Conny Plank" label="Conny Plank"/>
<link wikidata="Q768807" start="9720" end="9738" title="sound effects" label="effects processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q44892" start="9818" end="9827" title="Kraftwerk" label="Kraftwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q544099" start="9841" end="9849" title="Autobahn (album)" label="Autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q181874" start="9857" end="9861" title="Neu!" label="Neu!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065671" start="9875" end="9882" title="Neu! 75" label="Neu! 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q705382" start="9894" end="9901" title="Cluster (band)" label="Cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q31595" start="9915" end="9925" title="Zuckerzeit" label="Zuckerzeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q213121" start="10359" end="10372" title="new-age music" label="new-age music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641839" start="10493" end="10509" title="avant-garde rock" label="avant-garde rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q285966" start="10698" end="10706" title="Hawkwind" label="Hawkwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032403" start="10725" end="10735" title="Dave Brock" label="Dave Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371735" start="10990" end="11001" title="Julian Cope" label="Julian Cope"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436460" start="11076" end="11092" title="Krautrocksampler" label="Krautrocksampler"/>
<link wikidata="Q748836" start="11156" end="11168" title="Simple Minds" label="Simple Minds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767006" start="11182" end="11204" title="Real To Real Cacophony" label="Real To Real Cacophony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339345" start="11228" end="11245" title="Empires and Dance" label="Empires and Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q569003" start="11290" end="11299" title="Brian Eno" label="Brian Eno"/>
<link wikidata="Q331731" start="11301" end="11311" title="Gary Numan" label="Gary Numan"/>
<link wikidata="Q316485" start="11316" end="11324" title="Ultravox" label="Ultravox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="11367" end="11378" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q831890" start="11392" end="11410" title="Station to Station" label="Station to Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q23807843" start="11477" end="11491" title="Berlin Trilogy" label="Berlin Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q700817" start="11501" end="11514" title="Ash Ra Tempel" label="Ash Ra Tempel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777713" start="11608" end="11613" title="Osees" label="Osees"/>
<link wikidata="Q19366461" start="11615" end="11651" title="King Gizzard &amp;amp; the Lizard Wizard" label="King Gizzard &amp;amp; the Lizard Wizard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276928" wikidata="Q578100" url="?curid=276928" title="Cru (Christian organization)">
<text>Cru (until 2011 known as Campus Crusade for Christ—informally &quot;Campus Crusade&quot; or simply &quot;Crusade&quot;—or CCC) is an interdenominational Christian parachurch organization. It was founded in 1951 at the University of California, Los Angeles by Bill Bright and Vonette Zachary Bright. Since then, Cru has expanded its focus to include a broad range of audiences. In 2020, the organization had 19,000 staff members in 190 countries.

Campus Crusade for Christ relocated its world headquarters from Arrowhead Springs, San Bernardino, California, to Orlando, Florida, in 1991. The president of the organization is David Robbins.

In 2011, Campus Crusade for Christ changed its name in the United States to Cru. The name change was intended to avoid association with the word &quot;crusade&quot;, which can lead to offense, especially in Muslim countries. A spokesperson for Cru also noted that the organization&#x27;s work is no longer limited to campuses.

==History==
===Early beginnings===
Campus Crusade for Christ was founded in 1951 at the University of California, Los Angeles by Bill Bright and Vonette Zachary Bright as a ministry for university students. According to historian John G. Turner, Bill Bright and Vonette Zachary Bright were influenced and mentored by Henrietta Mears, the director of Christian Education at the First Presbyterian Church of Hollywood. In addition, Bill was also influenced by the theology and teachings of the prominent American evangelist Billy Graham. While studying at Fuller Theological Seminary, Bright felt what he regarded as the call of God to reach out to university students. Abandoning his studies at Fuller, Bright started Campus Crusade at the UCLA campus.

By 1952, Campus Crusade saw 250 UCLA students join them in following Jesus Christ including decathlete and future film actor Rafer Johnson. With the establishment of other Campus Crusade branches in other universities, the ministry hired six staff members. In 1956, Bright developed a 20-minute evangelistic presentation called &quot;God&#x27;s Plan For Your Life,&quot; which set the tone for Campus Crusade&#x27;s evangelism and discipleship programs. In 1953, Campus Crusade rented a tiny office on Westwood Avenue in Los Angeles, which served as the organization&#x27;s headquarters until the 1960s. According to Turner, Cru&#x27;s expansion across US university campuses during the 1950s and 1960s created friction with existing Christian campus groups including the InterVarsity Christian Fellowship and liberal campus chaplains.

According to Turner, Campus Crusade had a conservative evangelical and anti-Communist orientation. While Bill Bright initially cultivated friendly relations with the fundamentalist Bob Jones University (BJU), Bright&#x27;s relations with Bob Jones Sr. and his son Bob Jones Jr. deteriorated after the former sided with Billy Graham, who had accepted the sponsorship of liberal Protestants during his 1957 New York City crusade. As a result, Bob Jones University ended its support for Campus Crusade. Turner argues that the deterioration of Campus Crusade&#x27;s relationship with BJU led the former to gravitate towards the &quot;new evangelical&quot; wing of the American evangelical Protestant movement by late 1958.

Following the split with Bob Jones University, Campus Crusade came to emphasize the importance of the Holy Spirit in its theological teaching and evangelical outreaches; which coincided with the growth of the Pentecostal and Charismatic Movements during the 1950s and 1960s. While Bright and Campus Crusade did cultivate friendly contacts with Pentecostal and charismatics, Bright disagreed with the Pentecostal and Charismatic theological view that glossolalia (speaking in tongues) was a manifestation of the Holy Spirit. As the wedge between evangelicals and charismatics deepened during the 1960s, Campus Crusade issued a ruling in 1960 banning staff members from &quot;speaking in tongues.&quot; During the mid-1960s, Campus Crusade adopted the cessationist standpoint that spiritual gifts such as the speaking of tongues, prophecy, and healing had ceased with the Apostolic age. According to Turner, the dispensationalist theologian Robert Thieme had an influence on Bill and Campus Crusade&#x27;s opposition to glossolalia; which prevented Campus Crusade from forming close ties with Pentecostal and Charismatic Christians.

Following a fundraising drive and some litigation with local authorities, Campus Crusade opened a headquarters in Arrowhead Springs, San Bernardino, California in the Arrowhead Springs Hotel. This facility was equipped with a series of dormitories to accommodate thousands of students who received evangelistic training. During the mid-1960s, Campus Crusade&#x27;s rapid expansion led to the creation of separate overseas, lay, and athletic ministries. Some notable former Campus Crusade staff members have included the evangelist Hal Lindsey, author of the apocalyptic &quot;The Late, Great Planet Earth&quot;, and Marabel Morgan, the author of &quot;The Total Woman&quot;.

===&quot;Four Spiritual Laws&quot;===
In 1952, Bill Bright developed the &quot;Four Spiritual Laws&quot; talking points in consultation with the salesman Bob Ringer after he and his team encountered difficulty disseminating the Gospel message. The &quot;Four Spiritual Laws&quot; consisted of the following points: 
* God loves you and has a wonderful plan for your life.
* Man is sinful and separated from God, thus he cannot know and experience God&#x27;s plan for life.
* Jesus Christ is God&#x27;s provision for man&#x27;s sin through whom man can know God&#x27;s love and plan for his life.
* We must receive Jesus Christ as Savior and Lord by personal invitation.

In 1965, the Toledo businessman Gus Yeager took the initiative to compile the &quot;Four Spiritual Laws&quot; into a booklet, which was accompanied by supporting Bible verses, some commentary, and support diagrams. Bright had large quantities of the booklet printed and distributed in campuses across the United States. These &quot;Four Spiritual Law&quot; presented a concise, four-step process of how to become a Christian and became one of the most widely distributed religious booklets in history. By 2006, the booklet had been translated into over 200 languages and more than 2.5 billion copies had been distributed worldwide. Due to its simplicity, it continues to be used in various forms by Cru and its international affiliates.

===Confronting the counter-culture movement===
To compete with contemporary popular musicians such as the Beatles and Bob Dylan, Campus Crusade sponsored its own Christian popular music band called the New Folk. According to historian John G. Turner, Campus Crusade under Bright&#x27;s leadership also actively sought to confront the counterculture movement during the 1960s and 1970s. One notable Campus Crusade campaign was the &quot;Berkeley Blitz&quot; in January 1967 which saw 600 Campus Crusade staff and students organize a series of events including concerts, dinners for international students, a performance by the illusionist André Kole, and a sermon by evangelist Billy Graham. Campus Crusade also claimed to have converted 700 students and faculty members.

During the late 1960s, Campus Crusade in line with its conservative, anti-Communist orientation organized counter-demonstrations against New Left and anti-war demonstrations including those by the left-wing Students for a Democratic Society (SDS). Several Campus Crusade members also took the opportunity to evangelize during the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago. Campus Crusade also ran a hippie–oriented outreach called the Christian World Liberation Front (CWLF) to engage the New Left. CWLF&#x27;s ministry focused on establishing safe houses and &quot;crash pads&quot; for drug addicts, infiltrating SDS meetings, and persuading student radicals to abandon violence. While CWLF received funding and support from Campus Crusade, the latter was discreet to conceal its involvement to avoid antagonizing conservative donors and potential CWLF converts.

In 1972, Campus Crusade in coordination with the Jesus Movement organized a week-long International Student Congress on Evangelism at Cotton Bowl Stadium in Dallas known as Explo &#x27;72. The Explo &#x27;72 conference featured evangelism and discipleship training and contemporary music events. It was attended by 80,000 college and high school students and was nicknamed as the &quot;Christian Woodstock&quot; in the media. Besides Billy Graham, the event featured several contemporary popular musicians including Johnny Cash, Kris Kristofferson, the Christian band Love Song, Andraé Crouch, and the Disciples.

The historian Turner regards Explo &#x27;72 as Campus Crusade&#x27;s first significant exposure to the mainstream media and a success due to the positive media coverage. Turner also argues that Campus Crusade during the 1970s sought to become more &quot;socially aware&quot; by recruiting more African American speakers and delegates. According to Turner, the large Pentecostal and charismatic presence at Explo &#x27;72 signaled Bright adopting a more conciliatory stance towards the Charismatic movement. However, Campus Crusade maintained its opposition to glossolalia.

===Riding the conservative wave, 1970s and 1980s===
During the 1970s and 1980s, Campus Crusade increasingly became aligned with conservative politics, moral, and social positions. During the mid-1970s, Campus Crusade started a family outreach called FamilyLife to promote a Biblical view of the family, gender roles, homosexuality and abortion. Bill Bright objected to what he regarded as the &quot;breakdown of the American family&quot; and advocated a return to Biblical values. As part of the Evangelical Bicentennial of 1976, Campus Crusade launched an evangelism drive called &quot;I Found It&quot; which targeted 246 cities and involved 300,000 Christian volunteers from 15,000 churches.

In addition, Campus Crusade worked with other evangelical leaders including Jack W. Hayford, Pat Robertson, Pat Boone, William L. Armstrong, and Billy James Hargis to build relationships with US politicians particularly within the Republican Party through outreaches such as &quot;Christian Embassy.&quot; Bill Bright was also supportive of the Moral Majority and President Ronald Reagan, who was popular with many of Bright&#x27;s evangelical contemporaries. Two Campus Crusade staff members Jerry Regier and Robert Pittenger also participated in the White House Conference on Families and the National Affairs Briefing in 1980. According to the historian Turner, Bill Bright and Campus Crusade&#x27;s conservative political leanings created friction with the left-leaning evangelist Jim Wallis.

During the 1980s, Bright attempted to establish a graduate university for Campus Crusade called the &quot;International Christian Graduate University&quot; in La Jolla, San Diego. However, the project was fraught by fundraising problems, which almost bankrupted Campus Crusade. It also attracted opposition from the mayor of San Diego Roger Hedgecock and a coalition of environmentalist groups including the Sierra Club, who supported a ballot in November 1985 requiring the city&#x27;s voters to approve any developmental projects in San Diego&#x27;s northern land reserve. In March 1986, Campus Crusade filed a lawsuit against San Diego for US$70 million plus interest. However, the lawsuit failed and Crusade&#x27;s subsidiary, University Development, filed for bankruptcy when a lender foreclosed on the property in late 1986. The Texas land developer Glenn Terrell helped Crusade offset its debts by purchasing the property.

During the 1980s, Campus Crusade increased its cooperation with the charismatic, Pentecostal, and Catholic churches and denominations. Bright&#x27;s personal friendships with charismatic and Pentecostal Christians and Zachary Bright&#x27;s charismatic experience led Campus Crusade to soften its stance towards charismatic and Pentecostal churches. In 1983, Campus Crusade overturned its ban on staff members speaking in tongues. During the late 1980s, Campus Crusade also partnered with the Assemblies of God in missionary work in Africa and Latin America. In addition, Campus Crusade also collaborated with the Catholic Church to distribute the &quot;Jesus&quot; film in Catholic countries.

===1990s and 2000s===
During the late 1980s and 1990s, Campus Crusade&#x27;s Family First ministry endorsed the complementarian position that men and women have different but complementary roles and responsibilities in marriage, family life, and religious leadership. Bill and Vonette Bright served as board members of the pro-complementarian Council on Biblical Manhood and Womanhood and signed the Danvers Statement. The historian Turner credits FamilyLife Director Dennis Rainey with advancing the complementarian position among Campus Crusade&#x27;s leadership. In 1993, FamilyLife published the &quot;Family Manifesto&quot; emphasizing male leadership over the family and the female role as nurturers. In 1999, Campus Crusade adopted the Southern Baptist Convention&#x27;s doctrinal statement on the family endorsing complementarianism. Campus Crusade has also endorsed the traditional evangelical positions on homosexuality and abortion. During the early 2000s, its family ministry FamilyLife supported California&#x27;s Proposition 22 and opposed gay marriage.

In 1991, Campus Crusade moved its world headquarters from Arrowhead Springs, California to Orlando, Florida. In 1992, Campus Crusade partnered with Co-Mission to evangelize in the Former Soviet Union. During the 1990s, Campus Crusade launched a series of campus media campaigns promoting sexual abstinence and opposing alcoholism and racism. In 1996, Crusade drew controversy when it published advertisements containing testimonies by &quot;former homosexuals&quot; during the National Coming Out Week; several newspapers either declined to run the ads, or published editorial rebuttals.

To combat the under-representation of African American and other ethnic minorities during the late 1970s and 1980s, Campus Crusade launched several ethnic-based student movements during the early 1990s. In 1991, Tom Fritz founded the Impact movement which sought to reach African Americans by organizing regional conferences featuring Gospel music. To appeal to Black students, Campus Crusade launched advertising campaigns highlighting Biblical arguments against racism and promoting the African roots of Christianity. The Epic and Destino movements were also launched to reach Asian American and Latino students. In addition, the Korea Campus Crusade for Christ also opened chapters in the West Coast to accommodate the Korean-American diaspora.

In 2000, Bill Bright designated Steve Douglass, executive vice president and director of U.S. Ministries, as his successor. Douglass assumed the presidency of Campus Crusade in August 2001. On July 19, 2011, it was announced that Campus Crusade for Christ in the United States was changing its name to Cru to overcome existing barriers and perceptions inherent in the original name, particularly among Muslim communities.

In April 2020, Steve Douglass announced that due to health concerns, he would be stepping down from his role as president. On September 2, 2020, Cru announced that Steve Sellers, Executive Vice President and U.S. National Director would take over from Steve Douglass as president, effective in early October.

Most recently, Cru is wrestling with troublesome divides amongst its members in regards to how race and diversity fit into its mission. As American culture as a whole critically examines and revolutionizes its perception of race, Cru is now trying to do the same in an effort to parallel these new developments. However, where some argue that these new adjustments in the theology and structure of the organization encourage much-needed diversity and promote the Christian ideals of acceptance and unconditional love, others push back, claiming that the issue of race is being overemphasized, causes divisiveness and disharmony, and that it distracts from the mission of the organization and from the Gospel itself.

==Ministries and partners==
The historian John G. Turner and pastor and theologian David Cobia have described Cru or Campus Crusade as a parachurch organization, Christian organizations that exist alongside the institutional church (denominations and congregations). Throughout its history, Cru or Campus Crusade was best known for disseminating the &quot;Four Spiritual Laws&quot;, a four-step Gospel tract developed in 1959 that distilled key evangelical Christian beliefs. By 2006, over 2.5 billion copies of the &quot;Four Spiritual Laws&quot; had been printed. It continues to be used in Cru and its international affiliates&#x27; literature.

===Athletes in Action===
Among the events sponsored by Athletes in Action is the NFL-sanctioned Super Bowl Breakfast which features the presentation of the Bart Starr Award &quot;to honor the NFL player who best exemplifies outstanding character and leadership in the home, on the field and in the community.&quot;

===Christian Embassy===
Christian Embassy is an organization for politicians and diplomats.

===Colleges===
Despite a failed attempt during the 1980s to establish an &quot;International Christian Graduate University&quot; in San Diego, Campus Crusade still operates several theological colleges overseas. In 1998, Campus Crusade began running The King&#x27;s College, a Christian school based in New York City.

===FamilyLife===
Following the 1975 evangelical Continental Congress on the Family, Campus Crusade staff members Ney Bailey and Don Meredith created a series of premarital and marriage seminars in response to marital disharmony among Crusade staff members. In response to growing interest from pastors, couples, and community leaders, Campus Crusade opened them to the public in 1978. This ministry became known as FamilyLife and used the Bible as a guide for issues relating to marriage, the family, gender roles, homosexuality, and abortion. While FamilyLife endorsed the male leadership, it also sought to accommodate modern feminism by promoting female leadership in ways that did not threaten traditional gender roles. Since 1976 more than 1.5 million people have attended marriage conferences.

During the 1980s and 1990s, FamilyLife grew rapidly due to the strong emphasis on &quot;family values&quot; in US evangelical political discourses, particularly under the leadership of its director Dennis Rainey. Rainey played an important role in promoting complementarianism among the Campus Crusade leadership. In 1993, FamilyLife published a manifesto called the &quot;Family Manifesto&quot; promoting male leadership in the family. During the 2000s, FamilyLife joined other conservative advocacy groups such as James Dobson&#x27;s Focus on the Family and the Family Research Council in marshaling opposition against gay marriage, abortion, and pornography.

Besides lobbying on moral issues, FamilyLife&#x27;s primary activities included organizing conferences, radio programs, and publications. By 2008, FamilyLife had an annual budget of around US$40 million and had embarked on a $100 million fundraising campaign to build a new headquarters in Little Rock, Arkansas.

===Inner City===
Cru&#x27;s inner city ministry (formerly known as Here&#x27;s Life Inner City) currently trains and equips churches in 17 cities to meet immediate physical needs, while also providing long-term development programs such as Holistic Hardware for life skills and WorkNet for career preparedness.

===The Jesus Film Project===

The Jesus Film Project started in 1981 to translate the Hollywood film &quot;Jesus&quot; into other languages so that it could be shown by missionaries to peoples around the world in their native languages. The origins of The Jesus Film Project date back to 1945 when Campus Crusade&#x27;s founder Bill Bright wanted to privately finance a film about the life of Jesus that was entertaining, biblically accurate, and which could be translated into non-English languages. Rather than making a film at that time, Bright instead focused on his campus ministry Campus Crusade.

In 1976, with Campus Crusade&#x27;s influence spreading beyond college campuses to sports, the marketplace and other aspects of society, Bright turned his attention once again to filmmaking. That year, the British Jewish film and television producer John Heyman approached Bright to obtain funding for his &quot;Jesus&quot; film and his Genesis Project to produce film adaptations of both the Old Testament and the New Testament. This meeting proved productive and Bright assigned Paul Eshleman, the director of campus ministry, to consult with the film maker. Despite some unease within Campus Crusade&#x27;s leadership about hiring a &quot;non-believer&quot; to produce a film on the Bible, Bright approved the project after watching Heyman&#x27;s short film on the first two chapters of the Gospel of Luke and assigned Eshleman to work full-time on the &quot;Jesus&quot; film.

While Heyman&#x27;s initial cut of the Gospel of Luke ran more than four hours, it was shortened considerably following consultation with Bright and Eshleman. The &quot;Jesus&quot; movie was financed by Campus Crusade supporters Bunker and Caroline Hunt for a sum of US$6 million. The film starred British Shakespearean actor Brian Deacon as Jesus, Rivka Neumann as Mary, Yosef Shiloach as Saint Joseph and Niko Nitai as Saint Peter.

With the sponsorship of Warner Brothers, the &quot;Jesus&quot; movie was released in US theaters in late 1979. To promote the film, Eshleman worked with both evangelical and Catholic churches to arrange group trips and discounts. Four million reportedly watched the &quot;Jesus&quot; film in 1980. Despite its popularity among Christian audiences, Heyman failed to generate enough revenue to subsidize his Genesis Project since the film failed to attract general audiences, leaving the project US$4 million in debt. Following the &quot;Jesus&quot; movie&#x27;s completion, the relationship between Campus Crusade and Heyman deteriorated. Heyman was unhappy that Campus Crusade had overlooked his contribution to the film and objected to the ministry making different versions of the film for their evangelism outreaches. During the late 1990s, Heyman sued Campus Crusade for producing a shorter version &quot;The Story of Jesus for Children&quot;, which included new footage. The parties settled the dispute out of court.

However, Bright was pleased with the film and Campus Crusade embarked on plans to turn &quot;Jesus&quot; into a global evangelistic tool. Campus Crusade dubbed the film into other languages and the film became part of the &quot;Here&#x27;s Life, World&quot; campaigns. During the 1980s and 1990s, Campus Crusade produced and distributed dozens of dubbed versions of the &quot;Jesus&quot; movie in its evangelism outreaches in the developing world. These outreaches led Campus Crusade to partner with the Southern Baptist Convention, charismatic and Pentecostal denominations and churches, and the Catholic Church. In 2000, the Catholic Church collaborated with Campus Crusade to produce a version of the &quot;Jesus&quot; film that was more attuned to Catholic theology.

Distribution of the &quot;Jesus&quot; film in the United States has included direct mail campaigns sponsored by churches to deliver a copy of the film to every address in select zip codes across the country. Project leaders claim that it has been viewed over 5 billion times by over 3 billion people. This claim has been greeted with skepticism by an evangelical leader. Vinay Samuel, former executive director of the International Fellowship of Evangelical Mission Theologians has said: &quot;These numbers are, to say the least, not gathered in a social-scientific way,&quot; and that &quot;They have no way of knowing this.&quot;

===Josh McDowell Ministries===

In 1964, Josh McDowell became a traveling representative of Cru addressing campus groups about the Christian faith. By 2008, Josh McDowell Ministry had become a speaking and humanitarian ministry based in Dallas which partnered with Cru. Over the years his ministry has focused on Christian apologetics, youth issues such as relationships and sexuality, and international humanitarian aid.

==Critique and criticism==
Some criticism of Cru has stemmed from their stance on sexuality and not allowing practicing LGBTQ members as leaders. Cru was not recognized as a student organization by Rollins College in 2018, due to its values which prevent gay people from becoming campus leaders, in violation of the college&#x27;s non-discrimination policy. While Cru&#x27;s constitution has a non-discrimination policy, Rollins was concerned that Cru&#x27;s binding statement of faith could affect the admission of members or the selection of leaders.

Religion scholar Elizabeth McAlister sees Campus Crusade&#x27;s language of warriors &quot;encouraged to enlist, rally, advance, campaign, and blitz&quot; as part of a broader trend in increasing militaristic language in Evangelicalism.

==Fundraising==
Cru is currently a charter member of the Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability. Prior to the late 1970s, Campus Crusade had raised the vast majority of its revenue by asking families, friends, and churches to pledge funds towards the salaries of its staff members. By the later 1970s, the increasing scale of Campus Crusade&#x27;s domestic and foreign evangelism projects led the organization to solicit funds from wealthy conservative donors such as Wallace E. Johnson, Roy Rogers, and Nelson Bunker Hunt.

In 2007, Campus Crusade was ranked 107 in fundraising efficiency among the top 200 U.S. charitable organizations, according to &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine (2007). Ninety-three percent of its funds go directly to programming, and 7% to overhead expenses. In 2008, the &quot;Chronicle of Philanthropy&quot; ranked Campus Crusade for Christ No. 23 in private funding in its &quot;Chronicle of Philanthropy 400&quot;, with annual giving of $514 million. In 2012, &quot;Forbes&quot; ranked it No. 19 in its list of the largest charities in the United States, with a total revenue of $519 million. The top salary for any Campus Crusade employee was $164,206 in the fiscal year ending 2011. In 2020, &quot;Forbes&quot; ranked it at No. 25 in the top 100 largest U.S. Charities.

==Worldwide presence==
Cru Global operates under various names around the world:
*Korea – Korea Campus Crusade for Christ

===History===
According to the historian Turner, the Nigerian Idowu Johnson, a student at UCLA, became Campus Crusade&#x27;s first overseas representative in 1954. After returning to Nigeria, Johnson became an evangelist at his home university. In 1958, the South Korean Dr. Joon Gon Kim became Campus Crusade&#x27;s first permanent overseas staff member and established the group&#x27;s first overseas mission. A Pakistani Fuller Seminary student Kundan Massey founded Campus Crusade&#x27;s first chapter in Pakistan. By the end of the 1950s, Campus Crusade was active in three countries. Campus Crusade&#x27;s overseas expansion accentuated friction with the InterVarsity Christian Fellowship, which also maintained overseas chapters.

In 1961, Bill and Vonette Bright participated in the evangelistic ministry World Vision&#x27;s Tokyo crusade and used it as an opportunity to expand Campus Crusade&#x27;s outreach in Japan. During the 1960s, Campus Crusade&#x27;s expanded its international outreach and expanded to 45 countries including the United Kingdom. As a result, Bright appointed Ray Nethery and Bob Kendall as directors of the group&#x27;s work in Asia and Latin America respectively. In 1967, Bill sent 55 Campus Crusade workers to establish the ministry&#x27;s presence in British universities. Campus Crusade&#x27;s British outreach became known as Agapé. That same year, branches were established in Canadian and Australian campuses which eventually became known as the Power to Change Ministries.

Following the resignation of Campus Crusade&#x27;s Asia director Nethery in 1968, Bill Bright appointed Bailey Marks as the new Asia director and tasked him with bringing more organizational unity to Crusade&#x27;s Asian ministries. After touring the nine Asian countries where Crusade had a presence, Marks built a training center in Manila, the Philippines for the purpose of training all Asian staff in the organization&#x27;s philosophy and techniques. While Campus Crusade did not abandon its principle of indigenous leadership, more emphasis was placed on ensuring that local leaders followed the organization&#x27;s policies. Opposition to increased central control led a third of the 90 Asian staff members to resign from Campus Crusade. Their replacements embraced Crusade&#x27;s evangelism models.

Building on the success of Explo &#x27;72, Campus Crusade organized the Explo &#x27;74 conference in Seoul, which reportedly attracted 300,000 delegates. One of the conference&#x27;s evening meetings reportedly attracted an estimated 1.5 million people with 320,000 reportedly converting to Christianity. Bill Bright also expressed support for the conservative, anti-Communist South Korean President Park Chung Hee, who imposed martial law and assumed dictatorial powers in 1972. Bright claimed that the Explo &#x27;74 conference indicated that Park&#x27;s regime preserved religious freedom.

During the late 1970s, Campus Crusade began to shift its emphasis from university evangelism to encouraging students to serve as Crusade missionaries upon graduation. According to the historian Turner, the number of American staff serving overseas doubled to 660 between 1977 and 1981.

In 2011, &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that Cru has 25,000 missionaries in 191 countries.

==See also==

* College religious organizations
* InterVarsity Christian Fellowship
* Fellowship of Christian Athletes
* Student Venture
* International student ministry

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q578100" start="0" end="3" title="Cru (Christian organization)" label="Cru"/>
<link wikidata="Q578100" start="25" end="50" title="Cru (Christian organization)" label="Campus Crusade for Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q578100" start="122" end="125" title="Cru (Christian organization)" label="CCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="133" end="152" title="interdenominational" label="interdenominational"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356065" start="163" end="186" title="parachurch organization" label="parachurch organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="218" end="255" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q861982" start="259" end="270" title="Bill Bright" label="Bill Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q27860246" start="275" end="297" title="Vonette Zachary Bright" label="Vonette Zachary Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796186" start="511" end="556" title="Arrowhead Springs, San Bernardino, California" label="Arrowhead Springs, San Bernardino, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q49233" start="561" end="577" title="Orlando, Florida" label="Orlando, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="1057" end="1094" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q861982" start="1098" end="1109" title="Bill Bright" label="Bill Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q27860246" start="1114" end="1136" title="Vonette Zachary Bright" label="Vonette Zachary Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5716009" start="1286" end="1301" title="Henrietta Mears" label="Henrietta Mears"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453690" start="1346" end="1384" title="First Presbyterian Church of Hollywood" label="First Presbyterian Church of Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q213550" start="1491" end="1503" title="Billy Graham" label="Billy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q262617" start="1523" end="1550" title="Fuller Theological Seminary" label="Fuller Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q452605" start="1847" end="1860" title="Rafer Johnson" label="Rafer Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635445" start="2494" end="2527" title="InterVarsity Christian Fellowship" label="InterVarsity Christian Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="2614" end="2625" title="evangelicalism" label="evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="2630" end="2644" title="anti-Communism" label="anti-Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740389" start="2740" end="2760" title="Bob Jones University" label="Bob Jones University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306213" start="2797" end="2810" title="Bob Jones Sr." label="Bob Jones Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4932953" start="2823" end="2836" title="Bob Jones Jr." label="Bob Jones Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q37302" start="3381" end="3392" title="Holy Spirit" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="3488" end="3499" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q324640" start="3504" end="3524" title="Charismatic Movement" label="Charismatic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q61070" start="3729" end="3740" title="glossolalia" label="glossolalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065552" start="4029" end="4041" title="Cessationism" label="cessationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302871" start="4149" end="4162" title="Apostolic age" label="Apostolic age"/>
<link wikidata="Q849459" start="4189" end="4206" title="dispensationalism" label="dispensationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350329" start="4218" end="4231" title="Robert Thieme" label="Robert Thieme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796186" start="4525" end="4570" title="Arrowhead Springs, San Bernardino, California" label="Arrowhead Springs, San Bernardino, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q106771001" start="4578" end="4601" title="Arrowhead Springs Hotel" label="Arrowhead Springs Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407611" start="4942" end="4953" title="Hal Lindsey" label="Hal Lindsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765746" start="4987" end="5015" title="The Late, Great Planet Earth" label="The Late, Great Planet Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754536" start="5027" end="5041" title="Marabel Morgan" label="Marabel Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404298" start="5063" end="5078" title="The Total Woman" label="The Total Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="6598" end="6609" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="6614" end="6623" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="6830" end="6853" title="Counterculture of the 1960s" label="counterculture movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850818" start="7077" end="7099" title="International student ministry" label="international students"/>
<link wikidata="Q520215" start="7134" end="7144" title="André Kole" label="André Kole"/>
<link wikidata="Q160637" start="7405" end="7413" title="New Left" label="New Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250103" start="7475" end="7508" title="Students for a Democratic Society" label="Students for a Democratic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q83516" start="7598" end="7633" title="1968 Democratic National Convention" label="1968 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="7672" end="7678" title="hippie" label="hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q85752263" start="7708" end="7740" title="Christian World Liberation Front" label="Christian World Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q94776" start="8187" end="8201" title="Jesus Movement" label="Jesus Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136764" start="8272" end="8291" title="Cotton Bowl (stadium)" label="Cotton Bowl Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="8295" end="8301" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421274" start="8311" end="8325" title="Explo &amp;#x27;72" label="Explo &amp;#x27;72"/>
<link wikidata="Q164815" start="8534" end="8543" title="Woodstock" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="8654" end="8665" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q208681" start="8667" end="8685" title="Kris Kristofferson" label="Kris Kristofferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3837788" start="8706" end="8715" title="Love Song (band)" label="Love Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q493028" start="8717" end="8730" title="Andraé Crouch" label="Andraé Crouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115608" start="10097" end="10112" title="Jack W. Hayford" label="Jack W. Hayford"/>
<link wikidata="Q364990" start="10114" end="10127" title="Pat Robertson" label="Pat Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q342778" start="10129" end="10138" title="Pat Boone" label="Pat Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q744037" start="10140" end="10160" title="William L. Armstrong" label="William L. Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912780" start="10166" end="10184" title="Billy James Hargis" label="Billy James Hargis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="10252" end="10268" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119363" start="10366" end="10380" title="Moral Majority" label="Moral Majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="10395" end="10408" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3956848" start="10531" end="10547" title="Robert Pittenger" label="Robert Pittenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689239" start="10806" end="10816" title="Jim Wallis" label="Jim Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q840668" start="10978" end="10986" title="La Jolla" label="La Jolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535739" start="11135" end="11153" title="mayor of San Diego" label="mayor of San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439068" start="11154" end="11169" title="Roger Hedgecock" label="Roger Hedgecock"/>
<link wikidata="Q508775" start="11227" end="11238" title="Sierra Club" label="Sierra Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q494890" start="12242" end="12259" title="Assemblies of God" label="Assemblies of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q575248" start="12403" end="12408" title="Jesus (1979 film)" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156416" start="12556" end="12571" title="complementarianism" label="complementarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176554" start="12787" end="12828" title="Council on Biblical Manhood and Womanhood" label="Council on Biblical Manhood and Womanhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221325" start="12844" end="12861" title="Danvers Statement" label="Danvers Statement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12912" end="12925" title="Dennis Rainey" label="Dennis Rainey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="13187" end="13214" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020803" start="13471" end="13485" title="2000 California Proposition 22" label="Proposition 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="13498" end="13510" title="gay marriage" label="gay marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q49233" start="13604" end="13620" title="Orlando, Florida" label="Orlando, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="13693" end="13712" title="Former Soviet Union" label="Former Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q598443" start="13801" end="13818" title="sexual abstinence" label="sexual abstinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q849216" start="13954" end="13972" title="Ex-gay movement" label="former homosexuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="14437" end="14449" title="Gospel music" label="Gospel music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431603" start="14734" end="14765" title="Korea Campus Crusade for Christ" label="Korea Campus Crusade for Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="14794" end="14804" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q276879" start="14824" end="14839" title="Korean-American" label="Korean-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="15253" end="15259" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356065" start="16438" end="16448" title="parachurch" label="parachurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q520776" start="17106" end="17122" title="Bart Starr Award" label="Bart Starr Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521483" start="17609" end="17632" title="The King&amp;#x27;s College (New York)" label="The King&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="18306" end="18314" title="feminism" label="feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811480" start="18567" end="18580" title="family values" label="family values"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156416" start="18737" end="18755" title="complementarianism" label="complementarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q955266" start="18995" end="19007" title="James Dobson" label="James Dobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435085" start="19015" end="19034" title="Focus on the Family" label="Focus on the Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q841737" start="19043" end="19066" title="Family Research Council" label="Family Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="19100" end="19112" title="gay marriage" label="gay marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q33405" start="19432" end="19453" title="Little Rock, Arkansas" label="Little Rock, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6188145" start="19802" end="19820" title="Jesus Film Project" label="Jesus Film Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q575248" start="19875" end="19880" title="Jesus (1979 film)" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q861982" start="20096" end="20107" title="Bill Bright" label="Bill Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="20190" end="20200" title="bible" label="biblically"/>
<link wikidata="Q33898" start="20258" end="20267" title="List of language families" label="languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q702718" start="20578" end="20592" title="British Jews" label="British Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239175" start="20622" end="20633" title="John Heyman" label="John Heyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="20765" end="20778" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="20787" end="20800" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q39939" start="21166" end="21180" title="Gospel of Luke" label="Gospel of Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q912067" start="21579" end="21591" title="Brian Deacon" label="Brian Deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338955" start="21602" end="21615" title="Rivka Neumann" label="Rivka Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="21619" end="21623" title="Mary (mother of Jesus)" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q657077" start="21625" end="21639" title="Yosef Shiloach" label="Yosef Shiloach"/>
<link wikidata="Q128267" start="21643" end="21655" title="Saint Joseph" label="Saint Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21660" end="21670" title="Niko Nitai" label="Niko Nitai"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="21674" end="21685" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="21712" end="21727" title="Warner Brothers" label="Warner Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="23215" end="23242" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="23308" end="23323" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q61911099" start="23854" end="23866" title="Vinay Samuel" label="Vinay Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377898" start="24430" end="24451" title="Christian apologetics" label="Christian apologetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="24660" end="24665" title="LGBT" label="LGBTQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164222" start="24738" end="24753" title="Rollins College" label="Rollins College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140925" start="25007" end="25025" title="statement of faith" label="statement of faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578135" start="25170" end="25178" title="Spiritual warfare" label="warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575688" start="25290" end="25302" title="Militarization" label="militaristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415667" start="25389" end="25437" title="Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability" label="Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717882" start="25810" end="25828" title="Wallace E. Johnson" label="Wallace E. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q367129" start="25830" end="25840" title="Roy Rogers" label="Roy Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q711333" start="25846" end="25864" title="Nelson Bunker Hunt" label="Nelson Bunker Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="26000" end="26006" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431603" start="26729" end="26760" title="Korea Campus Crusade for Christ" label="Korea Campus Crusade for Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155102" start="26815" end="26823" title="Nigerians" label="Nigerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594001" start="27575" end="27587" title="World Vision International" label="World Vision"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27855" end="27866" title="Ray Nethery" label="Ray Nethery"/>
<link wikidata="Q67171489" start="27871" end="27882" title="Bob Kendall" label="Bob Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q18209759" start="28250" end="28276" title="Power to Change Ministries" label="Power to Change Ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="28614" end="28620" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="28626" end="28637" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421274" start="29115" end="29129" title="Explo &amp;#x27;72" label="Explo &amp;#x27;72"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29160" end="29174" title="Explo &amp;#x27;74" label="Explo &amp;#x27;74"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="29189" end="29194" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q14356" start="29488" end="29502" title="Park Chung Hee" label="Park Chung Hee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="29984" end="30002" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146904" start="30086" end="30117" title="College religious organizations" label="College religious organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635445" start="30120" end="30153" title="InterVarsity Christian Fellowship" label="InterVarsity Christian Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442520" start="30156" end="30188" title="Fellowship of Christian Athletes" label="Fellowship of Christian Athletes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627789" start="30191" end="30206" title="Student Venture" label="Student Venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850818" start="30209" end="30239" title="International student ministry" label="International student ministry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276930" wikidata="Q244783" url="?curid=276930" title="Exegesis">
<text>Exegesis ( ; from the Greek , from , &quot;to lead out&quot;) is a critical explanation or interpretation of a text. The term is traditionally applied to the interpretation of Biblical works. In modern usage, exegesis can involve critical interpretations of virtually any text, including not just religious texts but also philosophy, literature, or virtually any other genre of writing. The phrase &quot;Biblical exegesis&quot; can be used to distinguish studies of the Bible from other critical textual explanations.

Textual criticism investigates the history and origins of the text, but exegesis may include the study of the historical and cultural backgrounds of the author, text, and original audience. Other analyses include classification of the type of literary genres presented in the text and analysis of grammatical and syntactical features in the text itself.

==Usage==
One who practices exegesis is called an &quot;exegete&quot; (; from Greek ), the plural of exegesis is &quot;exegeses&quot; (), and adjectives are exegetic or exegetical (e.g., exegetical commentaries). In biblical exegesis, the opposite of exegesis (to draw out) is eisegesis (to draw in), in the sense of an eisegetic commentator &quot;importing&quot; or &quot;drawing in&quot; their own subjective interpretations into the text, unsupported by the text itself. &quot;Eisegesis&quot; is often used as a derogatory term.

==Mesopotamian commentaries==
One of the early examples of exegesis, and one of the larger corpora of text commentaries from the ancient world, comes from Mesopotamia (modern-day Iraq) in the first millennium BCE. Containing over 860 manuscripts, the majority of which date to 700–100 BCE, these commentaries explore numerous types of texts, including literary works (such as the Babylonian Epic of Creation), medical treatises, magical texts, ancient dictionaries, and law collections (the Code of Hammurabi). Most of them, however, comment on divination treatises, in particular treatises that predict the future from the appearance and movement of celestial bodies on the one hand (Enūma Anu Enlil), and from the appearance of a sacrificed sheep&#x27;s liver on the other (Bārûtu).

As with the majority of the thousands of texts from the ancient Near East that have survived to the present day, Mesopotamian text commentaries are written on clay tablets in cuneiform script. Text commentaries are written in the East Semitic language of Akkadian, but due to the influence of lexical lists written in Sumerian language on cuneiform scholarship, they often contain Sumerian words or phrases as well.

Cuneiform commentaries are important because they provide information about Mesopotamian languages and culture that are not available elsewhere in the cuneiform record. To give but one example, the pronunciation of the cryptically written name of Gilgamesh, the hero of the Epic of Gilgamesh, was discovered in a cuneiform commentary on a medical text. However, the significance of cuneiform commentaries extends beyond the light they shed on specific details of Mesopotamian civilization. They shed light on what the concerns of the Mesopotamian literate elite were when they read some of the most widely studied texts in the Mesopotamian intellectual tradition, a perspective that is important for &quot;seeing things their way.&quot; Finally, cuneiform commentaries are also the earliest examples of textual interpretation. It has been repeatedly argued that they influenced rabbinical exegesis.

The publication and interpretation of these texts began in the mid-19th century, with the discovery of the royal Assyrian libraries at Nineveh, from which ca. 454 text commentaries have been recovered. The study of cuneiform commentaries is, however, far from complete. It is the subject of on-going research by the small, international community of scholars who specialize in the field of Assyriology.

==Commentaries on Plato==

Commentaries on Plato include a large corpus of literature, especially in the ancient and medieval world, to explain and clarify the works of Plato. Many Platonist philosophers in the centuries following Plato sought to clarify and summarise his thoughts, but it was during the Roman era, that the Neoplatonists, in particular, wrote many commentaries on individual dialogues of Plato, many of which survive to the present day.

==Biblical commentaries==

A common published form of biblical exegesis is known as a Bible commentary and typically takes the form of a set of books, each of which is devoted to the of one or two books of the Bible. Long books or those that contain much material either for theological or historical-critical speculation, such as Genesis or Psalms, may be split over two or three volumes. Some, such as the Four Gospels, may be multiple- or single-volume, while short books such as the deuterocanonical portions of Daniel, Esther, and Jeremiah (i.e. Book of Susanna, Prayer of Azariah, Bel and the Dragon, Additions to Esther, Baruch and the Epistle of Jeremiah), or the pastoral or Johannine epistles are often condensed into one volume.

The form of each book may be identical or allow for variations in methodology among the many authors who collaborate to write a full commentary. Each book&#x27;s commentary generally consists of a background and introductory section, followed by detailed commentary of the book pericope-by-pericope or verse-by-verse. Before the 20th century, a commentary would be written by a sole author, but in the recent period, a publishing board will commission a team of scholars to write a commentary, with each volume being divided out among them.

A single commentary will generally attempt to give a coherent and unified view on the Bible as a whole, for example, from a Catholic or Reformed (Calvinist) perspective, or a commentary that focuses on textual criticism or historical criticism from a secular point of view. However, each volume will inevitably lean toward the personal emphasis bias of its author, and within any commentaries there may be great variety in the depth, accuracy, and critical or theological strength of each volume.

==Christianity==
In Christianity, biblical exegeses have relied on various doctrines.

The doctrine of four senses of Scripture is a concept used in biblical hermeneutics. In the 3rd century, the theologian Origen, a graduate of Catechetical School of Alexandria, formulated the principle of the three senses of Scripture (literal, moral and spiritual) from the Jewish method of interpretation (midrash) used by Paul of Tarsus in Epistle to the Galatians chapter 4.

The historical-grammatical method is a Christian hermeneutical method that strives to discover the Biblical author&#x27;s original intended meaning in the text. It is the primary method of interpretation for many conservative Protestant exegetes who reject the historical-critical method to various degrees (from the complete rejection of historical criticism of some fundamentalist Protestants to the moderated acceptance of it in the Catholic Church since Pope Pius XII), in contrast to the overwhelming reliance on historical-critical interpretation, often to the exclusion of all other hermeneutics, in liberal Christianity.

Historical criticism, also known as the historical-critical method or higher criticism, is a branch of literary criticism that investigates the origins of ancient texts in order to understand &quot;the world behind the text&quot;. This is done to discover the text&#x27;s primitive or original meaning in its original historical context and its literal sense.

Revealed exegesis considers that the Holy Spirit inspired the authors of the scriptural texts, and so the words of those texts convey a divine revelation. In this view of exegesis, the principle of &quot;sensus plenior&quot; applies—that because of its divine authorship, the Bible has a &quot;fuller meaning&quot; than its human authors intended or could have foreseen.

Rational exegesis bases its operation on the idea that the authors have their own inspiration (in this sense, synonymous with artistic inspiration), so their works are completely and utterly a product of the social environment and human intelligence of their authors.

===Catholic===
Catholic centres of biblical exegesis include:
* the École Biblique of Jerusalem founded in 1890 by the Dominican order&#x27;s Marie-Joseph Lagrange. The school became embroiled in the modernist crisis, and had to curtail its New Testament activities until after Vatican II
* the Pontifical Biblical Institute of Rome, a division of the Jesuit Gregorian University, has influenced Catholic exegesis through teaching and through the Pontifical Biblical Commission

===Protestant===
For more than a century, German universities such as Tübingen have had reputations as centers of exegesis; in the US, the Divinity Schools of Chicago, Harvard and Yale became famous.

Robert A. Traina&#x27;s book &quot;Methodical Bible Study&quot; is an example of Protestant Christian exegesis.

==Indian philosophy==
The Mimamsa school of Indian philosophy, also known as (&quot;prior&quot; inquiry, also ), in contrast to (&quot;posterior&quot; inquiry, also ), is strongly concerned with textual exegesis, and consequently gave rise to the study of philology and the philosophy of language. Its notion of shabda &quot;speech&quot; as indivisible unity of sound and meaning (signifier and signified) is due to Bhartrhari (7th century).

==Islam==

Tafsīr (, , &quot;interpretation&quot;) is the Arabic word for exegesis, commentary or explanation of the Qur&#x27;an. It explains those aspects of the Qur’an that cannot be known by reason and logic such as the context of the revelation or abrogation of a specific &quot;ayah&quot; (verse). They are explained using reliable sources: other verses of Qur&#x27;an itself as some explain the other; the hadiths of The Prophet as the Quran was revealed on him; the narrations of the Prophet&#x27;s companions as they were the main context and reason for the revelation of some specific verses of the Qur&#x27;an; and so on and so forth. Such an author of &quot;tafsīr&quot; is a (, , plural: , ). Imam Razi&#x27;s &quot;Tafsir Kabir&quot; in Arabic and Mufti Naeemi&#x27;s &quot;Tafsir Naeemi&quot; in Urdu are some of the significant works on &quot;tafsīr&quot; in Islam.

==Judaism==

Traditional Jewish forms of exegesis appear throughout rabbinic literature, which includes the Mishnah, the two Talmuds, and the midrash literature. Jewish exegetes have the title (, &quot;commentators&quot;).

===Midrash===
The Midrash is a compilation of homiletic teachings or commentaries on the Tanakh (Hebrew Bible), a biblical exegesis of the Pentateuch and its paragraphs related to the Law or Torah, which also forms an object of analysis. It comprises the legal and ritual Halakha, the collective body of Jewish laws, and exegesis of the written Law; and the non-legalistic Aggadah, a compendium of Rabbinic homilies of the parts of the Pentateuch not connected with Law.

====Halakha and Aggadah====
In the halakhic as well as in the aggadic exegesis, the endeavored not so much to seek the original meaning of the text as to find authority in a Hebrew Bible passage for established concepts and ideas, rules of conduct, and teachings, for which he wished to locate a foundation. The talmudical hermeneutics form is defined as finding hints for a given law.

====Midrashic====
Midrash exegesis was largely in the nature of homiletics, expounding the Bible not primarily in order to understand the documents of the past (although in some instances it is indeed the case), but to find religious , moral instruction, and sustenance for the thoughts and feelings of the present. The contrast between explanation of the literal sense and the Midrash, that did not follow the words, was recognized by the Tannaim and the Amoraim, although their idea of the literal meaning of a passage may not be allowed by more modern standards. The above-mentioned tanna, Ishmael b. Elisha said, rejecting an exposition of Eliezer b. Hyrcanus: &quot;Truly, you say to Scripture, &#x27;Be silent while I am expounding!.

====Tannaim====
Tannaitic exegesis distinguishes principally between the actual deduction of a thesis from a passage as a means of proving a point, and the use of such a passage as a mere mnemonic device—a distinction that was also made in a different form later in the Babylonian schools. The Babylonian Amoraim were the first to use the expression &quot;Peshaṭ&quot; (&quot;simple&quot; or face value method) to designate the primary sense, contrasting it with the &quot;Drash,&quot; the Midrashic exegesis. These two terms were later on destined to become important features in the history of Hebrew Bible exegesis. In Babylonia was formulated the important principle that the Midrashic exegesis could not annul the primary sense. This principle subsequently became the watchword of commonsense Bible exegesis.

How little it was known or recognized may be seen from the admission of Kahana, a Babylonian amora of the fourth century, that while at 18 years of age he had already learned the whole Mishnah, he had only heard of that principle a great many years later (Shab 63a). Kahana&#x27;s admission is characteristic of the centuries following the final redaction of the Talmud. The primary meaning is no longer considered, but it becomes more and more the fashion to interpret the text according to the meaning given to it in traditional literature. The ability and even the desire for original investigation of the text succumbed to the overwhelming authority of the Midrash.

It was, therefore, providential that, just at the time when the Midrash was paramount, the close study of the text of the Hebrew Bible, at least in one direction, was pursued with rare energy and perseverance by the Masorites, who set themselves to preserving and transmitting the pronunciation and correct reading of the text.

===Mikra===
The Mikra, the fundamental part of the national science, was the subject of the primary instruction. It was also divided into the three historic groups of the books of the Hebrew Bible: the Pentateuch, the Prophets, and the Hagiographa, called in traditional Hebrew attribution the Torah (the Law or Teaching), the Nevi&#x27;im (the Prophets) and the Kethuvim (the Writings) respectively. The intelligent reading and comprehension of the text, arrived at by a correct division of the sentences and words, formed the course of instruction in the Hebrew Bible. The scribes were also required to know the Targum, the Aramaic translation of the text. The Targum made possible an immediate comprehension of the text, but was continuously influenced by the exegesis taught in the schools.

The reading of the biblical text, which was combined with that of the Targum, served to widen the knowledge of the scholars learned in the first division of the national science. The scribes found the material for their discourses, which formed a part of the synagogue service, in the second division of the several branches of the tradition. The Aggadah, the third of these branches, was the source material for the sermon.

=== Jewish Scholasticism ===
Jewish exegesis did not finish with the redaction of the Talmud, but continued during ancient times, the Middle Ages and the Renaissance; it remains a subject of study today. Jews have centers for exegetic studies around the world, in each community: they consider exegesis an important tool for the understanding of scripture. Associated with the rabbinic text studies, such methodology is known to adopt a wide assortment of literary tools, in conjunction with meticulous, widespread engagement with classical exegetical literature. Throughout history, exegetes like Saadia Gaon (&quot;The Book of Beliefs and Opinions&quot;), Avicebron, and Isaac Alfasi have bridged gaps between different eras and emphasized empirical observation, logic, and divine attributes. Others, like Bahya ibn Paquda, Ibn Ezra, and Maimonides (&quot;The Guide for the Perplexed&quot;), reinterpreted virtues, developed linguistic traditions, and reconciled philosophy with religion, employing systematic reasoning. The works of these exegetes have been translated into numerous languages, ensuring their widespread influence. 

== Zoroastrianism==
Zoroastrian exegesis consists basically of the interpretation of the Avesta. However, the closest equivalent Iranian concept, zand, generally includes Pahlavi texts which were believed to derive from commentaries upon Avestan scripture, but whose extant form contains no Avestan passages. Zoroastrian exegesis differs from similar phenomena in many other religions in that it developed as part of a religious tradition which made little or no use of writing until well into the Sasanian era. This lengthy period of oral transmission has clearly helped to give the Middle Persian Zand its characteristic shape and has, in a sense, limited its scope. Although the later tradition makes a formal distinction between &quot;Gathic&quot; (gāhānīg), &quot;legal&quot; (dādīg), and perhaps &quot;ritual&quot; (hādag-mānsrīg) Avestan texts, there appear to be no significant differences in approach between the Pahlavi commentary on the Gathas and those on dādīg texts, such as the &quot;Vendīdād&quot;, the &quot;Hērbedestān and the Nērangestān&quot;. Since many 19th and 20th century works by Zoroastrians contain an element of exegesis, while on the other hand no exegetical literature in the strict sense of the word can be said to exist, the phenomenon of modern Zoroastrian exegesis as such will be discussed here, without detailed reference to individual texts.

==In a secular context==
Several universities, including the Sorbonne in Paris, Leiden University, and the (Free University of Brussels), put exegesis in a secular context, next to exegesis in a religious tradition. Secular exegesis is an element of the study of religion.

At Australian and British universities, the exegesis forms part of the required work for fine arts, including creative-writing doctorates. A scholarly text accompanies a creative work, such as a film, novel, poetry or other artistic output by the PhD candidate. Together, the two elements form the candidate&#x27;s research thesis.

=== Straussian reading ===

In the late 1930s, Leo Strauss called for the first time for a reconsideration of the &quot;distinction between exoteric (or public) and esoteric (or secret) teaching.&quot; In 1952 he published &quot;Persecution and the Art of Writing&quot;, arguing that serious writers write esoterically, that is, with multiple or layered meanings, often disguised within irony or paradox, obscure references, even deliberate self-contradiction. Esoteric writing serves several purposes: protecting the philosopher from the retribution of the regime, and protecting the regime from the corrosion of philosophy; it attracts the right kind of reader and repels the wrong kind; and ferreting out the interior message is in itself an exercise of philosophic reasoning.

Taking his bearings from his study of Maimonides and Al-Farabi, and pointing further back to Plato&#x27;s discussion of writing as contained in the &quot;Phaedrus&quot;, Strauss proposed that the classical and medieval art of &quot;esoteric&quot; writing is the proper medium for philosophic learning: rather than displaying philosophers&#x27; thoughts superficially, classical and medieval philosophical texts guide their readers in thinking and learning independently of imparted knowledge. Thus, Strauss agrees with the Socrates of the &quot;Phaedrus&quot;, where the Greek indicates that, insofar as writing does not respond when questioned, good writing provokes questions in the reader—questions that orient the reader towards an understanding of problems the author thought about with utmost seriousness. Strauss thus, in &quot;Persecution and the Art of Writing&quot;, presents Maimonides &quot;as a closet nonbeliever obfuscating his message for political reasons&quot;.

Strauss&#x27;s hermeneutical argument—rearticulated throughout his subsequent writings (most notably in &quot;The City and Man&quot; [1964])—is that, before the 19th century, Western scholars commonly understood that philosophical writing is not at home in any polity, no matter how liberal. Insofar as it questions conventional wisdom at its roots, philosophy must guard itself especially against those readers who believe themselves authoritative, wise, and liberal defenders of the status quo. In questioning established opinions, or in investigating the principles of morality, philosophers of old found it necessary to convey their messages in an oblique manner. Their &quot;art of writing&quot; was the art of esoteric communication. This was especially apparent in medieval times when heterodox political thinkers wrote under the threat of the Inquisition or comparably obtuse tribunals.

Strauss&#x27;s argument is not that the medieval writers he studies reserved one exoteric meaning for the many (hoi polloi) and an esoteric, hidden one for the few (hoi oligoi), but that, through rhetorical stratagems including self-contradiction and hyperboles, these writers succeeded in conveying their proper meaning at the tacit heart of their writings—a heart or message irreducible to &quot;the letter&quot; or historical dimension of texts.

Explicitly following Gotthold Ephraim Lessing&#x27;s lead, Strauss indicates that medieval political philosophers, no less than their ancient counterparts, carefully adapted their wording to the dominant moral views of their time, lest their writings be condemned as heretical or unjust, not by &quot;the many&quot; (who did not read), but by those &quot;few&quot; whom the many regarded as the most righteous guardians of morality. It was precisely these righteous personalities who would be most inclined to persecute/ostracize anyone who was in the business of exposing the noble or great lie upon which the authority of the few over the many stands or falls.

==See also==

* Allegory in the Middle Ages
* Archetype
* Eisegesis
* Biblical criticism
** Form criticism
** Radical criticism
** Redaction criticism
** Source criticism
** Tradition criticism
* Biblical literalism
* Biblical software
* Biblical studies
* Close reading
* Gloss (annotation)
* Gymnobiblism
* Icon
* Literal and figurative language
* Narrative criticism
* Pesher
* Semiotics
* Symbol
* Typology (theology)
==References==
==External links==

* Biblical Interpretation and Application Reading Room: Extensive bibliography for biblical exegesis provided by Tyndale Seminary
* JewishEncyclopedia.com
* Cuneiform Commentaries Project
* en.exegetes.org features paleographic works, translations, and publications of classical exegesis and offers a selection of books for readers.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="0" end="8" title="Exegesis" label="Exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="22" end="27" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q855395" start="91" end="105" title="interpretation (philosophy)" label="interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="176" end="184" title="Bible" label="Biblical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="322" end="332" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="334" end="344" title="literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q275456" start="519" end="536" title="Textual criticism" label="Textual criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q223393" start="762" end="776" title="literary genre" label="literary genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="816" end="827" title="grammar" label="grammatical"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="832" end="843" title="syntax" label="syntactical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311095" start="1151" end="1160" title="eisegesis" label="eisegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="1562" end="1573" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q206063" start="1787" end="1814" title="Enûma Eliš" label="Babylonian Epic of Creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q93304" start="1898" end="1915" title="Code of Hammurabi" label="Code of Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q301593" start="2092" end="2107" title="Enūma Anu Enlil" label="Enūma Anu Enlil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005350" start="2183" end="2189" title="Bārûtu" label="Bārûtu"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="2249" end="2266" title="ancient Near East" label="ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="2368" end="2384" title="cuneiform script" label="cuneiform script"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="2448" end="2456" title="Akkadian (language)" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36790" start="2511" end="2528" title="Sumerian language" label="Sumerian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8272" start="2884" end="2901" title="Epic of Gilgamesh" label="Epic of Gilgamesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q156859" start="3900" end="3911" title="Assyriology" label="Assyriology"/>
<link wikidata="Q51623" start="4567" end="4585" title="books of the Bible" label="books of the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q508091" start="4660" end="4679" title="Historical criticism" label="historical-critical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="4701" end="4708" title="Book of Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="4712" end="4718" title="Book of Psalms" label="Psalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="4778" end="4790" title="Four Gospels" label="Four Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q201410" start="4857" end="4873" title="deuterocanonical" label="deuterocanonical"/>
<link wikidata="Q80115" start="4886" end="4892" title="Book of Daniel" label="Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131068" start="4894" end="4900" title="Book of Esther" label="Esther"/>
<link wikidata="Q131590" start="4906" end="4914" title="Book of Jeremiah" label="Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930210" start="4921" end="4936" title="Book of Susanna" label="Book of Susanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471572" start="4938" end="4955" title="Prayer of Azariah" label="Prayer of Azariah"/>
<link wikidata="Q218087" start="4957" end="4975" title="Bel and the Dragon" label="Bel and the Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131068" start="4977" end="4996" title="Additions to Esther" label="Additions to Esther"/>
<link wikidata="Q211746" start="4998" end="5004" title="Book of Baruch" label="Baruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q757010" start="5013" end="5032" title="Epistle of Jeremiah" label="Epistle of Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q369042" start="5042" end="5050" title="Pastoral epistles" label="pastoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q654807" start="5054" end="5072" title="Johannine epistles" label="Johannine epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q185698" start="5177" end="5188" title="methodology" label="methodology"/>
<link wikidata="Q118289" start="5389" end="5397" title="pericope" label="pericope"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="5777" end="5785" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="5789" end="5797" title="Reformed Churches" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="5799" end="5808" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q275456" start="5855" end="5872" title="textual criticism" label="textual criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q508091" start="5876" end="5896" title="historical criticism" label="historical criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="6171" end="6183" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523571" start="6254" end="6278" title="four senses of Scripture" label="four senses of Scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="6309" end="6321" title="hermeneutics" label="hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q170472" start="6358" end="6364" title="Origen" label="Origen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470799" start="6380" end="6413" title="Catechetical School of Alexandria" label="Catechetical School of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q202344" start="6546" end="6553" title="midrash" label="midrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="6563" end="6577" title="Paul of Tarsus" label="Paul of Tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128620" start="6581" end="6605" title="Epistle to the Galatians" label="Epistle to the Galatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333667" start="6622" end="6651" title="historical-grammatical method" label="historical-grammatical method"/>
<link wikidata="Q508069" start="6667" end="6680" title="Biblical hermeneutics" label="hermeneutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q508091" start="6879" end="6905" title="historical-critical method" label="historical-critical method"/>
<link wikidata="Q9149" start="6986" end="7000" title="fundamentalist" label="fundamentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="7076" end="7080" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="7081" end="7089" title="Pius XII" label="Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q859557" start="7225" end="7245" title="liberal Christianity" label="liberal Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q508091" start="7318" end="7334" title="higher criticism" label="higher criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="7646" end="7657" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q870945" start="7658" end="7666" title="Biblical inspiration" label="inspired"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="7752" end="7762" title="revelation" label="revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955393" start="7813" end="7827" title="sensus plenior" label="sensus plenior"/>
<link wikidata="Q196668" start="8107" end="8127" title="artistic inspiration" label="artistic inspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q273496" start="8318" end="8332" title="École Biblique" label="École Biblique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="8336" end="8345" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="8369" end="8384" title="Dominican order" label="Dominican order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243614" start="8392" end="8413" title="Marie-Joseph Lagrange" label="Marie-Joseph Lagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q368119" start="8450" end="8466" title="modernist crisis" label="modernist crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="8491" end="8504" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="8528" end="8538" title="Vatican II" label="Vatican II"/>
<link wikidata="Q951184" start="8545" end="8574" title="Pontifical Biblical Institute" label="Pontifical Biblical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="8578" end="8582" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="8602" end="8608" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q467025" start="8609" end="8629" title="Gregorian University" label="Gregorian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q24937814" start="8646" end="8663" title="Roman Catholic theology of Scripture" label="Catholic exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140511" start="8697" end="8727" title="Pontifical Biblical Commission" label="Pontifical Biblical Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q153978" start="8799" end="8807" title="University of Tübingen" label="Tübingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="8888" end="8895" title="University of Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034225" start="8897" end="8904" title="Harvard Divinity School" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="8909" end="8913" title="Yale University" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q847918" start="9069" end="9076" title="Mimamsa" label="Mimamsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q376022" start="9087" end="9104" title="Indian philosophy" label="Indian philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="9299" end="9308" title="philology" label="philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q484761" start="9317" end="9339" title="philosophy of language" label="philosophy of language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892651" start="9355" end="9361" title="shabda" label="shabda"/>
<link wikidata="Q16136913" start="9424" end="9447" title="signifier and signified" label="signifier and signified"/>
<link wikidata="Q335161" start="9459" end="9469" title="Bhartrhari" label="Bhartrhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q335414" start="9497" end="9503" title="Tafsir" label="Tafsīr"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="9603" end="9614" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q188219" start="9769" end="9773" title="Āyah" label="ayah"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="9898" end="9905" title="Hadith" label="hadiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="9909" end="9920" title="Muhammad" label="The Prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115424" start="9938" end="9953" title="Muhammad&amp;#x27;s first revelation" label="revealed on him"/>
<link wikidata="Q188711" start="9977" end="10002" title="Companions of the Prophet" label="Prophet&amp;#x27;s companions"/>
<link wikidata="Q333703" start="10191" end="10200" title="Fakhr al-Din al-Razi" label="Imam Razi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119254" start="10214" end="10226" title="Tafsir al-Kabir (al-Razi)" label="Tafsir Kabir"/>
<link wikidata="Q31559" start="10247" end="10259" title="Ahmed Yaar Khan Naeemi" label="Mufti Naeemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117603" start="10436" end="10455" title="rabbinic literature" label="rabbinic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="10476" end="10483" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="10493" end="10499" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q202344" start="10510" end="10517" title="midrash" label="midrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q202344" start="10610" end="10617" title="Midrash" label="Midrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038158" start="10638" end="10647" title="homiletic" label="homiletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="10681" end="10687" title="Tanakh" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="10731" end="10741" title="Pentateuch" label="Pentateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="10783" end="10788" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="10864" end="10871" title="Halakha" label="Halakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q393148" start="10965" end="10972" title="Aggadah" label="Aggadah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="11028" end="11038" title="Pentateuch" label="Pentateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="11099" end="11107" title="halakhic" label="halakhic"/>
<link wikidata="Q393148" start="11126" end="11133" title="aggadic" label="aggadic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910405" start="11376" end="11399" title="talmudical hermeneutics" label="talmudical hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038158" start="11515" end="11525" title="homiletics" label="homiletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q474035" start="11907" end="11914" title="Amoraim" label="Amoraim"/>
<link wikidata="Q975574" start="12037" end="12042" title="Tannaim" label="tanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391069" start="12044" end="12061" title="Ishmael b. Elisha" label="Ishmael b. Elisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329310" start="12095" end="12114" title="Eliezer b. Hyrcanus" label="Eliezer b. Hyrcanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q975574" start="12208" end="12217" title="Tannaim" label="Tannaitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="12380" end="12388" title="mnemonic" label="mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="12462" end="12469" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q474035" start="12497" end="12504" title="Amoraim" label="Amoraim"/>
<link wikidata="Q339091" start="12548" end="12554" title="Peshaṭ" label="Peshaṭ"/>
<link wikidata="Q202344" start="12682" end="12691" title="Midrashic" label="Midrashic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="12814" end="12823" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346820" start="13079" end="13085" title="Kahana b. Tahlifa" label="Kahana"/>
<link wikidata="Q474035" start="13100" end="13105" title="Amoraim" label="amora"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="13192" end="13199" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195034" start="13263" end="13267" title="Shab" label="Shab"/>
<link wikidata="Q756227" start="13894" end="13903" title="Masorites" label="Masorites"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="14023" end="14028" title="Tanakh" label="Mikra"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="14209" end="14219" title="Pentateuch" label="Pentateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q117190874" start="14225" end="14233" title="Prophets in Judaism" label="Prophets"/>
<link wikidata="Q208190" start="14243" end="14254" title="Hagiographa" label="Hagiographa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="14301" end="14306" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q216383" start="14334" end="14346" title="Nevi&amp;#x27;im" label="Nevi&amp;#x27;im"/>
<link wikidata="Q208190" start="14370" end="14378" title="Kethuvim" label="Kethuvim"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="15315" end="15321" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="15363" end="15374" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="15383" end="15394" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q328748" start="15827" end="15838" title="Saadia Gaon" label="Saadia Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q239355" start="15887" end="15896" title="Solomon ibn Gabirol" label="Avicebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q523491" start="15902" end="15914" title="Isaac Alfasi" label="Isaac Alfasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q762229" start="16037" end="16053" title="Bahya ibn Paquda" label="Bahya ibn Paquda"/>
<link wikidata="Q270670" start="16055" end="16063" title="Abraham ibn Ezra" label="Ibn Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="16069" end="16079" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q25423639" start="16385" end="16405" title="Exegesis in Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrian exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83426" start="16454" end="16460" title="Avesta" label="Avesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="16863" end="16871" title="Sasanian" label="Sasanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329536" start="17313" end="17319" title="Gathas" label="Gathas"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="17807" end="17815" title="University of Paris" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="17826" end="17843" title="Leiden University" label="Leiden University"/>
<link wikidata="Q34187" start="18000" end="18017" title="study of religion" label="study of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="18147" end="18156" title="doctorate" label="doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q77144" start="18400" end="18411" title="Leo Strauss" label="Leo Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170053" start="18582" end="18616" title="Persecution and the Art of Writing" label="Persecution and the Art of Writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="19172" end="19182" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q160460" start="19187" end="19196" title="Al-Farabi" label="Al-Farabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q555862" start="19288" end="19296" title="Phaedrus (dialogue)" label="Phaedrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="20115" end="20143" title="Straussian hermeneutics" label="Strauss&amp;#x27;s hermeneutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="20966" end="20977" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975610" start="21123" end="21133" title="hoi polloi" label="hoi polloi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34628" start="21482" end="21506" title="Gotthold Ephraim Lessing" label="Gotthold Ephraim Lessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="22141" end="22168" title="Allegory in the Middle Ages" label="Allegory in the Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q131714" start="22171" end="22180" title="Archetype" label="Archetype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311095" start="22183" end="22192" title="Eisegesis" label="Eisegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q373665" start="22195" end="22213" title="Biblical criticism" label="Biblical criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q496428" start="22217" end="22231" title="Form criticism" label="Form criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918554" start="22235" end="22252" title="Radical criticism" label="Radical criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q496434" start="22256" end="22275" title="Redaction criticism" label="Redaction criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122746" start="22279" end="22295" title="Source criticism" label="Source criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447836" start="22299" end="22318" title="Tradition criticism" label="Tradition criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q856690" start="22321" end="22340" title="Biblical literalism" label="Biblical literalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q856108" start="22343" end="22360" title="Biblical software" label="Biblical software"/>
<link wikidata="Q794605" start="22363" end="22379" title="Biblical studies" label="Biblical studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042156" start="22382" end="22395" title="Close reading" label="Close reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132324" start="22398" end="22416" title="Gloss (annotation)" label="Gloss (annotation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5624614" start="22419" end="22431" title="Gymnobiblism" label="Gymnobiblism"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="22434" end="22438" title="Icon" label="Icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363315" start="22441" end="22472" title="Literal and figurative language" label="Literal and figurative language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965350" start="22475" end="22494" title="Narrative criticism" label="Narrative criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q119530" start="22497" end="22503" title="Pesher" label="Pesher"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="22506" end="22515" title="Semiotics" label="Semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="22518" end="22524" title="Symbol" label="Symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480072" start="22527" end="22546" title="Typology (theology)" label="Typology (theology)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276931" wikidata="Q485673" url="?curid=276931" title="Garbage (band)">
<text>Garbage is a Scottish and American rock band formed in 1993 in Madison, Wisconsin. The band&#x27;s line-up consisting of Scottish singer Shirley Manson (vocals) and American musicians Duke Erikson (guitar, bass, keyboards), Steve Marker (guitar, keyboards), and Butch Vig (drums, production) has remained unchanged since its inception. All four members are involved in the songwriting and production process. Garbage has sold over 17 million albums worldwide.

The band&#x27;s eponymous debut album was critically acclaimed upon its release, selling over four million copies and achieving double platinum certification in the United Kingdom, the United States and Australia. It was accompanied by a string of increasingly successful singles from 1995 to 1996, including &quot;Stupid Girl&quot; and &quot;Only Happy When It Rains&quot;. Follow-up &quot;Version 2.0&quot;, released in 1998 after a year in production, was equally successful, topping the UK Albums Chart and receiving two Grammy Award nominations. Garbage followed this by performing and co-producing the theme song to the 19th James Bond film &quot;The World Is Not Enough&quot; (1999).

Garbage&#x27;s third album &quot;Beautiful Garbage&quot; was also critically acclaimed, but failed to match the commercial success of its predecessors, despite selling over a million copies in its opening three months. Garbage quietly disbanded amidst the troubled production of their fourth album &quot;Bleed Like Me&quot;, but regrouped to complete the album, which was released in 2005 and peaked at a career-high number four in the U.S. The band cut short their &quot;Bleed Like Me&quot; concert tour and announced an indefinite hiatus, emphasizing that they had not broken up but rather wished to pursue separate interests. The hiatus was briefly interrupted in 2007, when the band recorded new tracks for their greatest hits album &quot;Absolute Garbage&quot;. The band reunited in 2011, and self-released their 2012 album &quot;Not Your Kind of People&quot; on their own label Stunvolume to positive reviews. Their next album, &quot;Strange Little Birds&quot;, followed in 2016. Their seventh studio album, &quot;No Gods No Masters&quot;, was released in 2021.

==History==

===Formation and early years (1993–1994) ===

Duke Erikson and Butch Vig had been in several bands together, including Spooner and Fire Town (with Steve Marker as a sound engineer). In 1983, Vig and Marker founded Smart Studios in Madison and Vig&#x27;s production work brought him to the attention of Sub Pop. Spooner reunited in 1990 and released another record, but disbanded in 1993 as Vig and Marker&#x27;s career as producers took over. In 1994, as Vig had become &quot;kind of burned out on doing really long records&quot;. He collaborated with Erikson and Marker by doing remixes for acts such as U2, Depeche Mode, Nine Inch Nails, and House of Pain. The remixes featured different instrumentation, and often highlighting new guitar hooks and bass grooves. This experience inspired the three men to form a band, where they &quot;wanted to take that remix sensibility and somehow translate it into all of the possibilities of a band setup.&quot;

According to Vig, the team drew inspiration for its name from a hostile early comment, when a friend of the band heard recording material said, &quot;This shit sounds like garbage!&quot; However, according to &quot;This Is The Noise That Keeps Me Awake&quot;, an autobiography of the band, Vig wrote in his 1993 studio journal about the creative process; of working for long periods of time, &quot;without coming up with anything cool... and when you least expect it, it all falls into place.&quot; The name derives from the last line of this entry: &quot;I hope that all this garbage will become something beautiful!&quot;.

Initial sessions with Vig on vocals, along with the members&#x27; past work with all-male groups, led to the band&#x27;s desire for a woman on lead. Vig declared that they wanted to find a female vocalist like &quot;Debbie Harry, Patti Smith, Chrissie Hynde and Siouxsie Sioux—all really strong, unique personalities&quot;. Marker and Vig desired someone &quot;who didn&#x27;t have a high, chirpy, girly quality to her voice&quot; and who could sing in an understated way, in contrast to &quot;these alterna-rock singers [that] have a tendency to scream&quot;. Marker was watching &quot;120 Minutes&quot; when he saw the music video for Angelfish&#x27;s &quot;Suffocate Me&quot;. He showed the video to Erikson and Vig while their manager Shannon O&#x27;Shea tracked down the band&#x27;s singer, Shirley Manson. When Manson was contacted, she did not know who Vig was and was urged to check the credits on &quot;Nevermind&quot;, the Nirvana album which Vig had produced.

On April 8, 1994, Manson met Erikson, Marker, and Vig for the first time in London. Later that evening Vig was informed of Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain&#x27;s suicide. Garbage was put on hold until Angelfish was finished touring North America in support of Live. Erikson, Marker, and Vig attended the Metro Chicago date, and Manson was invited to Madison to audition for the band. The audition did not go well, but Manson socialized with the men while there and they found they had a similar taste in music. Angelfish disbanded at the end of the Live tour. Manson called O&#x27;Shea and asked to audition again, feeling that &quot;it could work out&quot;.

Manson described her first session with the band as &quot;a disaster&quot;, as she had no experience as a session player, and she and the band were &quot;two parties totally uncomfortable with the situation&quot;, but the &quot;mutual disdain&quot; from that meeting managed to pull the band together. The first songs were skeletal versions of the songs &quot;Stupid Girl&quot;, &quot;Queer&quot; and &quot;Vow&quot;, which led to some ad-libbed lyrics by Manson. Manson had never written a song prior to this session; nevertheless, this time she was invited to join the band. Lyrics were penned at a cabin in the north woods of Wisconsin while the songs were recorded at Smart Studios. Conscious of the grunge genre that had made their names, particularly Vig&#x27;s, the band made every effort to avoid sounding similar, deliberately striving to make a pop record.

Garbage sent out demo tapes with no bio, to avoid a bidding war over Vig&#x27;s production history. Garbage signed with Mushroom UK worldwide (excluding North America) and secured the band a &quot;Volume&quot; magazine compilation inclusion. The only potential candidate for release was &quot;Vow&quot;, as it was the only song for which the band had completed production. When released in December, &quot;Vow&quot; began to receive radio airplay on XFM and from Radio 1 DJs Steve Lamacq, John Peel, and Johnnie Walker. Word-of-mouth on &quot;Vow&quot; took the track back to the US. On December 21, Garbage signed to Jerry Moss&#x27;s label Almo Sounds for North America. Manson was licensed to both Mushroom and Almo by Radioactive Records for a single album, with no compensation from any of Garbage&#x27;s labels.

Garbage had not considered &quot;Vow&quot; for inclusion on the album or even as a single. Because the exclusive licensing of &quot;Volume&quot; prevented a full commercial single release, on March 20, 1995, Mushroom issued &quot;Vow&quot; in a limited 7-inch vinyl format through Discordant, a label set up just to launch Garbage. By May, commercial alternative radio in the US had picked up on the track, and it began to receive heavy rotation nationwide. &quot;Vow&quot; debuted on Hot Modern Rock Tracks at No. 39. It climbed gradually over the following weeks, peaking at No. 26 in July. &quot;Vow&quot; bubbled under for two weeks before it spent two weeks on the Billboard Hot 100 staying at No. 97 both weeks.

=== &quot;Garbage&quot; and international breakthrough (1995–1997) ===

On August 15, 1995, &quot;Garbage&quot; debuted on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 at No. 193. In the United Kingdom, its release was preceded by non-album track &quot;Subhuman&quot; and &quot;Only Happy When It Rains&quot; as singles to promote the album instead of &quot;Queer&quot;. The album debuted on the UK album chart at No. 12. In Australia, the album debuted at No. 5. &quot;Queer&quot; was quickly released in the United Kingdom and Europe, while Garbage began their first tour. Garbage was nominated for Brit Awards for Best New Band and Best International Newcomer.

Garbage had no plans to perform on stage, but once urged to play live during the recording of the music video for &quot;Vow&quot;, they enjoyed the performance and decided to schedule a tour. The Garbage tour started in November 1995 and continued throughout 1996. &quot;Only Happy When It Rains&quot; was released as a single in North America; &quot;Stupid Girl&quot; was released to promote European dates. MTV announced that &quot;Only Happy When It Rains&quot; was certified a &quot;Buzz clip&quot;, guaranteeing heavy rotation on its network from February 13. &quot;Only Happy&quot; peaked at No. 55 on the Hot 100. &quot;Stupid Girl&quot; received frequent video and radio airplay in the UK and peaked at No. 4, becoming the band&#x27;s first top 10 hit on the UK Singles Chart and elevated the album to No. 6.

In May, Garbage reworked &quot;Milk&quot; with Tricky in a Chicago recording studio before supporting Smashing Pumpkins on their arena tour until the overdose of Pumpkins keyboardist Jonathan Melvoin. &quot;Stupid Girl&quot; peaked at No. 24 on the Hot 100. Its Top 40 radio remix by Todd Terry received massive airplay.

&quot;Garbage Video&quot;, a compilation of the album&#x27;s promotional videos, was released in November 1996. Garbage was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best New Artist, while &quot;Stupid Girl&quot; received two nominations for Best Rock Song and Best Rock Performance By A Duo Or Group.

Worldwide, the final single release from the album was the reworked version of &quot;Milk&quot;, which became the band&#x27;s second UK top 10 hit. The band performed the song live at the MTV Europe Music Awards in London on November 14; Garbage won the Breakthrough award at the event. In North America, Almo Sounds released album track &quot;Supervixen&quot; to Modern Rock radio, while Mushroom Records released a remix of &quot;#1 Crush&quot; in March 1997 as a single from the soundtrack to &quot;Romeo + Juliet&quot;, which topped the Modern Rock Tracks chart for four weeks from the start of the year; the remix was also featured as the theme for the TV show &quot;Hex&quot;. &quot;#1 Crush&quot; was later nominated for Best Song From a Movie at the 1997 MTV Movie Awards.

=== &quot;Version 2.0&quot; and continued popularity (1997–2000) ===

Garbage relocated to Friday Harbor, Washington on March 1, 1997 to write songs for their second album. Returning to Smart Studios a short while later, the band found themselves under intense pressure to repeat the success of &quot;Garbage&quot;. The band decided not to change their formula, but progress musically by pushing their sound as far as it could go—hence the album&#x27;s eventual title &quot;Version 2.0&quot;, which was completed by February 15, 1998. In March, the first single &quot;Push It&quot; became the No. 1 most added record at the UK Alternative Radio. It became their third consecutive UK top ten hit at No. 9.

In May 1998, &quot;Version 2.0&quot; debuted at No. 1 in the UK and at No. 13 in the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. Garbage began touring &quot;Version 2.0&quot; that month, a tour which lasted until the end of 1999. &quot;I Think I&#x27;m Paranoid&quot; was released worldwide in July, while the music video for &quot;Push It&quot; received eight nominations at the 1998 MTV Video Music Awards. By October 12, &quot;Special&quot; was released and Garbage was nominated for three MTV Europe Music Awards: &quot;Best Group&quot;, &quot;Best Rock Act&quot; and &quot;Best Video&quot; for &quot;Push It&quot;.

In early 1999, &quot;Version 2.0&quot; received two Grammy Award nominations for Album of the Year and Best Rock Album &quot;Special&quot; was No. 1 most added single at the Top 40 radio. In Europe, Garbage began their biggest headline tour, releasing singles for &quot;When I Grow Up&quot; and &quot;The Trick Is to Keep Breathing&quot;. In April, &quot;When I Grow Up&quot; was released to Modern Rock radio. &quot;When I Grow Up&quot; was then featured on the movie &quot;Big Daddy&quot;. &quot;Version 2.0&quot; was awarded the European Platinum Award by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry for one million sales across Europe and the United States. &quot;You Look So Fine&quot; was released as the final single from &quot;Version 2.0&quot; worldwide, as Garbage toured Europe, including headlining in Edinburgh to mark the opening of the Scottish Parliament.

On August 4, Garbage was contracted to perform the theme for the James Bond film &quot;The World Is Not Enough&quot; and worked with composer David Arnold in London and Vancouver. Garbage co-headlined an Australian tour with Alanis Morissette, while &quot;When I Grow Up&quot; spent three months in the Australian chart, becoming the band&#x27;s most successful single there. &quot;The World Is Not Enough&quot; reached the top 10s in Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway and Finland, as well as the top 40 in Germany, Austria, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. &quot;Special&quot; received Grammy nominations for Best Rock Song and for Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group, while &quot;When I Grow Up&quot; was re-issued in Europe.

=== &quot;Beautiful Garbage&quot; (2001–2002) ===

Garbage regrouped on April 10, 2001. The group began work on their third record, and put aside plans for a B-sides album due to the sale of Almo Sounds to the UMG. Manson ran an online blog throughout the recording of the album named &quot;Beautiful Garbage&quot;. During the recording of the album, Garbage invoked a provision of its contract to leave Almo, and sued UMG when it refused to terminate the contract. UMG threatened to use Manson&#x27;s 1993 solo contract to tie Garbage to the label. The suit was settled on July 29, 2001, and Garbage moved to Interscope. Lead single &quot;Androgyny&quot; was released to radio by the end of August, and its video was released on September 10. The following day, due to the September 11 attacks in New York City and Washington D.C., the promotion schedule for the album was put on hold.

Released three weeks after the September 11 attacks, the album suffered from lack of promotion, mixed reaction from critics and fans alike, and the failure of its lead single &quot;Androgyny&quot; to achieve high chart positions. Despite faltering in major markets, &quot;Beautiful Garbage&quot; debuted at number one on &quot;Billboard&quot; Top Electronic Albums chart where it stayed for eight weeks, topped the album charts in Australia, and was named one of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;&#x27;s &quot;Top 10 Albums of the Year&quot;.

In October, &quot;Beautiful Garbage&quot; achieved a No. 13 debut on the Billboard 200, reached number six on the Top Internet Albums chart, and topped the Electronic Albums chart for seven weeks. In its first three months on sale, &quot;Beautiful Garbage&quot; sold 1.2 million copies. Garbage supported U2 on the third leg of their Elevation Tour. After the last show, Vig contracted Hepatitis A and was replaced by Matt Chamberlain for European dates. In December &quot;Breaking Up the Girl&quot; was released as a single. On December 27, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s United States and Australian editions named &quot;Beautiful Garbage&quot; as one of their critics &quot;Top 10 Albums of the Year&quot;.

&quot;Cherry Lips&quot; was released at the end of 2001, becoming a massive hit in Australia, peaking at number seven on the ARIA Charts, and number eleven in the highly influential Triple J Hottest 100, 2001. Sony Music Japan released an exclusive E.P. of rare tracks titled &quot;Special Collection&quot;. Following the release of &quot;Beautiful Garbage&quot;, the band were dropped by their record label, Interscope, with Manson feeling as if the band &quot;was finished&quot;. Manson claimed that the band had been told by Interscope that there &quot;was no room for the record company to promote more than one female rock band&quot; and ultimately they decided to progress with No Doubt fronted by Gwen Stefani rather than Garbage. Manson worried that her career was over following the band being dropped by the label, claiming that &quot;I was 40 at the time, and I was thinking ‘no woman in alt rock has got out of this situation with her career intact&#x27;. I really believed my career was over&quot;. Manson and the band ultimately felt that Interscope had been trying to turn the band into a pop–style oriented band, something which Garbage were ultimately against.

=== &quot;Bleed Like Me&quot;, hiatus and &quot;Absolute Garbage&quot; (2003–2007) ===

Garbage started proper work on their fourth record in March 2003, writing &quot;Right Between the Eyes&quot; in 30 minutes. It was a false start. Recording was halted during the summer when Manson underwent surgery on her right vocal cord and was not given the okay to sing again until August. By October, due to rising tension within the band and a breakdown in communication, Vig relocated to Los Angeles while Manson returned to Scotland. During the Christmas period, Vig decided to give the band another chance, having met excited fans eager to hear how the album was going.

In January 2004 Garbage reconvened in Los Angeles with Dust Brothers&#x27; John King, drummer Matt Chamberlain, bassist Justin Meldal-Johnsen, and on February 6, Dave Grohl performed drums on &quot;Bad Boyfriend&quot;. His performance was regarded by the band as &quot;raising the bar&quot; for the record. Following the John King sessions, the band formally relocated to Los Angeles and wrote &quot;Metal Heart&quot; and &quot;Boys Wanna Fight&quot;, both more energetic than they had been writing and lyrically more &quot;overtly political&quot;; both songs referenced the United States and the United Kingdom-led 2003 invasion of Iraq.

In 2005, lead single &quot;Why Do You Love Me&quot; debuted on the Modern Rock Tracks chart at No. 39. as well as No. 97 and No. 81 on the Billboard Hot 100 and Pop 100 charts respectively, becoming the band&#x27;s most successful single for six years. Their fourth album, &quot;Bleed Like Me&quot;, entered Top 10 in the US.

On August 25, 2005 Garbage cancelled their scheduled October tour dates in France, Belgium and the United Kingdom. They released a statement that the band had &quot;somewhat overextended themselves&quot; and decided to conclude their tour in Australia on October 1. Ahead of the Australian tour, &quot;Sex Is Not The Enemy&quot; was released to Australian radio. The end of the tour marked the end of active promotion for &quot;Bleed Like Me&quot;. The band confirmed that they were going &quot;on indefinite hiatus&quot; to dispel reports of a split. &quot;We were barely even speaking,&quot; Manson later admitted. &quot;We didn&#x27;t want to talk to anyone outside of the band about the problems we were having with our career, so of course it turned into this whole passive-aggressive thing between us. I just wanted to get the fuck out of there and go home.&quot;

Garbage ended their 18-month hiatus on January 31, 2007, at a benefit show in Glendale, California, organised by Vig to help pay musician Wally Ingram&#x27;s medical care following treatment for throat cancer. Prior to this, Garbage had been sharing song ideas via the internet and were keen on getting into the recording studio to complete them. Garbage began work on the new songs in earnest during February and March at Vig&#x27;s home studio, completing four tracks including &quot;Tell Me Where It Hurts&quot;, which was released as the album&#x27;s lead single.

&quot;Absolute Garbage&quot; was released in July, remastered and including a special edition bonus remix package. A DVD format rounded out the package; among the fifteen Garbage music videos included was a documentary film titled &quot;Thanks For Your, Uhhh Support&quot; featuring backstage and behind-the-scenes footage, live performances and interviews. A Garbage track called &quot;Witness to Your Love&quot; was released on a charity, &quot;limited availability&quot;, compilation in the US. The release was available from Urban Outfitters from Wednesday, October 15, 2008, to Thursday, January 31, 2009, and went on radio in the US on October 17.

===&quot;Not Your Kind of People&quot; (2010–2012)===

On February 1, 2010, it was confirmed through Shirley Manson&#x27;s official Facebook profile that she spent a week in the studio with her bandmates. In the post, Manson wrote &quot;Guess who I just spent a week in the studio with? Would you be pleased if I said one of them was called Steve and one of them was called Duke and another was a Grammy-winning producer?&quot; In October 2010, it was officially confirmed that Garbage were recording their fifth studio album. In an interview with Jason Tanamor, Duke stated in regard to the band reuniting after seven years, &quot;It&#x27;s kind of amazing we all happen to be in the right place at the same time. I don&#x27;t know. The stars were aligned or something. It was quite coincidental we were all on the same page and ready to give it another go.&quot;

On September 17, 2011, the band clarified that their forthcoming 11-track LP would be mixed by October 17, while another 12 songs would be finalized by the end of the year and see release as &quot;b-sides, extra tracks and maybe one might even come your way simply as a Christmas present from Garbage as a thank you to you all for sticking around,&quot; though this did not materialize.

The band announced to &quot;Billboard&quot; that their fifth studio album would be released independently of any major label support. On January 6, 2012, the band announced that they had entered Red Razor Studios in Glendale, California to record bonus material for their forthcoming album, later confirming on Twitter that a further five tracks were being worked on, including the new title &quot;What Girls Are Made Of&quot;. &quot;Not Your Kind of People&quot; was released on May 14, 2012, to generally positive reviews. The album reached number 13 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, and number 10 on the UK Albums Chart. The band supported the album with the year-long Not Your Kind of People World Tour. The song &quot;Not Your Kind of People&quot; was used in a trailer for the video game, &quot;Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain&quot;.

=== Record Store Day releases (2013–2015) ===
Garbage and Screaming Females recorded a cover of &quot;Because the Night&quot; for Record Store Day 2013. They released a video directed by Sophie Muller. The band released their first live DVD, &quot;One Mile High... Live&quot;, in May 2013. Shirley Manson confirmed that they would release two new songs for Record Store Day on April 19, 2014. &quot;Girls Talk&quot;, an out-take from the &quot;Absolute Garbage&quot; sessions, was re-recorded to include vocals from Brody Dalle, and was backed by an out-take from the &quot;Not Your Kind of People&quot; sessions, &quot;Time Will Destroy Everything&quot;.

In 2014, Manson confirmed that the band is working on a book, and noted that the next record would be her &quot;romance novel&quot;. On January 23, 2015, Garbage confirmed on their Facebook page that they completed two new songs for Record Store Day 2015; &quot;The Chemicals&quot;, which features vocals from Brian Aubert of Silversun Pickups, was released on April 18, 2015. The band played the Pa&#x27;l Norte Rock Festival in Monterrey, Mexico, on April 25, 2015.

On October 2, 2015, the band released the Deluxe Edition of their debut album, in commemoration of the 20th anniversary of the album. The album was remastered from the original tapes, and all b-sides (called G-sides on the album), were included. During the &quot;20 Years Queer&quot; tour, Vig announced that mixing of the new album would be finished by February 1, 2016, and that it would be promoted by a world tour beginning in the summer.

=== &quot;Strange Little Birds&quot; and &quot;Version 2.0: 20th Anniversary&quot; (2016–2021) ===

On February 6, 2016 Garbage stated on their Facebook page that mixing was almost done: &quot;Our new record is an inch away, just an inch away from being done. And I do mean an inch away from being completely done. Recorded. Mixed. And soon to be mastered.&quot; Vig also confirmed the title of a new song, &quot;Even Though Our Love is Doomed&quot;. Three days later, Garbage announced that they had completed the album. &quot;Strange Little Birds&quot;, the band&#x27;s sixth studio album, was released on June 10, 2016.

Writing and recording for &quot;Strange Little Birds&quot; took over two years, starting in early 2013. Garbage recorded over twenty tracks during the sessions. The band recorded the album in Vig&#x27;s basement and at engineer Billy Bush&#x27;s Red Razor Sounds studio in Los Angeles. Vig stated, &quot;we mixed it so it&#x27;s kind of confessional, almost confrontational. On a lot of songs, Shirley&#x27;s voice sounds really loud, in your face, and really dry. There are not a lot of effects. There are some moments on the record that get really huge, but a lot of it is really intimate.&quot; Two of the songs written during the sessions, &quot;The Chemicals&quot; and &quot;On Fire&quot;, were given a vinyl release on Record Store Day the previous year.

In 2017, Garbage recorded and released a standalone digital single titled &quot;No Horses&quot;, which the band hinted could be the direction their new material would sound. Writing for Garbage&#x27;s seventh album began in April 2018, following some preliminary work at Butch Vig&#x27;s home studio, the band set up space in Palm Springs to write demos. The quartet sketched out the skeleton of the album over two weeks, jamming, experimenting and feeling the songs out. Work was paused in the latter half of 2018, as Garbage marked the twentieth anniversary of their second album &quot;Version 2.0&quot; (1998) with the two-month 20 Years Paranoid tour, before reconvening in Los Angeles to finish the project.

The band announced that in May 2018 the band would release a 20th anniversary edition of their second album &quot;Version 2.0&quot; in a similar fashion to the 20th anniversary edition of their self-titled debut album. The anniversary edition would also see Garbage commit to touring for this celebration which took place towards the end of 2018. As of March 2018, Garbage had also been working on a new studio album which, according to Shirley Manson, was due for a 2020 release.

===&quot;No Gods No Masters&quot; and &quot;Beautiful Garbage: 20th Anniversary&quot; (2021–2022)===

On March 30, 2021, Garbage released the song &quot;The Men Who Rule the World&quot;, the lead single from their seventh studio album, &quot;No Gods No Masters&quot;, which was released on June 11, 2021. On April 28, the album&#x27;s title track &quot;No Gods No Masters&quot; was released as the second single, followed by &quot;Wolves&quot; on May 19. &quot;No Gods No Masters&quot; was supported in summer 2021 with an arena concert tour with Garbage as guests of Alanis Morissette. The tour went on to become the most successful female-fronted tour of the year, selling more than 500,000 tickets.

In August 2021, Garbage announced that they would release a 20th anniversary edition of their third studio album, &quot;Beautiful Garbage&quot;, which was originally released in 2001. This follows previous reissued anniversary editions of &quot;Garbage&quot; (1995, reissued in 2015) and &quot;Version 2.0&quot; (1998, reissued in 2018). The reissue features a previously unheard version of the album&#x27;s lead single &quot;Androgyny&quot;, with Manson explaining, &quot;We wanted to celebrate the release of our third album in the same manner as we have celebrated the 20th anniversaries of our previous two records, as we cherish this third child of ours just as much as its predecessors&quot;. The reissued version of &quot;Beautiful Garbage&quot; was released on November 5, 2021.

On October 20, a 10-date UK Tour by Blondie featuring Garbage as special guest was announced for November. However, the tour was later postponed to spring 2022, featuring Johnny Marr instead of Garbage as special guest due to scheduling conflicts. In May 2022, Garbage joined Tears for Fears for the 21-date United States wing of The Tipping Point World Tour as special guest. In summer, Garbage toured the United States and Canada with Alanis Morissette for 10 dates of her &quot;Jagged Little Pill&quot; 25th anniversary tour. On April 14, Garbage announced a 7-date United States headline tour at the end of June supported by Glass Battles. However, the last four dates of the tour were cancelled due to illness in the band.

=== &quot;Anthology&quot; (2022–2024) ===
On September 7, 2022, Garbage announced their third greatest hits album &quot;Anthology&quot;, released on October 28. The compilation features 35 newly remastered tracks celebrating three decades of career, including &quot;Witness To Your Love&quot;, which was released as single.

On October 4, Garbage performed &quot;The World Is Not Enough&quot; at the Royal Albert Hall in London with the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra as part of &quot;The&quot; &quot;Sound of 007: Live at the Royal Albert Hall&quot; curated by David Arnold, marking the 60th anniversary of the Bond franchise. The event was made available for streaming on Prime Video on October 5. A documentary by Matt Whitecross titled &quot;The Sound of 007&quot; featuring an interview with Garbage premiered on Prime Video the same day. Prior to the event, the 2022 remaster of &quot;The World Is Not Enough&quot; was released as digital single. On October 22, Garbage performed at Audacy&#x27;s 9th annual &quot;We Can Survive&quot; at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles.

Early in 2022, Garbage started writing for their upcoming eighth studio album. In October, after fulfilling their touring obligations, Garbage resumed writing for the album. In February 2023, Garbage announced their Summer 2023 co-headline North American tour with Noel Gallagher&#x27;s High Flying Birds featuring Metric as special guests. On April 22, 2023 Garbage released the four-song 12&quot; &quot;Witness to Your Love&quot; EP as a vinyl exclusive Record Store Day release featuring &quot;Witness to Your Love&quot; backed by an unreleased cover of &quot;Cities in Dust&quot;, originally by Siouxsie and the Banshees, and two outtakes from the &quot;No Gods No Masters&quot; sessions, &quot;Blue Betty&quot; and &quot;Adam and Eve&quot;.

In May 2023, longtime touring and recording bass guitarist Eric Avery left the band to rejoin Jane&#x27;s Addiction. Regarding his departure, Manson posted: &quot;We are all genuinely happy for Eric as this course of action, this band of his, is where his heart lies and always has. Unfortunately for us it is an enormous, immeasurable loss. He has always been such a joy to work with. We will all miss him more than I have the words to express.&quot; Avery was replaced by a returning Daniel Shulman, marking his first time playing with the band since 2005.

===Touring and &quot;Let All That We Imagine Be the Light&quot; (2024–present)===
On 4 March 2024, Garbage announced a European tour, marking their first tour in five years in continental Europe. The headlining tour includes dates in Germany, Italy, France, Denmark, as well as a date at the Wembley Arena in England. Two dates were confirmed in Manson&#x27;s native Scotland – a main stage slot at the TRNSMT festival in Glasgow, and a date at the Usher Hall in Edinburgh. The band was joined by Ginger Pooley on bass and backing vocals, marking the first time that another female musician would perform with the band on tour and also that someone would sing backing vocals. Following the commencement of the tour, the band announced three festival dates in North America at the Festival Hera HSBC in Mexico City on August 24, HFStival in Washington D.C. on September 21, and Ohana Festival in Dana Point, California on September 27, before mixing and mastering their eighth studio album.

In April 2024, the band re-released their 2005 album &quot;Bleed Like Me&quot;. For the release, the album was remastered and packaged in formats including a 2 CD release with a selection of B-sides, remixes and demos from the recording sessions for &quot;Bleed Like Me&quot; featured on the second disc, a 2 LP red vinyl edition which includes ten B-sides and bonus tracks on LP number two, and a silver single vinyl LP with just the remastered album available. This marks the first time that &quot;Bleed Like Me&quot; was issued on vinyl, as it was not pressed on vinyl for its original release in 2005. On April 22, the four-track &quot;Lie to Me&quot; EP was released. It contains two outtakes from the &quot;Bleed Like Me&quot; sessions, a cover of &quot;Song to the Siren&quot; and a remix of &quot;Bad Boyfriend&quot;. 

In June, the band announced they had finished recording their upcoming eighth studio album slated for a release in 2025. Speaking ahead of the TRNSMT Festival at Glasgow Green in Scotland, on 12 July 2024 during an interview with BBC Scotland, Manson claimed that she &quot;didn&#x27;t know how long Garbage has left&quot;, claiming &quot;the older I get the more I enjoy life&quot;. She also referred to the future of Garbage, stating &quot;I am the youngest member of the band and I’m turning 58 in a couple of weeks. So we are just enjoying every moment right now&quot;.

On November 29, the band released their first cover collection, &quot;Copy/Paste&quot;, as a Record Store Day Black Friday exclusive. The compilation album includes ten classic songs covered by Garbage over the course of almost twenty years.

On February 27, 2025, the band announced their eighth studio album, &quot;Let All That We Imagine Be the Light&quot;, which will be released on May 30.

==Musical style==
Garbage&#x27;s musical style has been described as alternative rock, electronic rock, electropop, trip hop, post-grunge, industrial rock, dance-rock, and hard rock. Garbage&#x27;s intention is to make pop-like songs which mix a variety of genres, with Steve Marker saying that the band wanted to &quot;take pop music and make it as horrible sounding as we can.&quot; These genres include trip hop, grunge, 1980s rock music, techno, power pop, and shoegaze. Shirley Manson has stated that the band itself &quot;used to describe [their sound] as sci-fi pop, because we felt it was taking a futuristic approach.&quot; Vig has said the crossover-heavy sound was inspired by the band&#x27;s background with remixes, where songs would be rearranged to every musical style to which they held interest, and also that he &quot;grew up listening to everything from pop radio and opera to country music and polka, so I really thought that Garbage would be an interesting and eclectic thing to do.&quot; 
Lindsay Zoladz of Pitchfork notes Garbage prevailed in the glory days of alternative-rock &quot;probably because their sound was a hectic amalgamation of almost everything that mingled on the format&#x27;s airwaves: electronica, punk, industrial rock, grunge, and the occasional trip-hop&quot;. Likewise, &quot;Vice&quot; wrote that from their singular concoctions of styles like trip hop, grunge, rock, techno, and shoegaze, Garbage &quot;has forged a kind of queasy originality&quot; in the search of &quot;a kind of perverse beauty&quot;.

Garbage has been inspired by The Velvet Underground, Iggy &amp; The Stooges, T. Rex, Roxy Music, The Pretenders, Siouxsie and the Banshees, Blondie, Cocteau Twins, Patti Smith, The Smashing Pumpkins and David Bowie.

==Members==

* Shirley Manson – vocals, guitar, keyboards 
* Duke Erikson – guitar, bass, keyboards, backing vocals
* Steve Marker – guitar, bass, keyboards, backing vocals
* Butch Vig – drums, percussion, keyboards, backing vocals

=== Touring musicians ===
* Nicole Fiorentino – bass (2025–present) 

=== Former touring musicians ===
* Daniel Shulman – bass (1995–2005, 2022–2024)
* Matt Chamberlain – drums (2002; substitute for Butch Vig)
* Matthew Walker – drums (2002, 2017, 2019; substitute for Butch Vig)
* Eric Avery – bass, guitar, keyboards (2005–2023)
* Ginger Pooley – bass, backing vocals (2024)

==Awards and nominations==
Garbage have received 57 nominations, winning seventeen awards. Major awards which Garbage have been nominated for include the Grammy Awards and the BRIT Awards.

==Concert tours==
Headlining tours
* Garbage tour (1995–1996)
* Version 2.0 tour (1998–1999)
* Beautiful Garbage tour (2001–2002)
* Bleed Like Me tour (2005)
* Not Your Kind of People tour (2012–2013)
* 20 Years Queer tour (2015)
* Strange Little Birds tour (2016)
* Rage and Rapture tour (with Blondie) (2017)
* 20 Years Paranoid (2018)
* Summer Tour (2019)
* Garbage &amp; Noel Gallagher&#x27;s High Flying Birds: Live in Concert (2023)
* Garbage 2024 (2024)

Supporting tours

* 2020 World Tour: Celebrating 25 Years of Jagged Little Pill - tour supporting Alanis Morissette (postponed to 2021)
* 2022 The Tipping Point World tour supporting Tears for Fears
* 2022 North American Tour: Celebrating 25 Years of Jagged Little Pill - tour supporting Alanis Morissette

==Discography==

Studio albums
* &quot;Garbage&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Version 2.0&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Beautiful Garbage&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Bleed Like Me&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Not Your Kind of People&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Strange Little Birds&quot; (2016)
* &quot;No Gods No Masters&quot; (2021)
* &quot;Let All That We Imagine Be the Light&quot; (2025)

==References==
===Sources===
* 

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q485673" start="0" end="7" title="Garbage (band)" label="Garbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="35" end="39" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="63" end="81" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q234104" start="137" end="151" title="Shirley Manson" label="Shirley Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379091" start="184" end="196" title="Duke Erikson" label="Duke Erikson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418017" start="224" end="236" title="Steve Marker" label="Steve Marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q451084" start="262" end="271" title="Butch Vig" label="Butch Vig"/>
<link wikidata="Q239773" start="477" end="498" title="Garbage (album)" label="eponymous debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="589" end="604" title="music recording sales certification" label="double platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="733" end="740" title="single (music)" label="singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159914" start="776" end="787" title="Stupid Girl (Garbage song)" label="Stupid Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686992" start="804" end="828" title="Only Happy When It Rains" label="Only Happy When It Rains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415934" start="852" end="863" title="Version 2.0" label="Version 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="952" end="967" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="986" end="998" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q623156" start="1065" end="1079" title="The World Is Not Enough (song)" label="the theme song"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="1092" end="1102" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q212145" start="1114" end="1137" title="The World Is Not Enough" label="The World Is Not Enough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817891" start="1186" end="1203" title="Beautiful Garbage" label="Beautiful Garbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q432062" start="1457" end="1470" title="Bleed Like Me" label="Bleed Like Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q723849" start="1870" end="1889" title="greatest hits album" label="greatest hits album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933657" start="1896" end="1912" title="Absolute Garbage" label="Absolute Garbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q606109" start="1988" end="2011" title="Not Your Kind of People" label="Not Your Kind of People"/>
<link wikidata="Q23028060" start="2093" end="2113" title="Strange Little Birds" label="Strange Little Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q106384687" start="2173" end="2191" title="No Gods No Masters (Garbage album)" label="No Gods No Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q451084" start="2298" end="2307" title="Butch Vig" label="Butch Vig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579163" start="2354" end="2361" title="Spooner (band)" label="Spooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451493" start="2366" end="2375" title="Fire Town" label="Fire Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="2400" end="2414" title="sound engineer" label="sound engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962978" start="2449" end="2462" title="Smart Studios" label="Smart Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q778673" start="2537" end="2544" title="Sub Pop" label="Sub Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="2840" end="2842" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="2844" end="2856" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q11647" start="2858" end="2873" title="Nine Inch Nails" label="Nine Inch Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q752410" start="2879" end="2892" title="House of Pain" label="House of Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q215026" start="4031" end="4043" title="Debbie Harry" label="Debbie Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q557" start="4045" end="4056" title="Patti Smith" label="Patti Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q239202" start="4058" end="4072" title="Chrissie Hynde" label="Chrissie Hynde"/>
<link wikidata="Q243041" start="4077" end="4091" title="Siouxsie Sioux" label="Siouxsie Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206488" start="4362" end="4368" title="Screaming (music)" label="scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548110" start="4402" end="4413" title="120 Minutes" label="120 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q533723" start="4452" end="4461" title="Angelfish (band)" label="Angelfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674287" start="4710" end="4717" title="Credit (creative arts)" label="credits"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="4727" end="4736" title="Nevermind" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="4748" end="4755" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="4927" end="4938" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616580" start="4946" end="4953" title="Death of Kurt Cobain" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q165714" start="5044" end="5048" title="Live (band)" label="Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824526" start="5088" end="5101" title="Metro Chicago" label="Metro Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="5550" end="5564" title="session player" label="session player"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159914" start="5804" end="5815" title="Stupid Girl (Garbage song)" label="Stupid Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927555" start="5829" end="5834" title="Queer (song)" label="Queer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016518" start="5851" end="5854" title="Vow (song)" label="Vow"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="6299" end="6302" title="pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="6329" end="6339" title="Demo (music)" label="demo tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488358" start="6432" end="6443" title="A&amp;amp;E Records" label="Mushroom UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940828" start="6509" end="6515" title="Volume magazine" label="Volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q408978" start="6745" end="6758" title="radio airplay" label="radio airplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072562" start="6762" end="6765" title="XFM" label="XFM"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="6775" end="6782" title="BBC Radio 1" label="Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142472" start="6787" end="6799" title="Steve Lamacq" label="Steve Lamacq"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="6801" end="6810" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q939019" start="6816" end="6830" title="Johnnie Walker (DJ)" label="Johnnie Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15737157" start="6832" end="6845" title="Word-of-mouth" label="Word-of-mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q744190" start="6930" end="6940" title="Jerry Moss" label="Jerry Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733859" start="6954" end="6965" title="Almo Sounds" label="Almo Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="7384" end="7396" title="7-inch vinyl" label="7-inch vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="7616" end="7638" title="Modern Rock Tracks" label="Hot Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q570827" start="7740" end="7753" title="Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles" label="bubbled under"/>
<link wikidata="Q239773" start="7948" end="7955" title="Garbage (album)" label="Garbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="7977" end="8002" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171048" start="8088" end="8096" title="Subhuman (Garbage song)" label="Subhuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686992" start="8113" end="8137" title="Only Happy When It Rains" label="Only Happy When It Rains"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="8436" end="8447" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521995" start="8696" end="8708" title="Garbage tour" label="Garbage tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="8909" end="8912" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003514" start="8987" end="8996" title="Buzz Bin" label="Buzz clip"/>
<link wikidata="Q408978" start="9179" end="9186" title="Airplay (radio)" label="airplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="9267" end="9283" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857929" start="9349" end="9353" title="Milk (Garbage song)" label="Milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q313627" start="9365" end="9371" title="Tricky (musician)" label="Tricky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="9377" end="9384" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q746369" start="9385" end="9401" title="recording studio" label="recording studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="9420" end="9437" title="Smashing Pumpkins" label="Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="9468" end="9476" title="Drug overdose" label="overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703258" start="9501" end="9517" title="Jonathan Melvoin" label="Jonathan Melvoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q427487" start="9580" end="9592" title="Contemporary hit radio" label="Top 40 radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253645" start="9602" end="9612" title="Todd Terry" label="Todd Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946553" start="9646" end="9659" title="Garbage Video" label="Garbage Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="9701" end="9719" title="music video" label="promotional videos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453643" start="9782" end="9814" title="Grammy Award for Best New Artist" label="Grammy Award for Best New Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q282636" start="9875" end="9889" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Song" label="Best Rock Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542205" start="9894" end="9933" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal" label="Best Rock Performance By A Duo Or Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q207599" start="10124" end="10147" title="MTV Europe Music Awards" label="MTV Europe Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644342" start="10280" end="10290" title="Supervixen" label="Supervixen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488358" start="10325" end="10341" title="Mushroom Records UK" label="Mushroom Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879355" start="10368" end="10376" title="Number One Crush" label="#1 Crush"/>
<link wikidata="Q463313" start="10438" end="10452" title="Romeo + Juliet" label="Romeo + Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="10477" end="10495" title="Alternative Songs" label="Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008581" start="10602" end="10617" title="Hex (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Hex&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q166573" start="10694" end="10715" title="1997 MTV Movie Awards" label="1997 MTV Movie Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q968711" start="10809" end="10822" title="Friday Harbor, Washington" label="Friday Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="10824" end="10834" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415934" start="11192" end="11203" title="Version 2.0" label="Version 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="11509" end="11534" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174504" start="11643" end="11668" title="I Think I&amp;#x27;m Paranoid" label="I Think I&amp;#x27;m Paranoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="11792" end="11814" title="MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966143" start="11837" end="11844" title="Special (Garbage song)" label="Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q207599" start="11900" end="11923" title="MTV Europe Music Awards" label="MTV Europe Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q904528" start="12109" end="12126" title="Grammy Award for Album of the Year" label="Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q691892" start="12131" end="12146" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Album" label="Best Rock Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q427487" start="12202" end="12214" title="Top 40 radio" label="Top 40 radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019345" start="12298" end="12312" title="When I Grow Up (Garbage song)" label="When I Grow Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641158" start="12329" end="12359" title="The Trick Is to Keep Breathing" label="The Trick Is to Keep Breathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q509025" start="12503" end="12512" title="Big Daddy (1999 film)" label="Big Daddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q826858" start="12591" end="12644" title="International Federation of the Phonographic Industry" label="International Federation of the Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q542662" start="12710" end="12726" title="You Look So Fine" label="You Look So Fine"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="12893" end="12912" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q212145" start="13002" end="13025" title="The World Is Not Enough" label="The World Is Not Enough"/>
<link wikidata="Q346285" start="13057" end="13069" title="David Arnold" label="David Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="13084" end="13093" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q130742" start="13140" end="13157" title="Alanis Morissette" label="Alanis Morissette"/>
<link wikidata="Q623156" start="13297" end="13320" title="The World Is Not Enough (song)" label="The World Is Not Enough"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="13808" end="13815" title="B-sides" label="B-sides"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="13860" end="13863" title="Universal Music Group" label="UMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817891" start="13941" end="13958" title="Beautiful Garbage" label="Beautiful Garbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q231694" start="14260" end="14270" title="Interscope" label="Interscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="14424" end="14444" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="14448" end="14461" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="14466" end="14481" title="Washington D.C." label="Washington D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="14569" end="14589" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q133661" start="14701" end="14712" title="lead single" label="lead single"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296887" start="14719" end="14728" title="Androgyny (song)" label="Androgyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="14865" end="14874" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q130136" start="14881" end="14902" title="Top Electronic Albums" label="Top Electronic Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="15007" end="15020" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="15188" end="15207" title="Top Internet Albums" label="Top Internet Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="15379" end="15381" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q955379" start="15408" end="15422" title="Elevation Tour" label="Elevation Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q157661" start="15460" end="15471" title="Hepatitis A" label="Hepatitis A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388748" start="15492" end="15508" title="Matt Chamberlain" label="Matt Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467719" start="15547" end="15567" title="Breaking Up the Girl" label="Breaking Up the Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430706" start="15734" end="15741" title="critics" label="critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288492" start="15788" end="15799" title="Cherry Lips" label="Cherry Lips"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843426" start="15964" end="15990" title="Triple J Hottest 100, 2001" label="Triple J Hottest 100, 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q732503" start="15992" end="16008" title="Sony Music Japan" label="Sony Music Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q485673" start="16064" end="16082" title="Special Collection (Garbage E.P.)" label="Special Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q43259" start="16466" end="16474" title="No Doubt (band)" label="No Doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q483379" start="16486" end="16498" title="Gwen Stefani" label="Gwen Stefani"/>
<link wikidata="Q215558" start="17277" end="17287" title="vocal cord" label="vocal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="17444" end="17455" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="17481" end="17489" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="17502" end="17511" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q765119" start="17684" end="17703" title="Dust Brothers" label="Dust Brothers&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243132" start="17704" end="17713" title="John King (producer)" label="John King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586622" start="17749" end="17770" title="Justin Meldal-Johnsen" label="Justin Meldal-Johnsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="17791" end="17801" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="18001" end="18012" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="18245" end="18266" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q541915" start="18296" end="18314" title="Why Do You Love Me" label="Why Do You Love Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750857" start="18430" end="18437" title="Pop 100" label="Pop 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q432062" start="18548" end="18561" title="Bleed Like Me" label="Bleed Like Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153809" start="19367" end="19385" title="Passive-aggressive behavior" label="passive-aggressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q485716" start="19545" end="19565" title="Glendale, California" label="Glendale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674513" start="19605" end="19617" title="Wally Ingram" label="Wally Ingram"/>
<link wikidata="Q372701" start="19662" end="19675" title="Esophageal cancer" label="throat cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157182" start="19953" end="19975" title="Tell Me Where It Hurts (Garbage song)" label="Tell Me Where It Hurts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933657" start="20042" end="20058" title="Absolute Garbage" label="Absolute Garbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q127691190" start="20423" end="20443" title="Witness to Your Love" label="Witness to Your Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552193" start="20565" end="20581" title="Urban Outfitters" label="Urban Outfitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="20823" end="20831" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q841983" start="21631" end="21633" title="Long player" label="LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="21973" end="21982" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q485716" start="22161" end="22181" title="Glendale, California" label="Glendale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q606109" start="22379" end="22402" title="Not Your Kind of People" label="Not Your Kind of People"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="22505" end="22530" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="22553" end="22568" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062250" start="22618" end="22652" title="Not Your Kind of People World Tour" label="Not Your Kind of People World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22747" end="22783" title="Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain" label="Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049186" start="22850" end="22867" title="Screaming Females" label="Screaming Females"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333404" start="22894" end="22911" title="Because the Night" label="Because the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222130" start="22922" end="22938" title="Record Store Day" label="Record Store Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q242859" start="22979" end="22992" title="Sophie Muller" label="Sophie Muller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092898" start="23040" end="23061" title="One Mile High... Live" label="One Mile High... Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222130" start="23149" end="23165" title="Record Store Day" label="Record Store Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839147" start="23191" end="23201" title="Girls Talk (Garbage song)" label="Girls Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q237922" start="23308" end="23319" title="Brody Dalle" label="Brody Dalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19627581" start="23711" end="23724" title="The Chemicals" label="The Chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q312275" start="23775" end="23792" title="Silversun Pickups" label="Silversun Pickups"/>
<link wikidata="Q81033" start="23879" end="23888" title="Monterrey" label="Monterrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23028060" start="24890" end="24910" title="Strange Little Birds" label="Strange Little Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912302" start="25214" end="25224" title="Billy Bush (producer)" label="Billy Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="25259" end="25270" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q19627581" start="25636" end="25649" title="The Chemicals" label="The Chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222130" start="25711" end="25727" title="Record Store Day" label="Record Store Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q33101564" start="25828" end="25837" title="No Horses" label="No Horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q451084" start="26019" end="26028" title="Butch Vig" label="Butch Vig"/>
<link wikidata="Q488004" start="26074" end="26086" title="Palm Springs, California" label="Palm Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415934" start="26336" end="26347" title="Version 2.0" label="Version 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q48818060" start="26380" end="26397" title="20 Years Paranoid" label="20 Years Paranoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415934" start="26576" end="26587" title="Version 2.0" label="Version 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q116158576" start="27097" end="27123" title="The Men Who Rule the World" label="The Men Who Rule the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q106384687" start="27186" end="27204" title="No Gods No Masters (Garbage album)" label="No Gods No Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q115519270" start="27297" end="27315" title="No Gods No Masters (song)" label="No Gods No Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q114658730" start="27375" end="27381" title="Wolves (Garbage song)" label="Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573906" start="27473" end="27485" title="Concert tours" label="concert tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q130742" start="27512" end="27529" title="Alanis Morissette" label="Alanis Morissette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817891" start="27767" end="27784" title="Beautiful Garbage" label="Beautiful Garbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296887" start="28073" end="28082" title="Androgyny (song)" label="Androgyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q202741" start="28471" end="28478" title="Blondie (band)" label="Blondie"/>
<link wikidata="Q317742" start="28606" end="28617" title="Johnny Marr" label="Johnny Marr"/>
<link wikidata="Q269091" start="28711" end="28726" title="Tears for Fears" label="Tears for Fears"/>
<link wikidata="Q113298154" start="28765" end="28793" title="The Tipping Point World Tour" label="The Tipping Point World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q750084" start="28916" end="28934" title="Jagged Little Pill" label="Jagged Little Pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q114232340" start="29284" end="29293" title="Anthology (Garbage album)" label="Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q127691190" start="29430" end="29450" title="Witness to Your Love" label="Witness To Your Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="29564" end="29581" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q856125" start="29601" end="29629" title="Royal Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Royal Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="29836" end="29847" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298143" start="29879" end="29894" title="Mat Whitecross" label="Matt Whitecross"/>
<link wikidata="Q55397258" start="30151" end="30157" title="Audacy" label="Audacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q976218" start="30210" end="30224" title="Hollywood Bowl" label="Hollywood Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30458" end="30501" title="Garbage &amp;amp; Noel Gallagher&amp;#x27;s High Flying Birds: Live in Concert" label="Summer 2023 co-headline North American tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q194227" start="30507" end="30546" title="Noel Gallagher&amp;#x27;s High Flying Birds" label="Noel Gallagher&amp;#x27;s High Flying Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q650486" start="30557" end="30563" title="Metric (band)" label="Metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q127691190" start="30641" end="30673" title="Witness to Your Love (EP)" label="&amp;quot;Witness to Your Love&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222130" start="30698" end="30714" title="Record Store Day" label="Record Store Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678280" start="30805" end="30819" title="Cities in Dust" label="Cities in Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="30841" end="30866" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316428" start="31048" end="31058" title="Eric Avery" label="Eric Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q622947" start="31083" end="31104" title="Jane&amp;#x27;s Addiction" label="Jane&amp;#x27;s Addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q125243581" start="31656" end="31681" title="Garbage 2024" label="announced a European tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="31783" end="31790" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="31792" end="31797" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="31799" end="31805" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="31807" end="31814" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q815571" start="31841" end="31854" title="Wembley Arena" label="Wembley Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="31858" end="31865" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="31916" end="31924" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q50875152" start="31952" end="31958" title="TRNSMT" label="TRNSMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="31971" end="31978" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636910" start="31998" end="32008" title="Usher Hall" label="Usher Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="32012" end="32021" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317703" start="32046" end="32059" title="Ginger Pooley" label="Ginger Pooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629525" start="32377" end="32385" title="HFStival" label="HFStival"/>
<link wikidata="Q123310266" start="32426" end="32440" title="Ohana Festival" label="Ohana Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q322503" start="32491" end="32497" title="Audio mixing" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="32502" end="32511" title="Mastering (audio)" label="mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q126112920" start="33180" end="33189" title="Lie to Me (EP)" label="Lie to Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614550" start="33300" end="33317" title="Song to the Siren" label="Song to the Siren"/>
<link wikidata="Q50875152" start="33511" end="33526" title="TRNSMT" label="TRNSMT Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566834" start="33530" end="33543" title="Glasgow Green" label="Glasgow Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q681822" start="33598" end="33610" title="BBC Scotland" label="BBC Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q131452607" start="34013" end="34023" title="Copy/Paste (album)" label="Copy/Paste"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222130" start="34036" end="34052" title="Record Store Day" label="Record Store Day"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34260" end="34296" title="Let All That We Imagine Be the Light" label="Let All That We Imagine Be the Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="34408" end="34424" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q325504" start="34426" end="34441" title="electronic rock" label="electronic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q188450" start="34443" end="34453" title="electropop" label="electropop"/>
<link wikidata="Q205560" start="34455" end="34463" title="trip hop" label="trip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q379671" start="34465" end="34476" title="post-grunge" label="post-grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q968730" start="34478" end="34493" title="industrial rock" label="industrial rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281409" start="34495" end="34505" title="dance-rock" label="dance-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="34511" end="34520" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="34558" end="34561" title="pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q205560" start="34745" end="34753" title="trip hop" label="trip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="34755" end="34761" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="34781" end="34787" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q837837" start="34789" end="34798" title="power pop" label="power pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q272167" start="34804" end="34812" title="shoegaze" label="shoegaze"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34989" end="34998" title="Crossover (music)#Crossover as a mix of genres" label="crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="35368" end="35377" title="Pitchfork Media" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q249838" start="35661" end="35665" title="Vice (magazine)" label="Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="35922" end="35944" title="The Velvet Underground" label="The Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q208767" start="35946" end="35968" title="Iggy &amp;amp; The Stooges" label="Iggy &amp;amp; The Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q211770" start="35970" end="35976" title="T. Rex (band)" label="T. Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q334648" start="35978" end="35988" title="Roxy Music" label="Roxy Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q667389" start="35990" end="36004" title="The Pretenders" label="The Pretenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="36006" end="36031" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q202741" start="36033" end="36040" title="Blondie (band)" label="Blondie"/>
<link wikidata="Q588820" start="36042" end="36055" title="Cocteau Twins" label="Cocteau Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q557" start="36057" end="36068" title="Patti Smith" label="Patti Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="36070" end="36091" title="The Smashing Pumpkins" label="The Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="36096" end="36107" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q234104" start="36125" end="36139" title="Shirley Manson" label="Shirley Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379091" start="36171" end="36183" title="Duke Erikson" label="Duke Erikson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418017" start="36228" end="36240" title="Steve Marker" label="Steve Marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q451084" start="36285" end="36294" title="Butch Vig" label="Butch Vig"/>
<link wikidata="Q980374" start="36371" end="36388" title="Nicole Fiorentino" label="Nicole Fiorentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388748" start="36495" end="36511" title="Matt Chamberlain" label="Matt Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994327" start="36555" end="36569" title="Matt Walker (drummer)" label="Matthew Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316428" start="36625" end="36635" title="Eric Avery" label="Eric Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317703" start="36676" end="36689" title="Ginger Pooley" label="Ginger Pooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="36875" end="36888" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="36897" end="36908" title="BRIT Awards" label="BRIT Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521995" start="36948" end="36960" title="Garbage tour" label="Garbage tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922684" start="36975" end="36991" title="Version 2.0 tour" label="Version 2.0 tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877715" start="37006" end="37028" title="Beautiful Garbage tour" label="Beautiful Garbage tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925886" start="37043" end="37061" title="Bleed Like Me tour" label="Bleed Like Me tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062250" start="37071" end="37099" title="Not Your Kind of People tour" label="Not Your Kind of People tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q20012158" start="37114" end="37133" title="20 Years Queer tour" label="20 Years Queer tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058702" start="37143" end="37168" title="Strange Little Birds tour" label="Strange Little Birds tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591149" start="37178" end="37199" title="Rage and Rapture tour" label="Rage and Rapture tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q202741" start="37206" end="37213" title="Blondie (band)" label="Blondie"/>
<link wikidata="Q48818060" start="37224" end="37241" title="20 Years Paranoid" label="20 Years Paranoid"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37272" end="37342" title="Garbage &amp;amp; Noel Gallagher&amp;#x27;s High Flying Birds: Live in Concert" label="Garbage &amp;amp; Noel Gallagher&amp;#x27;s High Flying Birds: Live in Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q125243581" start="37352" end="37364" title="Garbage 2024" label="Garbage 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q113298154" start="37516" end="37544" title="The Tipping Point World Tour" label="The Tipping Point World tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q239773" start="37719" end="37726" title="Garbage (album)" label="Garbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415934" start="37748" end="37759" title="Version 2.0" label="Version 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817891" start="37781" end="37798" title="Beautiful Garbage" label="Beautiful Garbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q432062" start="37820" end="37833" title="Bleed Like Me" label="Bleed Like Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q606109" start="37855" end="37878" title="Not Your Kind of People" label="Not Your Kind of People"/>
<link wikidata="Q23028060" start="37900" end="37920" title="Strange Little Birds" label="Strange Little Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q106384687" start="37942" end="37960" title="No Gods No Masters" label="No Gods No Masters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37982" end="38018" title="Let All That We Imagine Be the Light" label="Let All That We Imagine Be the Light"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276932" wikidata="Q4734618" url="?curid=276932" title="Alopex">
<text>Alopex may refer to:

* &quot;Alopex lagopus&quot;, a taxonomic synonym for the Arctic fox, &quot;Vulpes lagopus&quot;
* ALOPEX a correlation-based machine learning algorithm
* Alopex (Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles), a character in the &quot;Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles&quot; franchise
* Alopex () ancient Greek for fox</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82738" start="98" end="112" title="Vulpes lagopus" label="Vulpes lagopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652408" start="121" end="127" title="ALOPEX" label="ALOPEX"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="177" end="214" title="Alopex (Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles)" label="Alopex (Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381762" start="241" end="269" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles" label="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="316" end="319" title="fox" label="fox"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276933" wikidata="Q577363" url="?curid=276933" title="Viduidae">
<text>The indigobirds and whydahs, together with the [[cuckoo-finch]], make up the family Viduidae; they are small passerine birds native to Africa.

These are finch-like species which usually have black or indigo predominating in their plumage. The birds named &quot;whydahs&quot; have long or very long tails in the breeding male.

All are obligate brood parasites, which lay their eggs in the nests of estrildid finch species; most indigobirds use firefinches as hosts, whereas the paradise whydahs choose pytilias. Unlike the cuckoos and honeyguides, the indigobirds and whydahs do not destroy the host&#x27;s eggs. Typically, they lay 2–4 eggs in with those already present. The eggs of both the host and the victim are white, although the indigobird&#x27;s are slightly larger. Many of the indigo-plumaged species named &quot;indigobirds&quot; are very similar in appearance, with the males difficult to separate in the field, and the young and females near impossible. The best guide is often the estrildid finch with which they are associating, since each indigobird parasitises a different host species. For example, the village indigobird is usually found with red-billed firefinches. Indigobirds and whydahs imitate their host&#x27;s song, which the males learn in the nest. Although females do not sing, they also learn to recognise the song, and choose males with the same song, thus perpetuating the link between each species of indigobird and firefinch. The nestling indigobirds mimic the unique gape pattern of the fledglings of the host species.

The matching with the host is the driving force behind speciation in this family, but the close genetic and morphological similarities among species suggest that they are of recent origin.

The family contains two genera:
==References==
==Sources==

==External links==
* Whydahs and indigobirds (Viduidae) information, including 7 species with videos and 9 with photographs at the Internet Bird Collection
*Indigobirds.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q577363" start="4" end="15" title="Viduidae" label="indigobirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q577363" start="20" end="27" title="Viduidae" label="whydahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q577363" start="47" end="63" title="Viduidae" label="[[cuckoo-finch]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q577363" start="84" end="92" title="Viduidae" label="Viduidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25341" start="109" end="118" title="passerine" label="passerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="135" end="141" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q160835" start="154" end="164" title="Finch" label="finch-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q647144" start="345" end="359" title="brood parasite" label="brood parasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q214462" start="399" end="414" title="estrildid finch" label="estrildid finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q454872" start="445" end="454" title="firefinch" label="firefinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093273" start="503" end="510" title="pytilia" label="pytilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26381" start="524" end="530" title="cuckoo" label="cuckoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q214137" start="536" end="546" title="honeyguide" label="honeyguide"/>
<link wikidata="Q941573" start="1124" end="1142" title="village indigobird" label="village indigobird"/>
<link wikidata="Q560326" start="1165" end="1185" title="red-billed firefinch" label="red-billed firefinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="1505" end="1509" title="gape" label="gape"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276936" wikidata="Q353973" url="?curid=276936" title="Pat Smear">
<text>Georg Albert Ruthenberg (born August 5, 1959), better known by his stage name Pat Smear, is an American musician. He was the lead guitarist and co-founder of Los Angeles–based punk band The Germs and a rhythm guitarist for grunge band Nirvana (which he joined as a touring guitarist in 1993). After Nirvana disbanded following the suicide of frontman Kurt Cobain, drummer Dave Grohl went on to form Foo Fighters, with Smear joining on guitar. Smear left the band in 1997 before rejoining as a touring guitarist in 2005 and being promoted back to a full-time member in 2010.

==Early life==
Smear was born and raised in West Los Angeles, California to a German Jewish father and African American and Native American mother. His parents enrolled him in piano lessons at a young age, and a few years later he began teaching himself to play the guitar.

At age 13, he left home to join a commune. Later, he attended Innovative Program School (IPS), an alternative school within University High School in Los Angeles. It was there he met vocalist Darby Crash, alongside whom he would play in the Germs in the late 1970s. Smear and Crash were both expelled from IPS due to concerns they were inciting unruly behavior among the students.

==Career==
===The Germs (1976–1980)===
Smear lists his influences as Joan Jett, Brian James, Brian May, and Steve Jones. He also stated that &quot;all the guitar playing&quot; of John McKay on Siouxsie and the Banshees&#x27;s first album &quot;really inspired me&quot; and that Yes guitarist Steve Howe is &quot;the best guitarist ever&quot;. As a teenager in 1976, Smear and Darby Crash formed the Germs with bassist Lorna Doom and drummer Dottie Danger (the pseudonym of Belinda Carlisle, who would go on to front The Go-Go&#x27;s). Smear was the only band member who had any musical knowledge or proficiency at the time. For most of his time in the Germs, Smear reported that he didn&#x27;t own a guitar but rather &quot;just borrowed from whoever we were playing with&quot;.

Carlisle was soon replaced by Don Bolles and, in 1979, the band released their first album, &quot;(GI)&quot;, produced by Joan Jett. The record is now regarded as a milestone in the history of punk rock, with Smear earning praise for his guitar work: &quot;Smear has an equal claim to being the album&#x27;s star [alongside Darby], though, and for good reason – not only did he co-write everything, his clipped, catchy monster riffing was as pure punk in the late-&#x27;70s sense as anything, wasting no time on anything extraneous.&quot;

The Germs, along with Smear, appeared in the punk documentary &quot;The Decline of Western Civilization&quot; (1981), directed by Penelope Spheeris. Darby Crash died before the film was released, leading to the band breaking up.

===Twisted Roots / The Adolescents / 45 Grave (1981)===
Following the demise of the Germs, Smear played in 1981 with the ex-Screamers keyboardist Paul Roessler and his sister Kira Roessler in Twisted Roots. Although short-lived, the band was the toast of the Hollywood punk scene. He also had a brief stint as a member of punk band the Adolescents in 1981.

Smear was briefly in deathrock band 45 Grave with Don Bolles (the former drummer for the Germs). During this stint, they recorded a 7&quot; titled &quot;Black Cross&quot; and other tracks that would later appear on 45 Grave&#x27;s 1987 compilation album, &quot;Autopsy&quot;.

=== Film career (1981-1986) ===
During this time, he also worked as an actor in bit parts, appearing in the television shows &quot;Quincy, M.E.&quot; and &quot;CHiPs&quot;, and in the films &quot;Blade Runner&quot;, &quot;Breakin&#x27;&quot; and &quot;Howard the Duck&quot;. While working on &quot;Breakin″&quot;, Smear became friends with Courtney Love. He also appeared as an extra in the music video for Prince and the Revolution&#x27;s single &quot;Raspberry Beret,&quot; sitting in front of Lisa Coleman&#x27;s piano. According to Smear, he was hand-picked by Prince himself for the video.

=== Solo career (1987-1992) ===
Smear would go on to make two solo albums of his own, &quot;Ruthensmear,&quot; released in 1987 and recorded with Paul Roessler, and &quot;So You Fell in Love with a Musician...,&quot; released in 1992.

=== Hole (1992) ===
Smear recorded and mixed a cover of &quot;Circle One&quot; in December 1992 with Courtney Love on vocals and bass, Smear and Eric Erlandson on guitar, and Patty Schemel on drums. A 7-inch vinyl was released under the name The Holez in 1993. The cover later appeared on the compilation album &quot;A Small Circle of Friends&quot; in 1996.

===Nirvana (1993–1994)===
In 1993, he received a call from Nirvana&#x27;s frontman Kurt Cobain, asking him to join the band as a second guitarist for an upcoming tour. At first, Smear thought his friend, Carlos &quot;Cake&quot; Nunez, was pranking him; however, Courtney Love had told Smear a few days prior that Cobain was going to call him. Smear accepted immediately and played his first show with Nirvana on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; on September 25, 1993. He toured with Nirvana for about six months. Smear appeared on their live albums &quot;MTV Unplugged in New York&quot;, &quot;From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah&quot;, as well as on material for the compilations &quot;Nirvana&quot; and &quot;With the Lights Out&quot; and the concert DVD &quot;Live and Loud&quot;.

===Foo Fighters (1994–1997)===
Following Cobain&#x27;s death, Nirvana drummer Dave Grohl formed a band to support his self-titled album, which would ultimately become known as Foo Fighters. Smear joined the group from its inception in late October 1994, but because their first album was a collection of demos recorded solely by Grohl, Smear did not appear on a Foo Fighters album until &quot;The Colour and the Shape&quot; (1997).

Shortly after the release of &quot;The Colour and the Shape&quot;, Smear quit the band. As Smear later explained, he quit mainly due to exhaustion from the band&#x27;s relentless touring schedule. Smear&#x27;s departure was also related to inner-band tensions that sprung up around Grohl&#x27;s divorce from his first wife, Jennifer Youngblood, who was a close friend of Smear. Grohl explained that he &quot;begged&quot; Smear to stay and Smear agreed to remain in Foo Fighters temporarily due to scheduled touring obligations, but only until a replacement guitarist could be recruited. Grohl eventually invited Franz Stahl, his former bandmate from Scream, to fill the lead guitarist slot.

Smear announced his departure from Foo Fighters during a live performance at the 1997 MTV Video Music Awards; he played partway through the set, then introduced Stahl who completed the gig.

===Hiatus from Foo Fighters and Germs Reunion (1997–2008)===
Smear kept a fairly low profile during his absence from Foo Fighters. He produced the debut album for the band Harlow and made scattered television appearances. He was employed as a creative consultant in a motion picture about the Germs and Darby Crash, entitled &quot;What We Do Is Secret&quot;, named after one of the band&#x27;s best-known songs. The film was released at the Los Angeles Film Festival on June 23, 2007, had a limited theatrical release in 2008, and is now available on DVD. In the film, Smear is depicted by actor Rick Gonzalez. In 2005, he began performing reunion shows with the Germs, including actor Shane West, who portrays Darby Crash in the film, filling in as lead vocalist.

=== Rejoining Foo Fighters (2005–present) ===

In late 2005, Smear began performing select shows with Foo Fighters again. He continued to play intermittently with the group, often not for the entirety of a concert, as a touring musician for the next five years. Smear appeared with the Foo Fighters as an additional musician on their live acoustic album, &quot;Skin and Bones&quot; (2006), contributing acoustic and electric guitar. He was also featured as a guest musician on the group&#x27;s sixth studio album, &quot;Echoes, Silence, Patience &amp; Grace&quot; (2007), playing rhythm guitar on the track &quot;Let It Die.&quot; Smear described his participation as &quot;the oddest recording experience I had with Foo Fighters&quot;, given he had no input in composition and was &quot;going in and playing on a song that was already written&quot;.

In August 2010, Foo Fighters began recording their seventh studio album, &quot;Wasting Light&quot;, with producer Butch Vig. The recording sessions were documented on the band&#x27;s website and Twitter, with Smear being present in many of the photos that were posted. A December press release confirmed that Smear was part of the project and was considered a core member of the band once again, becoming the band&#x27;s third guitarist alongside Grohl and Chris Shiflett. The album was released on April 12, 2011, marking the group&#x27;s first studio release with Smear as an official member since &quot;The Colour and the Shape&quot; in 1997. &quot;Wasting Light&quot; debuted at number one in twelve countries and was the first Foo Fighters album to top the United States&#x27; &quot;Billboard 200&quot; chart. The album and its songs were nominated for five Grammy Awards, including Album of the Year. The record won the Best Rock Album award, while &quot;White Limo&quot; was chosen as the Best Hard Rock/Metal Performance and &quot;Walk&quot; won both Best Rock Performance and Best Rock Song.

Smear continued his work with the band on their follow-up album &quot;Sonic Highways&quot; (2014). Every song on the album was written and recorded in a different city across the United States and features guest musicians with ties to that city&#x27;s musical history. The process was filmed for a companion television series, &quot;Foo Fighters: Sonic Highways&quot;, which was broadcast on HBO in the months surrounding the album&#x27;s release. Sonic Highways was released on November 10, 2014 and debuted at number two on the &quot;Billboard 200.&quot;

In 2017, the Foo Fighters released their ninth studio album, &quot;Concrete and Gold&quot;. Smear once again performed guitar on all tracks, as well as contributed percussion on the songs Run and Happy Ever After (Zero Hour). The group&#x27;s tenth studio album, &quot;Medicine at Midnight&quot;, was released on February 5, 2021 and went on to win three Grammy Awards, including Best Rock Album. Five days after the release of the album, Foo Fighters were announced as one of the 2021 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame nominees in their first year of eligibility. They were officially selected as part of the 2021 induction class on May 12, 2021.

On October 30, 2021, Smear was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of the Foo Fighters. His former bandmate from The Germs, Belinda Carlisle, was inducted the same year as a member of The Go-Go&#x27;s.

Smear appeared alongside his bandmates in the comedy horror film, &quot;Studio 666&quot;, directed by BJ McDonnell. The film was released on February 25, 2022 and received mixed reviews.

===Nirvana reunions===
During the Foo Fighters&#x27; Friday night performance at Bumbershoot Festival on August 29, 1997, Nirvana bassist Krist Novoselic joined his former bandmates Dave Grohl and Pat Smear on stage for the Foo&#x27;s encore to salute the late Kurt Cobain. Grohl took his position on drums, Novoselic played bass, and Smear accompanied on guitar. A spotlight encompassed the microphone stand to honor Cobain, who died by suicide on April 5, 1994. They performed a cover of Prince&#x27;s &quot;Purple Rain&quot;, after which a roadie for the Foo Fighters joined them on stage and sang a version of Led Zeppelin&#x27;s &quot;Communication Breakdown&quot;.

On December 22, 2010, the remaining members of Nirvana played together during a Foo Fighters show at Paladino&#x27;s in Tarzana, California, which was recorded for a documentary.

On December 12, 2012, Smear, Novoselic and Grohl reunited again for a televised &quot;Live Aid Hurricane Sandy&quot; benefit. This time, they were fronted by Paul McCartney. They performed &quot;Cut Me Some Slack&quot;, the first track from the film soundtrack for &quot;Sound City&quot;.

On December 15, 2012, they performed &quot;Cut Me Some Slack&quot; on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;, once again fronted by McCartney.

On July 19, 2013, Smear, Novoselic and Grohl reunited on-stage, again with Paul McCartney, during both the first and second encores of McCartney&#x27;s &quot;Out There&quot; tour stop at Safeco Field, Seattle. They performed &quot;Cut Me Some Slack&quot;, as well as numerous Beatles&#x27; songs.

On April 11, 2014, Nirvana was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Though Smear was not inducted, he joined Dave Grohl and Krist Novoselic on stage for performances of Nirvana songs along with Joan Jett, Lorde, St. Vincent and Kim Gordon.

The surviving Nirvana members reunited yet again with Joan Jett, Deer Tick&#x27;s John McCauley, as well as The Distillers&#x27; Brody Dalle for a six-song encore set to close out Cal Jam 18 on Saturday, October 6, 2018, at Glen Helen Amphitheater in San Bernardino, California.

==Gear==
Smear is closely associated with Hagström guitars, after buying one toward the end of his time in the Germs and using them as his preferred model for many years. He collaborated on designing a signature guitar with the company. Smear now primarily uses Gibson guitars. He can be seen with classic models such as a White SG Custom or a Les Paul but mostly custom shop variations on the rare Johnny A model. Smear also uses a Gibson Barney Kessel model guitar while playing with the Foo Fighters. 

For the &quot;MTV Unplugged in New York&quot; performance, Smear used a Harmony &quot;Buck Owens &quot; model acoustic guitar, which belonged to Krist Novoselic.

==Personal life==
According to the 2011 documentary &quot;Foo Fighters: Back and Forth&quot;, Smear was married at the time and has at least one child.

==Discography==
With the Germs
*&quot;Forming/Sexboy&quot; (1977)
*&quot;Lexicon Devil&quot; (1978)
*&quot;(GI)&quot; (1979)
*&quot;The Decline of Western Civilization Soundtrack&quot; (1980)
*&quot;What We Do Is Secret&quot; (1981)
*&quot;Live at the Whisky, First Show Ever&quot; (1981)
*&quot;Germicide&quot; (1985)
*&quot;(MIA) The Complete Anthology&quot; (1993)

With The Martyrs
* &quot;Pig Pen Victim / Social Sacrifice&quot; (7&quot;) (1979)

With 45 Grave
*&quot;Black Cross/Wax&quot; (1981)

With Twisted Roots
*&quot;Pretentiawhat&quot; (1981)
* &quot;Twisted Roots&quot; (Comp.) (2004)

With Vagina Dentata
*&quot;Work Till Your Dead&quot; – &quot;Flipside Video Fanzine Number Five&quot; (Comp.) (VHS) (1984)
*&quot;Golden Boys&quot; – &quot;Flipside Vinyl Fanzine Vol. 2&quot; (Comp.) (1985)
*&quot;Creep Street&quot; – &quot;Chaotic Reasoning Vol. 2&quot; (Comp.) (2012)

With Tater Totz
* &quot;Alien Sleestacks From Brazil (Unfinished Music Volume 3)&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Mono! Stereo: Sgt. Shonen&#x27;s Exploding Plastic Eastman Band Request&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Tater Comes Alive! (Tot Live! If You Want It!)&quot; (1992)

With Gary Celebrity
* &quot;Diary Of A Monster&quot; (1992)

Solo
*&quot;Ruthensmear&quot; (1987)
* &quot;Lazybones&quot; – &quot;Every Band Has A Shonen Knife Who Loves Them&quot; (Various Artists Shonen Knife Tribute Comp.) (1989)
*&quot;So You Fell in Love with a Musician...&quot; (1992)

With Deathfolk
*&quot;Deathfolk&quot; (1989)
*&quot;Deathfolk II&quot; (1992)

With Belinda Carlisle
*&quot;Real&quot; (1993)

With Hole

* &quot;Circle 1&quot; (1993)

With Nirvana
*&quot;MTV Unplugged in New York&quot; (1994)
*&quot;From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah&quot; (1996)
*&quot;Nirvana&quot; (2002)
*&quot;With the Lights Out&quot; (2004)
*&quot;In Utero 20th Anniversary Deluxe Edition&quot; (2013)
*&quot;Live and Loud&quot; (2013)

With Skull Control
* &quot;Electric Church&quot; – &quot;Radio Danger&quot; (1994)

With Mike Watt
*&quot;Ball-Hog or Tugboat?&quot; (1995)
*&quot;&quot;Ring Spiel&quot; Tour &#x27;95&quot; (2016)

With Foo Fighters
*&quot;The Colour and the Shape&quot; (1997)
*&quot;Skin and Bones&quot; (2006; additional player)
*&quot;Echoes, Silence, Patience &amp; Grace&quot; (2007; guest player on track 2)
*&quot;Live at Wembley Stadium&quot; (2008; additional)
*&quot;Wasting Light&quot; (2011)
*&quot;Sonic Highways&quot; (2014)
*&quot;Saint Cecilia&quot; (2015)
*&quot;Concrete and Gold&quot; (2017)
*&quot;Medicine at Midnight&quot; (2021)
* &quot;But Here We Are&quot; (2023)

With Paul McCartney
*&quot;Cut Me Some Slack&quot; (2012)

With theHell
*&quot;Southern Medicine&quot; (2013)

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q353973" start="0" end="23" title="Pat Smear" label="Georg Albert Ruthenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q353973" start="78" end="87" title="Pat Smear" label="Pat Smear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="176" end="180" title="punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850698" start="186" end="195" title="The Germs" label="The Germs"/>
<link wikidata="Q670969" start="202" end="208" title="rhythm guitar" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="223" end="229" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="235" end="242" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616580" start="331" end="338" title="Suicide of Kurt Cobain" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="351" end="362" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="372" end="382" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="399" end="411" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543669" start="619" end="635" title="West Los Angeles" label="West Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="653" end="666" title="German Jewish" label="German Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="678" end="694" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="699" end="714" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894738" start="974" end="996" title="University High School (Los Angeles, California)" label="University High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601849" start="1042" end="1053" title="Darby Crash" label="Darby Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q231106" start="1301" end="1310" title="Joan Jett" label="Joan Jett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094920" start="1312" end="1323" title="Brian James (guitarist)" label="Brian James"/>
<link wikidata="Q15873" start="1325" end="1334" title="Brian May" label="Brian May"/>
<link wikidata="Q347986" start="1340" end="1351" title="Steve Jones (musician)" label="Steve Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247959" start="1411" end="1421" title="John McKay (musician)" label="John McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="1425" end="1450" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188720" start="1458" end="1469" title="The Scream (album)" label="first album"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="1510" end="1513" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q312691" start="1524" end="1534" title="Steve Howe" label="Steve Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601849" start="1608" end="1619" title="Darby Crash" label="Darby Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850698" start="1631" end="1636" title="Germs (band)" label="Germs"/>
<link wikidata="Q60679418" start="1650" end="1660" title="Lorna Doom" label="Lorna Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q233959" start="1705" end="1721" title="Belinda Carlisle" label="Belinda Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533339" start="1748" end="1764" title="The Go-Go&amp;#x27;s" label="The Go-Go&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q23014903" start="2042" end="2052" title="Don Bolles (musician)" label="Don Bolles"/>
<link wikidata="Q755912" start="2110" end="2114" title="GI (album)" label="(GI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q231106" start="2134" end="2143" title="Joan Jett" label="Joan Jett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="2205" end="2214" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q460730" start="2439" end="2443" title="riff" label="riff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335241" start="2620" end="2655" title="The Decline of Western Civilization" label="The Decline of Western Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q441578" start="2682" end="2699" title="Penelope Spheeris" label="Penelope Spheeris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762693" start="2906" end="2915" title="The Screamers" label="Screamers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153295" start="2928" end="2941" title="Paul Roessler" label="Paul Roessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q436831" start="2957" end="2970" title="Kira Roessler" label="Kira Roessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q360484" start="3114" end="3129" title="the Adolescents" label="the Adolescents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164252" start="3161" end="3170" title="deathrock" label="deathrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262336" start="3176" end="3184" title="45 Grave" label="45 Grave"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3293" end="3304" title="Black Cross (song)#Black Cross" label="Black Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826935" start="3401" end="3408" title="Autopsy (45 Grave album)" label="Autopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14786283" start="3497" end="3505" title="bit part" label="bit part"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247732" start="3548" end="3560" title="Quincy, M.E." label="Quincy, M.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q1023688" start="3577" end="3582" title="CHiPs" label="CHiPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="3613" end="3625" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q903895" start="3639" end="3652" title="Breakin&amp;#x27;" label="Breakin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146570" start="3669" end="3684" title="Howard the Duck (film)" label="Howard the Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="3757" end="3770" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="3824" end="3830" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q519725" start="3835" end="3849" title="The Revolution (band)" label="the Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138900" start="3870" end="3885" title="Raspberry Beret" label="Raspberry Beret"/>
<link wikidata="Q456306" start="3913" end="3925" title="Lisa Coleman (musician)" label="Lisa Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656543" start="4105" end="4116" title="Ruthensmear" label="Ruthensmear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549624" start="4184" end="4222" title="So You Fell in Love with a Musician..." label="So You Fell in Love with a Musician..."/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="4350" end="4363" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351266" start="4394" end="4408" title="Eric Erlandson" label="Eric Erlandson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331185" start="4424" end="4437" title="Patty Schemel" label="Patty Schemel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3602742" start="4566" end="4591" title="A Small Circle of Friends (album)" label="A Small Circle of Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="4667" end="4674" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="4691" end="4702" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="5026" end="5045" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q212326" start="5162" end="5187" title="MTV Unplugged in New York" label="MTV Unplugged in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q945101" start="5201" end="5236" title="From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah" label="From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128931" start="5294" end="5301" title="Nirvana (Nirvana album)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140480" start="5318" end="5337" title="With the Lights Out" label="With the Lights Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="5470" end="5480" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="5568" end="5580" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q735771" start="5664" end="5675" title="Foo Fighters (album)" label="first album"/>
<link wikidata="Q968646" start="5785" end="5809" title="The Colour and the Shape" label="The Colour and the Shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728860" start="6437" end="6448" title="Franz Stahl" label="Franz Stahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030697" start="6475" end="6481" title="Scream (band)" label="Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q917679" start="6598" end="6625" title="1997 MTV Video Music Awards" label="1997 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991414" start="7039" end="7059" title="What We Do Is Secret (film)" label="What We Do Is Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370072" start="7304" end="7317" title="Rick Gonzalez" label="Rick Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q239415" start="7394" end="7404" title="Shane West" label="Shane West"/>
<link wikidata="Q781063" start="7829" end="7855" title="Skin and Bones (Foo Fighters album)" label="&amp;quot;Skin and Bones&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q752268" start="7994" end="8031" title="Echoes, Silence, Patience &amp;amp; Grace" label="Echoes, Silence, Patience &amp;amp; Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q73643992" start="8087" end="8097" title="Let It Die (Foo Fighters song)" label="Let It Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q521826" start="8405" end="8418" title="Wasting Light" label="Wasting Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q451084" start="8440" end="8449" title="Butch Vig" label="Butch Vig"/>
<link wikidata="Q269624" start="8783" end="8797" title="Chris Shiflett" label="Chris Shiflett"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="9114" end="9127" title="Billboard 200" label="Billboard 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337556" start="9189" end="9202" title="54th Annual Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q904528" start="9214" end="9231" title="Grammy Award for Album of the Year" label="Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q691892" start="9252" end="9267" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Album" label="Best Rock Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q850243" start="9322" end="9354" title="Grammy Award for Best Hard Rock/Metal Performance" label="Best Hard Rock/Metal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542182" start="9385" end="9406" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Performance" label="Best Rock Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q282636" start="9411" end="9425" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Song" label="Best Rock Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151253" start="9498" end="9512" title="Sonic Highways" label="Sonic Highways"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9761" end="9789" title="Foo Fighters: Sonic Highways" label="Foo Fighters: Sonic Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="9820" end="9823" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q30348676" start="10053" end="10070" title="Concrete and Gold" label="Concrete and Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q30610241" start="10174" end="10177" title="Run (Foo Fighters song)" label="Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q101252387" start="10255" end="10275" title="Medicine at Midnight" label="Medicine at Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q108084271" start="10341" end="10354" title="64th Annual Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="10472" end="10498" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q233959" start="10773" end="10789" title="Belinda Carlisle" label="Belinda Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533339" start="10833" end="10849" title="The Go-Go&amp;#x27;s" label="The Go-Go&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q110535538" start="10924" end="10934" title="Studio 666" label="Studio 666"/>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="11178" end="11193" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist Novoselic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="11654" end="11666" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q278356" start="11680" end="11703" title="Communication Breakdown" label="Communication Breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11978" end="12002" title="12-12-12: The Concert for Sandy Relief" label="Live Aid Hurricane Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="12050" end="12064" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q17489370" start="12087" end="12104" title="Cut Me Some Slack" label="Cut Me Some Slack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855067" start="12163" end="12173" title="Sound City (film)" label="Sound City"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="12258" end="12277" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="12666" end="12692" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q231106" start="12820" end="12829" title="Joan Jett" label="Joan Jett"/>
<link wikidata="Q13476175" start="12831" end="12836" title="Lorde" label="Lorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q238795" start="12838" end="12849" title="St. Vincent (musician)" label="St. Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q240570" start="12854" end="12864" title="Kim Gordon" label="Kim Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182489" start="12932" end="12941" title="Deer Tick (band)" label="Deer Tick"/>
<link wikidata="Q237922" start="12996" end="13007" title="Brody Dalle" label="Brody Dalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568749" start="13189" end="13197" title="Hagström" label="Hagström"/>
<link wikidata="Q210278" start="13409" end="13415" title="Gibson (guitar company)" label="Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q115632993" start="13580" end="13600" title="Gibson Barney Kessel" label="Gibson Barney Kessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212326" start="13667" end="13692" title="MTV Unplugged in New York" label="MTV Unplugged in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="13798" end="13813" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist Novoselic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13874" end="13902" title="Foo Fighters: Back and Forth" label="Foo Fighters: Back and Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748283" start="14007" end="14021" title="Forming (song)" label="Forming/Sexboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303187" start="14042" end="14055" title="Lexicon Devil (EP)" label="Lexicon Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q755912" start="14076" end="14080" title="GI (album)" label="(GI)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14101" end="14147" title="The Decline of Western Civilization#Soundtrack" label="The Decline of Western Civilization Soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q767440" start="14168" end="14188" title="What We Do Is Secret (EP)" label="What We Do Is Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q15099513" start="14209" end="14244" title="Live at the Whisky, First Show Ever" label="Live at the Whisky, First Show Ever"/>
<link wikidata="Q15099513" start="14265" end="14274" title="Germicide (album)" label="Germicide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14442" end="14457" title="Black Cross (song)#Black Cross" label="Black Cross/Wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656543" start="15186" end="15197" title="Ruthensmear" label="Ruthensmear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891518" start="15311" end="15323" title="Shonen Knife" label="Shonen Knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549624" start="15353" end="15391" title="So You Fell in Love with a Musician..." label="So You Fell in Love with a Musician..."/>
<link wikidata="Q7300827" start="15514" end="15518" title="Real (Belinda Carlisle album)" label="Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q212326" start="15595" end="15620" title="MTV Unplugged in New York" label="MTV Unplugged in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q945101" start="15641" end="15676" title="From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah" label="From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128931" start="15697" end="15704" title="Nirvana (Nirvana album)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140480" start="15725" end="15744" title="With the Lights Out" label="With the Lights Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q222001" start="15765" end="15773" title="In Utero" label="In Utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256894" start="15826" end="15839" title="Live and Loud (Nirvana video)" label="Live and Loud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851168" start="15960" end="15980" title="Ball-Hog or Tugboat?" label="Ball-Hog or Tugboat?"/>
<link wikidata="Q968646" start="16077" end="16101" title="The Colour and the Shape" label="The Colour and the Shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q781063" start="16122" end="16136" title="Skin and Bones (Foo Fighters album)" label="Skin and Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q752268" start="16176" end="16213" title="Echoes, Silence, Patience &amp;amp; Grace" label="Echoes, Silence, Patience &amp;amp; Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931466" start="16259" end="16282" title="Live at Wembley Stadium (Foo Fighters video)" label="Live at Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q521826" start="16315" end="16328" title="Wasting Light" label="Wasting Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151253" start="16349" end="16363" title="Sonic Highways" label="Sonic Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q21533050" start="16384" end="16397" title="Saint Cecilia (EP)" label="Saint Cecilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30348676" start="16418" end="16435" title="Concrete and Gold" label="Concrete and Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q101252387" start="16456" end="16476" title="Medicine at Midnight" label="Medicine at Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q117802254" start="16498" end="16513" title="But Here We Are" label="But Here We Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q17489370" start="16555" end="16572" title="Cut Me Some Slack" label="Cut Me Some Slack"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276939" wikidata="Q7805435" url="?curid=276939" title="Time spent listening">
<text>Time spent listening (TSL) is one of the measurements surveyed by Nielsen Audio in determining ratings for radio stations in the United States. It is the equivalent of Average
Time Exposed (ATE), Daily or Weekly.

TSL is defined as the amount of time the average listener surveyed spent listening to each radio station at one time, before changing the station or turning it off. Alternately, it is an estimate of how long the average panelist (listener) was exposed to a particular station or stations for a specific time period.

TSL trends are used in conjunction with AQH share (&quot;AQH&quot;) to evaluate listenership to a station. In some radio formats, a station with low AQH (number of listeners) but high TSL is considered more attractive to advertisers than a high AQH / low TSL station, because the station&#x27;s listeners are more likely to stick with the station through commercial breaks and hear the paid advertisements.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q629981" start="66" end="79" title="Nielsen Audio" label="Nielsen Audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="129" end="142" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653513" start="571" end="580" title="AQH share" label="AQH share"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276942" wikidata="Q16774870" url="?curid=276942" title="De Plancy">
<text>de Plancy is a French toponym, relating to Plancy-l&#x27;Abbaye
* Miles de Plancy (d.1174) crusader

There is no aristocratic family &quot;de Plancy,&quot; but &quot;de Plancy&quot; was added to the commoner surname Collin by
* Jacques Collin de Plancy:

Also borne by his son:
* Victor Collin de Plancy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1365008" start="43" end="63" title="Plancy-l&amp;#x27;Abbaye" label="Plancy-l&amp;#x27;Abbaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q650014" start="66" end="81" title="Miles de Plancy" label="Miles de Plancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283832" start="228" end="252" title="Jacques Collin de Plancy" label="Jacques Collin de Plancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925809" start="280" end="303" title="Victor Collin de Plancy" label="Victor Collin de Plancy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276949" wikidata="Q1165905" url="?curid=276949" title="Sexual identity">
<text>Sexual identity refers to one&#x27;s self-perception in terms of romantic or sexual attraction towards others, though not mutually exclusive, and can be different from romantic identity. &quot;Sexual identity&quot; may also refer to sexual orientation identity, which is when people identify or dis-identify with a sexual orientation or choose not to identify with a sexual orientation. Sexual identity and sexual behavior are closely related to sexual orientation, but they are distinguished, with &quot;identity&quot; referring to an individual&#x27;s conception of themselves, &quot;behavior&quot; referring to actual sexual acts performed by the individual, and &quot;sexual orientation&quot; referring to romantic or sexual attractions toward persons of the opposite sex or gender, the same sex or gender, to both sexes or more than one gender, or to no one.

Historical models of sexual identity have tended to view its formation as a process undergone only by sexual minorities, while more contemporary models view the process as far more universal and attempt to present sexual identity within the larger scope of other major identity theories and processes.

==Definitions and identity ==
Sexual identity has been described as a component of an individual&#x27;s identity that reflects their sexual self-concept. The integration of the respective identity components (e.g. moral, religious, ethnic, occupational) into a greater overall identity is essential to the process of developing the multi-dimensional construct of identity.

Sexual identity can change throughout an individual&#x27;s life, and may or may not align with biological sex, sexual behavior or actual sexual orientation.&lt;ref name=&quot;Concordance/discordance in SO&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In a 1990 study by the Social Organization of Sexuality, only 15.7% of women and 34.9% of men who reported some level of same-sex attraction had a homosexual or bisexual identity.

Sexual identity is more closely related to sexual behavior than sexual orientation is. The same survey found that 96% of women and 87% of men with a homosexual or bisexual identity had engaged in sexual activity with someone of the same sex, contrasted with 32% of women and 43% of men who had same-sex attractions. Upon reviewing the results, the organization commented: &quot;Development of self-identification as homosexual or gay is a psychological and socially complex state, something which, in this society, is achieved only over time, often with considerable personal struggle and self-doubt, not to mention social discomfort.&quot;

===Identities===
* Asexuality is the lack of sexual attraction to others, or low or absent interest in or desire for sexual activity. It may also be categorized more widely to include a broad spectrum of asexual sub-identities. Asexuality is distinct from abstention from sexual activity and from celibacy.
* Aromanticism is defined as &quot;having little or no romantic feeling towards others: experiencing little or no romantic desire or attraction.
* Bisexuality describes a pattern of attraction toward both males and females, or to more than one sex or gender. A bisexual identity does not necessarily equate to equal sexual attraction to both sexes; commonly, people who have a distinct but not exclusive sexual preference for one sex over the other also identify themselves as bisexual.
* Heterosexuality describes a pattern of attraction to persons of the opposite sex. The term &quot;straight&quot; is commonly used to refer to heterosexuals. Heterosexuals are by far the largest sexual identity group.
* Homosexuality describes a pattern of attraction to other persons of the same sex. The term &quot;lesbian&quot; is commonly used to refer to homosexual women, and the term &quot;gay&quot; is commonly used to refer to homosexual men, although &quot;gay&quot; is sometimes used to refer to women as well.
* Pansexuality describes attraction towards people regardless of their sex or gender identity. Pansexual people may refer to themselves as gender-blind, asserting that gender and sex are not determining factors in their romantic or sexual attraction to others. Pansexuality is sometimes considered a type of bisexuality.
* has been defined as &quot;encompassing or characterized by many different kinds of sexuality&quot;, and as sexual attraction to many, but not all, genders. Those who use the term may be doing so as a replacement for the term &quot;bisexual&quot;, believing &quot;bisexual&quot; reifies dichotomies. Major monotheistic religions generally prohibit polysexual activity, but some religions incorporate it into their practices. &quot;Polysexuality&quot; is also considered to be another word for bisexuality however unlike bisexuals, polysexuals are not necessarily attracted to people of the same gender. Polysexuality is under what some people would call the &quot;bisexual umbrella&quot;, sometimes seen as the non-monosexual spectrum.
* describes attraction to the intelligence of another person. The prefix &quot;sapio-&quot; comes from the Latin for &quot;I [have] taste&quot; or &quot;I [have] wisdom&quot; and refers to a person&#x27;s preferences, proclivities, and common sense. Sapiosexual-identifying individuals can also be gay, straight, or bisexual. It is not a sexual orientation. It first gained mainstream attention in 2014 when dating website OkCupid added it as one of several new sexual orientation and gender identity options. About 0.5% of OkCupid users identify as sapiosexual, and it was most common among those ages 31–40. Women are more likely to identify as sapiosexual than men. Critics responded that sapiosexuality is &quot;elitist&quot;, &quot;discriminatory&quot;, and &quot;pretentious&quot;. OkCupid removed the identity on February 11, 2019 following what it described as &quot;considerable negative feedback&quot;.
* Relationship anarchy applies anarchist principles to intimate relationships. Its practice has no norms but tends towards criticism of western relationship norms, absence of demands and expectations on partners, and lack of distinction between friendships and romantic relationships.

===Unlabeled sexuality===

Unlabeled sexuality is when an individual chooses not to label their sexual identity. This identification could stem from one&#x27;s uncertainty about their sexuality or their unwillingness to conform to a sexuality because they do not necessarily like labels, or they wish to feel free in their attractions instead of feeling forced into same, other, both, or all attractions because of their sexual identity. Identifying as unlabeled could also be because of one&#x27;s &quot;unwillingness to accept their sexual minority status.&quot; Because being unlabeled is the purposeful decision of no sexual identity, it is different from bisexuality or any other sexual identity. Those who are unlabeled are more likely to view sexuality as less stable and more fluid and tend to focus more on the &quot;person, not the gender.&quot;
It is reported that some women who identify as unlabeled did so because they are unable or uncertain about the types of relationships they will have in the future. As such, this divergence from sexual labels could provide for a person to be able to more fully realize their &quot;true&quot; sexuality because it frees them from the pressure of liking and being attracted to who their sexual identification dictates they should like. Pham, Q.T. (2022) conducted an empirical qualitative research on the sexual identity management strategies of working women who experience sexual fluidity. The results show that female employees first consider or choose (non)identity that matches their new sexual attractions. These (non)identity choices include identity change, fluid identity, non-identity, and resisting identity. Next, strategies are utilized for managing that (non)identity at work—pass, cover, implicitly out, explicitly out, inform/educate. These strategies can be used independently or multiply (mixed/change), in which mixed strategy takes account of communication object and situation, while change strategy relies on time. The term is also similar to unlabeled in the sense that it defines the rejection of preexisting or mainstream labels.

==Development==
===General===
Most of the research on sexual orientation identity development focuses on the development of people who are attracted to the same sex. Many people who feel attracted to members of their own sex come out at some point in their lives. &quot;Coming out&quot; is described in three phases. The first phase is the phase of &quot;knowing oneself,&quot; and the realization emerges that one is sexually and emotionally attracted to members of one&#x27;s own sex. This is often described as an internal coming out and can occur in childhood or at puberty, but sometimes as late as age 40 or older. The second phase involves a decision to come out to others, e.g. family, friends, and/or colleagues, while the third phase involves living openly as an LGBT person. In the United States today, people often come out during high school or college age. At this age, they may not trust or ask for help from others, especially when their orientation is not accepted in society. Sometimes they do not inform their own families. Various studies have shown that gender identity can be affected by family conditions, educational environment, society and media. In other words, in conservative societies, people face different challenges to express their gender identity if they have a gender identity different from the norm of the society.

According to Rosario, Schrimshaw, Hunter, Braun (2006), &quot;the development of a lesbian, gay, or bisexual (LGB) sexual identity is a complex and often difficult process. Unlike members of other minority groups (e.g., ethnic and racial minorities), most LGB individuals are not raised in a community of similar others from whom they learn about their identity and who reinforce and support that identity&quot; and &quot;[r]ather, LGB individuals are often raised in communities that are either ignorant of or openly hostile toward homosexuality.&quot;

Some individuals with unwanted sexual attractions may choose to actively dis-identify with a sexual minority identity, which creates a different sexual orientation identity from their actual sexual orientation. Sexual orientation identity, but not sexual orientation, can change through psychotherapy, support groups, and life events. A person who has homosexual feelings can self-identify in various ways. An individual may come to accept an LGB identity, to develop a heterosexual identity, to reject an LGB identity while choosing to identify as ex-gay, or to refrain from specifying a sexual identity.

===Models of sexual identity development===
Several models have been created to describe coming out as a process for gay and lesbian identity development (e.g. Dank, 1971; Cass, 1984; Coleman, 1989; Troiden, 1989). These historical models have taken a view of sexual identity formation as a sexual-minority process only. However, not every LGBT person follows such a model. For example, some LGBT youth become aware of and accept their same-sex desires or gender identity at puberty in a way similar to which heterosexual teens become aware of their sexuality, i.e. free of any notion of difference, stigma or shame in terms of the gender of the people to whom they are attracted. More contemporary models take the stance that it is a more universal process. Current models for the development of sexual identity attempt to incorporate other models of identity development, such as Marcia&#x27;s ego-identity statuses.

The Cass identity model, established by Vivienne Cass, outlines six discrete stages transited by individuals who successfully come out: (1) identity confusion, (2) identity comparison, (3) identity tolerance, (4) identity acceptance, (5) identity pride, and (6) identity synthesis. Fassinger&#x27;s model of gay and lesbian identity development contains four stages at the individual and group level: (1) awareness, (2) exploration, (3) deepening/commitment, and (4) internalization/synthesis.

Some models of sexual identity development do not use discrete, ordered stages, but instead conceptualize identity development as consisting of independent identity processes. For example, D&#x27;Augelli&#x27;s model describes six unordered independent identity processes: (1) exiting heterosexual identity, (2) developing personal LGB identity status, (3) developing an LGB social identity, (4) becoming an LGB offspring, (5) developing an LGB intimacy status, and (6) entering an LGB community.

The Unifying Model of Sexual Identity Development is currently the only model that incorporates heterosexual identity development within its statuses to include compulsory heterosexuality, active exploration, diffusion, deepening and commitment to status, and synthesis.

Contemporary models view sexual identity formation as a universal process, rather than a sexual minority one, in that it is not only sexual minorities that undergo sexual identity development, but heterosexual populations as well. More recent research has supported these theories, having demonstrated that heterosexual populations display all of Marcia&#x27;s statuses within the domain of sexual identity.

==See also==
*Androphilia and gynephilia
*Asexuality
*Bi-curious
*Erikson&#x27;s stages of psychosocial development
*Kinsey scale
*Men who have sex with men
*Queer heterosexuality
*Questioning (sexuality and gender)
*Romantic orientation
*Situational sexual behavior
*Women who have sex with women

== Notes ==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1165905" start="0" end="15" title="Sexual identity" label="Sexual identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688879" start="168" end="185" title="Romantic orientation" label="romantic identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165905" start="233" end="260" title="Sexual identity" label="sexual orientation identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="315" end="333" title="sexual orientation" label="sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q608" start="407" end="422" title="Human sexual activity" label="sexual behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="505" end="513" title="Identity (social science)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q290" start="772" end="775" title="sex" label="sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="779" end="785" title="gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q589656" start="967" end="984" title="Sexual minority" label="sexual minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="1890" end="1909" title="Homosexuality" label="same-sex attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="1930" end="1938" title="bisexual" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q724351" start="2611" end="2621" title="Asexuality" label="Asexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354594" start="2796" end="2818" title="Gray asexuality" label="asexual sub-identities"/>
<link wikidata="Q598443" start="2848" end="2879" title="sexual abstinence" label="abstention from sexual activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q191778" start="2889" end="2897" title="celibacy" label="celibacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52746927" start="2901" end="2913" title="Aromanticism" label="Aromanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="3046" end="3057" title="Bisexuality" label="Bisexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035954" start="3388" end="3403" title="Heterosexuality" label="Heterosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="3606" end="3619" title="Homosexuality" label="Homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="3703" end="3710" title="lesbian" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="3783" end="3786" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q271534" start="3910" end="3922" title="Pansexuality" label="Pansexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q48264" start="3986" end="4001" title="gender identity" label="gender identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q10361123" start="4517" end="4528" title="dichotomy" label="dichotomies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="4536" end="4548" title="monotheistic" label="monotheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q351403" start="4894" end="4911" title="bisexual community" label="bisexual umbrella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632385" start="4945" end="4955" title="Monosexuality" label="monosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="5304" end="5322" title="sexual orientation" label="sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138914" start="5389" end="5396" title="OkCupid" label="OkCupid"/>
<link wikidata="Q422933" start="5682" end="5689" title="Elitism" label="elitist"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="5703" end="5717" title="Discrimination" label="discriminatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15269209" start="5881" end="5901" title="Relationship anarchy" label="Relationship anarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="5910" end="5919" title="Anarchism" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="8499" end="8507" title="coming out" label="come out"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="9047" end="9051" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q912344" start="10205" end="10232" title="ego-dystonic sexual orientation" label="unwanted sexual attractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="10470" end="10483" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117735" start="10485" end="10498" title="support group" label="support group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035954" start="10653" end="10665" title="Heterosexuality" label="heterosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q849216" start="10732" end="10738" title="ex-gay" label="ex-gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138908" start="11672" end="11678" title="James Marcia" label="Marcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396775" start="11714" end="11733" title="Cass identity model" label="Cass identity model"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013257" start="11992" end="12054" title="Fassinger&amp;#x27;s model of gay and lesbian identity development" label="Fassinger&amp;#x27;s model of gay and lesbian identity development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069444" start="13398" end="13424" title="Androphilia and gynephilia" label="Androphilia and gynephilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q724351" start="13426" end="13436" title="Asexuality" label="Asexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q255155" start="13438" end="13448" title="Bi-curious" label="Bi-curious"/>
<link wikidata="Q983472" start="13450" end="13499" title="Erikson&amp;#x27;s stages of psychosocial development" label="Erikson&amp;#x27;s stages of psychosocial development"/>
<link wikidata="Q221890" start="13501" end="13513" title="Kinsey scale" label="Kinsey scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q853451" start="13515" end="13540" title="Men who have sex with men" label="Men who have sex with men"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353191" start="13542" end="13563" title="Queer heterosexuality" label="Queer heterosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404005" start="13565" end="13599" title="Questioning (sexuality and gender)" label="Questioning (sexuality and gender)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688879" start="13601" end="13621" title="Romantic orientation" label="Romantic orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526300" start="13623" end="13650" title="Situational sexual behavior" label="Situational sexual behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q210604" start="13652" end="13681" title="Women who have sex with women" label="Women who have sex with women"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276954" wikidata="Q7628102" url="?curid=276954" title="Studio transmitter link">
<text>A studio transmitter link (STL) sends a radio station&#x27;s or television station&#x27;s audio and video from the broadcast studio or origination facility to a radio transmitter, television transmitter or uplink facility in another location. This is accomplished through the use of terrestrial microwave links or by using fiber optic or other telecommunication connections to the transmitter site.

==Link==
This is often necessary because the best locations for an antenna are on top of a mountain, where a much shorter radio tower is required, but where locating a studio may be impractical. Even in flat regions, the center of the station&#x27;s allowed coverage area may not be near the studio location or may lie within a populated area where a transmitter would be frowned upon by the community, so the antenna must be placed at a distance from the studio.

Depending on the locations that must be connected, a station may choose either a point to point (PTP) link on another special radio frequency, or a newer all-digital wired link via a dedicated data transmission circuit. Radio links can also be digital, or the older analog type, or a hybrid of the two. Even on older all-analog systems, multiple audio and data channels can be sent using subcarriers.

Stations that employ an STL usually also have a &quot;transmitter/studio link&quot; (TSL) to return telemetry information. Both the STL and TSL are considered broadcast auxiliary services (BAS).

==Transmitter/studio link==
The transmitter/studio link (or TSL) of a radio station or television station is a return link which sends telemetry data from the remotely located radio transmitter or television transmitter back to the studio for monitoring purposes. The TSL may return the same way as the STL, or it can be embedded in the station&#x27;s regular broadcast signal as a subcarrier (for analog stations) or a separate data channel (for digital stations). 

Analog or digital data such as transmitter power, temperature, VSWR, voltage, modulation level, and other status information are returned so that broadcast engineering staff can correct any problems as soon as possible. These data may be attended to by an automated transmission system.

==See also==
*Sound-in-Syncs
*Television studio

==References==
*CFR Title 47: Telecommunication Part 74—Experimental Radio, Auxiliary, Special Broadcast and Other Program Distributional Services
*CFR Title 47: Telecommunication Chapter I—Federal Communications Commission Subchapter C—Part 73—Broadcast Radio Services</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7628102" start="2" end="25" title="Studio transmitter link" label="studio transmitter link"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628102" start="27" end="30" title="Studio transmitter link" label="STL"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="40" end="53" title="radio station" label="radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616075" start="64" end="82" title="television station" label="television station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650799" start="90" end="95" title="audio signal" label="audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q34508" start="100" end="105" title="video" label="video"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="115" end="124" title="broadcasting" label="broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q746628" start="125" end="131" title="studio" label="studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q190157" start="161" end="178" title="radio transmitter" label="radio transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285993" start="180" end="202" title="television transmitter" label="television transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349167" start="206" end="221" title="ground station" label="uplink facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q747066" start="295" end="310" title="microwave transmission" label="microwave links"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="467" end="474" title="antenna (electronics)" label="antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068623" start="522" end="533" title="radio tower" label="radio tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q849024" start="772" end="801" title="NIMBY" label="frowned upon by the community"/>
<link wikidata="Q681349" start="946" end="960" title="point-to-point (telecommunications)" label="point to point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="991" end="1006" title="radio frequency" label="radio frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q851691" start="1023" end="1030" title="digital signal (broadcasting)" label="digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695847" start="1058" end="1083" title="data transmission circuit" label="data transmission circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q174948" start="1131" end="1137" title="analog signal" label="analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149586" start="1149" end="1155" title="in-band on-channel" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q586358" start="1253" end="1263" title="subcarrier" label="subcarrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q209867" start="1367" end="1376" title="telemetry" label="telemetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972099" start="1426" end="1453" title="broadcast auxiliary service" label="broadcast auxiliary service"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="1533" end="1546" title="radio station" label="radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616075" start="1550" end="1568" title="television station" label="television station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493876" start="1574" end="1585" title="return link" label="return link"/>
<link wikidata="Q209867" start="1598" end="1607" title="telemetry" label="telemetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q190157" start="1639" end="1656" title="radio transmitter" label="radio transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285993" start="1660" end="1682" title="television transmitter" label="television transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="1823" end="1832" title="broadcasting" label="broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q733553" start="1892" end="1904" title="data channel" label="data channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27137" start="1974" end="1979" title="electrical power" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q188364" start="1994" end="1998" title="VSWR" label="VSWR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176252" start="2077" end="2098" title="broadcast engineering" label="broadcast engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826608" start="2187" end="2216" title="automated transmission system" label="automated transmission system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555669" start="2233" end="2247" title="Sound-in-Syncs" label="Sound-in-Syncs"/>
<link wikidata="Q511355" start="2249" end="2266" title="Television studio" label="Television studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065972" start="2284" end="2287" title="Code of Federal Regulations" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="2298" end="2315" title="Telecommunication" label="Telecommunication"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276957" wikidata="Q438461" url="?curid=276957" title="SWR">
<text>SWR may refer to:

==Radio and television==
* Standing wave ratio, in radio-engineering a measure of impedance matching of loads

===Broadcasters===
* Scandinavian Weekend Radio, Virrat, Finland
* South West Radio, former broadcaster, England
* Südwestrundfunk, German radio and television broadcaster
** SWR Symphonieorchester, a radio orchestra affiliated with Südwestrundfunk
** SWR Vokalensemble, the vocal ensemble of Südwestrundfunk
** SWR Fernsehen, a German regional television channel
* SWR FM, former name of the SWR 99.9 FM radio broadcaster, Sydney, Australia

==People==
* Simeon Woods Richardson, American baseball player

==Transportation==
===Railway===
* South Wales Railway, UK
* South Western Railway, a UK train operating company
* South Western Railway zone, India

===Airlines===
* Swiss International Air Lines (ICAO code), national airline of Switzerland
* Swissair (ICAO code), former national airline of Switzerland

==Other uses==
* SWR Sound Corporation, guitar amplifier manufacturer
* Saweru language (ISO 639:swr), closely related to Yawa of central Yapen Island, Indonesia
* &quot;Scarlet Weather Rhapsody&quot;, a game from &quot;Touhou Project&quot;
* Scotch Whisky Regulations 2009, a UK law
* She Wants Revenge, American rock band

==See also==
* Glasgow and South Western Railway (G&amp;SWR), a former railway company in Scotland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q438461" start="0" end="3" title="SWR" label="SWR"/>
<link wikidata="Q188364" start="46" end="65" title="Standing wave ratio" label="Standing wave ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951556" start="151" end="177" title="Scandinavian Weekend Radio" label="Scandinavian Weekend Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568876" start="197" end="213" title="South West Radio" label="South West Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q700133" start="245" end="260" title="Südwestrundfunk" label="Südwestrundfunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039090" start="305" end="327" title="SWR Symphonieorchester" label="SWR Symphonieorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167446" start="382" end="399" title="SWR Vokalensemble" label="SWR Vokalensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q317760" start="442" end="455" title="SWR Fernsehen" label="SWR Fernsehen"/>
<link wikidata="Q106771183" start="523" end="534" title="SWR 99.9 FM" label="SWR 99.9 FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q107406406" start="586" end="609" title="Simeon Woods Richardson" label="Simeon Woods Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304593" start="672" end="691" title="South Wales Railway" label="South Wales Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q30602320" start="698" end="719" title="South Western Railway" label="South Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595518" start="752" end="778" title="South Western Railway zone" label="South Western Railway zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q156776" start="804" end="833" title="Swiss International Air Lines" label="Swiss International Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q694098" start="881" end="889" title="Swissair" label="Swissair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460308" start="960" end="981" title="SWR Sound Corporation" label="SWR Sound Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474649" start="1015" end="1030" title="Saweru language" label="Saweru language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228137" start="1113" end="1137" title="Scarlet Weather Rhapsody" label="Scarlet Weather Rhapsody"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435538" start="1186" end="1216" title="Scotch Whisky Regulations 2009" label="Scotch Whisky Regulations 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q782916" start="1229" end="1246" title="She Wants Revenge" label="She Wants Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646029" start="1283" end="1316" title="Glasgow and South Western Railway" label="Glasgow and South Western Railway"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276960" wikidata="Q2206443" url="?curid=276960" title="SKU (disambiguation)">
<text>[[SKU]] is a common abbreviation for stock keeping unit.

SKU may also refer to:
==Places==
* Skiu-Kaya, two adjoining villages in Ladakh, India
* Skyros Island National Airport (IATA: SKU), Greece

==Businesses and organizations==
* SKU Amstetten, Austrian football club
* Sky Airline (ICAO: SKU), Santiago, Chile
* Sri Krishnadevaraya University, Andhra Pradesh, India
** SKU College of Engineering and Technology
* Church of Sweden Youth (), the youth wing of the Church of Sweden
* Young Communist League of Sweden (disambiguation) ()
* (SkU), an air squadron of the Indonesian Air Force

==See also==
* Skus (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2206443" start="0" end="7" title="SKU (disambiguation)" label="[[SKU]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206443" start="58" end="61" title="SKU (disambiguation)" label="SKU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4422653" start="94" end="103" title="Skiu-Kaya" label="Skiu-Kaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504030" start="147" end="177" title="Skyros Island National Airport" label="Skyros Island National Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206406" start="234" end="247" title="SKU Amstetten" label="SKU Amstetten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427299" start="274" end="285" title="Sky Airline" label="Sky Airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585870" start="317" end="347" title="Sri Krishnadevaraya University" label="Sri Krishnadevaraya University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390633" start="374" end="415" title="SKU College of Engineering and Technology" label="SKU College of Engineering and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q10685091" start="418" end="440" title="Church of Sweden Youth" label="Church of Sweden Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058036" start="486" end="535" title="Young Communist League of Sweden (disambiguation)" label="Young Communist League of Sweden (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304002" start="571" end="591" title="Indonesian Air Force" label="Indonesian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q56422044" start="608" end="629" title="Skus (disambiguation)" label="Skus (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276962" wikidata="Q1044789" url="?curid=276962" title="West Edmonton Mall">
<text>West Edmonton Mall (WEM) is a large shopping mall in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, that is owned, managed, and operated by Triple Five Group. It is the second most visited mall in Canada, after the Toronto Eaton Centre in Toronto, followed by Metropolis at Metrotown in Burnaby, and the 14th largest in the world (along with Dubai Mall) by gross leasable area. It is the second largest shopping mall, by square footage, in North America behind the Mall of America in Bloomington, Minnesota. Mall of America encompasses and West Edmonton Mall encompasses . By store count, West Edmonton Mall is the highest in the Western Hemisphere as it currently counts over 800 occupants, in comparison to Mall of America&#x27;s 520 occupants. The mall was founded by the Ghermezian brothers, who emigrated from Iran in 1959. The mall&#x27;s major anchor stores are Hudson&#x27;s Bay, London Drugs, Marshalls, Simons, The Brick, Winners/HomeSense and West Edmonton Mall Toyota.

West Edmonton Mall has over 800 stores and services including nine attractions, two hotels and over 100 dining venues in the complex, and parking for more than 20,000 vehicles. More than 24,000 people are employed at the property. The mall receives about 32 million visitors per year; it attracts between 90,000 and 200,000 shoppers daily, depending on the day and season. Recent tenants at the mall include L.L.Bean, Babies &quot;R&quot; Us, Balenciaga, Rooms + Spaces Outlet, Nike Factory Store, Psycho Bunny, Moncler, Jo Malone London, Columbia Sportswear and Chick-fil-A.

==History==

West Edmonton Mall first opened its doors to the public on 15 September 1981. The mall was developed in four phases, completed in 1981, 1983, 1985, and 1999. It was the largest indoor shopping centre in the world until 2004, and was named such in the Guinness Book of Records. The four phases of construction are used in a colour-coded system as a guideline for finding stores and attractions. The indoor roller coaster, The Mindbender had a fatal accident on 14 June 1986 when one of the rear cars derailed from the track and slammed into a nearby concrete pillar. Three people died and one was injured in the accident.
On 23 December 2000, a 22-year-old man drowned in a recreational lagoon. A man matching his description was seen swimming at about 2:30 am as the nearby drinking establishments had closed, though a second security check did not find anyone in the lagoon area. The man&#x27;s body was found around 10:30 am later that morning, fully clothed except for his shoes and jacket, which were never located. He is believed to have accidentally drowned while under the influence of drinking alcohol and cannabis.

On 11 July 2004, the mall suffered millions of dollars in damage when a severe storm of hail and rain caused roofs to fail and drains to overflow. The Ice Palace and surrounding sections were the most damaged, and the World Waterpark had a sewage overflow. The damage was promptly repaired.

Construction on a total renovation of the mall shopping areas through all the phases began in the spring of 2011. The &#x27;face lift&#x27; included the renovation of all mall common areas, which started in Phase I and finished in Phase IV. The most notable upgrades included the retrofit of an existing water fountain into choreographed musical dancing fountains, hanging décor of ceramic roses in the Rose Court outside Victoria&#x27;s Secret and glass oil droplets around the &quot;Oilmen&quot; statue outside the Phase I Food Court. Most of the renovations were completed in 2014; however, some areas of the mall continued construction, such as Park Lane and Chinatown.

In 2017, the mall announced that the Mayfield Toyota Ice Palace would undergo a renovation, retrofitting it with the latest technologies including modern lighting and sound. The Ice Palace closed in mid-2017 and reopened in December. Later in mid 2018, the mall announced that the World Waterpark would undergo renovations worth $2.5 million in September 2018. All upgrades have since been completed.

In 2021 local car dealership Mayfield Toyota made their move to the mall and rebranded as West Edmonton Mall Toyota, which is the world’s largest full-service in-mall dealership. The dealership is in the main floor of the old Sears retail space in Phase I. It includes 65 service bays, a detailing centre, and a three-aisle drive-through that intersects the entire mall.

Since 2018, the mall has focused on adding several high-end retailers including Gucci, Balenciaga, Saint Laurent, Moose Knuckles, Moncler and Louis Vuitton.

===World records===
Current West Edmonton Mall world records include;

*World&#x27;s largest indoor lake - Deep Sea Adventure Lake
*World’s largest indoor wave pool - World Waterpark
*World’s tallest indoor permanent bungee tower (no longer in use but still there) - World Waterpark
*World&#x27;s largest parking lot with more than 20,000 spaces, and over 10,000 overflow spaces. - WEM&#x27;s parking lot
*World’s largest full-service in-mall dealership - WEM Toyota

====Other records (past)====

*World&#x27;s largest indoor shopping mall (until 2004)
*World&#x27;s tallest indoor roller coaster - the Mindbender
* Most bungee jumps in 24 hours record while indoors was set by Peter Charney, on 6–7 November 2007 at the World Waterpark, completing 225 jumps.

==Major attractions==

=== Galaxyland Powered by Hasbro ===
Galaxyland was originally known as &quot;Fantasyland&quot;; however, during a court battle with the Walt Disney Company, West Edmonton Mall changed the park&#x27;s name to Galaxyland in July 1995 after completing major renovations. It undertook a complete redesign from the original theme, old Victorian fantasy, to a galactic space theme. It is an indoor amusement park on the north side of the mall and is the second-largest indoor amusement park in the world, behind Ferrari World, and features 24 rides and attractions. There are eight beginner rides, nine intermediate rides and seven thrill rides. The latest attraction in Galaxyland is Havoc, which opened in 2018. Management closed Drop of Doom in the early 2000s. The tower area was replaced shortly after by a more modern launch ride, the Space Shot, a S&amp;S Double Shot Tower Ride. In late 2019, the park announced a new partnership with Hasbro, with several rides and attractions being rebranded with Hasbro toy brands. The renovation was scheduled to finish by winter 2020, and eventually had its grand opening as Galaxyland Powered by Hasbro on 17 December 2022. The Mindbender rollercoaster was decommissioned in January 2023 after 37 years of service.

===World Waterpark===

The World Waterpark is the world&#x27;s 4th-largest indoor waterpark, built in 1985, with a size of . The park has the world&#x27;s largest indoor wave pool. The highest slides in the park are the Twister and Cyclone, which are each high.

The wave pool has six wave bays, each with two panels with a total of , generating waves up to two metres high.

In 2018–2019, the waterpark underwent a $2.5 million renovation. The renovations included new paint jobs to the Corkscrew slide, the handrails, and the Blue Thunder Wave Pool. Bathrooms were introduced to a more convenient location, as well as a rooftop balcony on top of the bathrooms for social gatherings. A hot dog stand, Tiki Dog, was added.

Along with Galaxyland, the World Waterpark was closed on 16 March 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Both reopened in July 2021.

===Ice Palace===

Ice Palace is a scaled-down version of a National Hockey League (NHL) regulation-sized ice rink in the centre of the mall. The Edmonton Oilers occasionally practised at the Ice Palace during the 1980s. The Oilers&#x27; contract for using the rink has since expired. The rink is used for various hockey and other sporting tournaments. In 2015, the Ice Palace was renamed Mayfield Toyota Ice Palace after the mall sold the naming rights to a local auto dealership.

During special events, such as Remembrance Day, the ice rink is covered for ceremonies. In July 2017, West Edmonton Mall announced that the Mayfield Toyota Ice Palace would get a $3 million renovation. It closed for the summer and reopened in December 2017.

===Mini Golf===
====Professor WEM&#x27;s Adventure Golf====

Professor WEM&#x27;s Adventure Golf is an 18-hole miniature golf course. The miniature golf course was originally known as Pebble Beach Mini Golf and was designed to be a mini golf version of Pebble Beach Golf Links. The course was refurbished and given the Professor WEM theme in the mid-1990s.

====Dragon&#x27;s Tale Black-lit Mini Golf====
Is near Galaxyland Powered by Hasbro, along with the Crystal Labyrinth Mirror Maze.

===Marine Life===

From 1985 to 2005 a Deep Sea adventure ride took visitors on a narrated tour of the lake in one of four submarines. The submarines have now been removed but guests can still visit the Sea Life Caverns at Marine Life — an underground aquarium that is home to more than 100 species of fish, sharks, sea turtles, penguins, reptiles, amphibians and invertebrates—or watch the free daily sea lion shows.

===Other attractions===


* Fantasyland Hotel, located within the mall; WEM is also affiliated with a second hotel, the West Edmonton Mall Inn, across the street from the shopping centre on 90th Avenue.
* An indoor shooting range (named &quot;Wild West Shooting Centre&quot;)
* Large-scale replica of the &quot;Santa María&quot;, one of the ships sailed by Christopher Columbus in 1492 to San Salvador Island. The deck can be booked for private functions.
* 24-hour Gym, Crunch Fitness
* Dinner Theatre: Jubilations Dinner Theatre offers original Canadian three-act musical comedies along with a four-course dinner. Full bar service is available and the theatre&#x27;s productions run Wednesday to Sunday. This space was formerly a Famous Players cinema.
* Previously, the mall has had a history of nightclubs and recreation spaces including the Empire Ballroom, Edmonton Events Centre (now demolished), The Joint, and Ka&#x27;os Nightclub. The former Edmonton Events Centre space has been purchased by Gateway Casinos &amp; Entertainment for their expansion of the Palace Casino, which was renamed to Starlight Casino. (Phase II)
* The Rec Room
* West 49 skate shop, built on the 1st floor in Phase II, in a former movie theatre, with an indoor skatepark in the basement then moved to former Sears temporarily, when DRIVE Go Karts moved in, before moving back to Phase II in a different store space than before. Stitches Factory Outlet later The Brick takes the 2nd floor. (Phase I)
* West Edmonton Christian Assembly (WECA), an inter-denominational chapel (Phase III)
* Four radio stations: 97.3 K-Rock (classic rock), 840 CFCW (classic country and news programming), Sports 1440 (sports talk), 96.3 The Breeze (soft adult contemporary), are owned by Stingray Radio. The Stingray-owned area features studios, offices, and a small free museum. Stingray studios are in Phase IV, with the broadcast studios visible from the mall (illuminated &quot;on air&quot; signs indicate when broadcasts are underway from those studios). (Phase III)

====Themed streets====

The mall also includes several theme areas including:

* BRBN st. (Bourbon Street): Features clubs and restaurants in a New Orleans-influenced setting. Several restaurants and clubs are here including 1st Rnd, Boston Pizza, Earls, Five &amp; Dive, Hudsons Canadian Tap House, Japanese Village, Mai Vietnamese Fusion, Mogouyan Hand-Pulled Noodle, Marble Slab Creamery, Q Tea, The Taco Shop, Moxie&#x27;s, Mr. Mikes, The Old Spaghetti Factory, Rick Bronson&#x27;s The Comic Strip. The lighting in this area is left dim to simulate a nighttime atmosphere. The area can be closed off from the rest of the mall, allowing for the hosting of special events, and for its establishments to stay open past the closing time of the rest of the mall. As part of the 2011–2014 mall renovations, this area was renovated and Bourbon Street was renamed Brbn St.
* Europa Boulevard: Eclectic shops in an area designed to look like a European streetscape. It is home to Opulence, Aztec Gold, G-Star Raw, Best Shoe Place, Shoo Loong Kan, Stitch It, Dr. Martens, Kawaii Alley, Yoyoso, Chill Pizza, FYidoctors, Untuckit, and several rentable conference rooms that look down on the Boulevard. Also, Europa Boulevard is home to the first La Maison Simons to open outside Quebec. Before Simons, the space was home to various stores including Petcetera, Gold&#x27;s Gym (original location), The Cash Store, Urban, and a car wash.
* Chinatown: Asian-themed area anchored by a T &amp; T Supermarket (in the former Canadian Tire location). It is directly above Bourbon Street. The Chinatown signage was removed in May 2012 and the section, though it still maintains an Asian décor, is no longer exclusive to such businesses.

==Former tenants==


*Bed Bath &amp; Beyond (2009-2023) (opened 2009 in former dinner theatre, closed in 2023 and is now Rooms + Spaces Outlet)
*BuyBuy Baby (2018-2023) (opened in 2018 in the former top level of Eaton&#x27;s/Zellers/Target, closed in 2023, and is now Babies &quot;R&quot; Us
*Eaton&#x27;s (1981-1999) (opened 1981, closed 1999, replaced with Zellers in 2000) (Phase I). Then became a Target store which was eventually replaced by Winners/HomeSense in 2018.
*Hard Rock Cafe (1985-2000) (currently various restaurants)
*HMV (1999-2017) (opened 1999, closed 2017, now Sunrise Records and later in 2021 on main floor Toys &quot;R&quot; Us, both now-closed and vacant, and to be replaced with The Paradox Museum. Sunrise Records has moved to a small location in Phase I.)
*IKEA (1985-1995) (Opened with Phase III back in November 1985, moving from a former location near the Sherwood Park Freeway. This location would only last about 10 years, before the store closed permanently on 14 October 1995.
*RAAS (2017-2019) (opened 2017, now closed, replaced by Lego Store) (phase IV)
*Sears Canada (1981-2018) (opened 1981, closed 8 January 2018, was replaced temporarily by a now-closed West 49 outlet on the Main level and Stitches Factory Outlet on the Upper level. Replaced by The Brick on the Upper Level on 7 September 2019, and West Edmonton Mall Toyota on the lower level on 18 October/2021.) (Phase I)
*The Bay (Secondary Store) (1993-1998) (opened 1993, closed 1998, now Phase IV)
*Target Canada (2013-2015) (opened on 6 May 2013, closed 2015, now Winners/HomeSense on the 1st floor and Structube, Babies &quot;R&quot; Us, and Alberta Academy of Aesthetics on the 2nd floor) (Phase I)
*Toys &quot;R&quot; Us (2021-2023) (opened December 2021 in HMV/Sunrise Records&#x27; former first floor, closed 28 January 2023)
*Woodward&#x27;s (1985-1993) (opened 1985, closed 1993, became the second Bay store in the mall, the store closed in 1998 and redeveloped into Phase IV)
*Zellers (Store 294) (1980s-2012) (originally opened as a two-level store in Phase II off the Ice Palace. Relocated to former Eaton&#x27;s space in 2000, closed 2012, replaced with Target Canada in 2013 which closed in 2015.) (Phase I)

==In popular culture==
The mall is featured prominently in the movies &quot;Christmas in Wonderland&quot; and &quot;Paper Marriage&quot;, and is featured briefly in &quot;FUBAR 2&quot;. The mall setting in the animated TV series &quot;6teen&quot; is also based on West Edmonton Mall.

==Future developments==

In 2002, the City of Edmonton approved plans for the mall to expand with an additional of retail space, a facility for sports, trade shows and conventions, a 12-storey office building, and a 600-unit apartment building, along with more parking. However, none of these projects has begun construction except for the completed parking lot expansion by the Rec Room.

As part of Mayfield Toyota’s move to the mall, the project is yet to include the addition of a parkade with 1,000 parking stalls and valet service.

==Security==
In February 2015, the jihadist terrorist group al-Shabaab released a propaganda video calling for attacks on West Edmonton Mall and other Western shopping centres. Although the group had hitherto never launched attacks in North America, security at the mall was tightened in response. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police also indicated that there was no evidence of any imminent threat.

In response to growing security threats, West Edmonton Mall developed a lockdown protocol in case of major emergencies. drills continued to be executed every two to three months.

On 21 August 2023, the mall was locked down after three men were seriously injured in a targeted shooting near the mall’s movie theatre.

The mall was locked down again on 2 December 2023 when a man was spotted with a gun. No shots were fired, and no injuries were reported.

=== Controversies ===
In 2011, a video recording allegedly showed WEM security assaulting a woman after arresting her for trespassing. A judge agreed to release the video after charges against the woman were dismissed.

==West Edmonton Mall Transit Centre==


The West Edmonton Mall Transit Centre is a major hub of the Edmonton Transit Service (ETS). As of August 2021, it is in a temporary location on 90 Avenue beside the West Edmonton Mall Inn. This is due to the construction of the LRT system&#x27;s Valley Line West elevated station.

The permanent transit centre is on the south side of West Edmonton Mall, outside mall entrance 48. Buses using the transit centre enter and exit from 87 Avenue. The large shelter building at the transit centre is accessible and equipped with power doors. This transit centre has vending machines and a payphone but no park and ride, public washrooms, or drop-off area. The transit centre is served by ETS and St. Albert Transit.

$3 million in upgrades to the transit centre were completed in June 2017 and included a new heated indoor shelter (double the size of the previous shelter), new sidewalks, new lighting, and a new public art installation, among other changes.

The following bus routes serve the transit centre:

==See also==
*List of shopping malls in Canada
*List of largest enclosed shopping malls in Canada
*List of largest shopping malls in the world

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1044789" start="0" end="18" title="West Edmonton Mall" label="West Edmonton Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044789" start="20" end="23" title="West Edmonton Mall" label="WEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="36" end="49" title="shopping mall" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="53" end="61" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973689" start="120" end="137" title="Triple Five Group" label="Triple Five Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="177" end="183" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278419" start="195" end="215" title="Toronto Eaton Centre" label="Toronto Eaton Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="219" end="226" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874689" start="240" end="263" title="Metropolis at Metrotown" label="Metropolis at Metrotown"/>
<link wikidata="Q244025" start="267" end="274" title="Burnaby" label="Burnaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133309" start="322" end="332" title="Dubai Mall" label="Dubai Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460163" start="337" end="356" title="gross leasable area" label="gross leasable area"/>
<link wikidata="Q659219" start="445" end="460" title="Mall of America" label="Mall of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q490737" start="464" end="486" title="Bloomington, Minnesota" label="Bloomington, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556472" start="755" end="774" title="Ghermezian family" label="Ghermezian brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q641129" start="849" end="866" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay (department store)" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258955" start="868" end="880" title="London Drugs" label="London Drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15903261" start="882" end="891" title="Marshalls" label="Marshalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210329" start="893" end="899" title="La Maison Simons" label="Simons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720000" start="901" end="910" title="The Brick" label="The Brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q845257" start="912" end="919" title="Winners" label="Winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844433" start="920" end="929" title="HomeSense" label="HomeSense"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="953" end="959" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131944" start="1370" end="1378" title="L.L.Bean" label="L.L.Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q696334" start="1380" end="1403" title="Babies &amp;quot;R&amp;quot; Us" label="Babies &amp;quot;R&amp;quot; Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530892" start="1405" end="1415" title="Balenciaga" label="Balenciaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q813782" start="1417" end="1438" title="Rooms + Spaces" label="Rooms + Spaces Outlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="1440" end="1458" title="Nike Factory Store" label="Nike Factory Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052459" start="1460" end="1472" title="Psycho Bunny" label="Psycho Bunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548951" start="1474" end="1481" title="Moncler" label="Moncler"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724743" start="1483" end="1499" title="Jo Malone London" label="Jo Malone London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112588" start="1501" end="1520" title="Columbia Sportswear" label="Columbia Sportswear"/>
<link wikidata="Q491516" start="1525" end="1536" title="Chick-fil-A" label="Chick-fil-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="1803" end="1827" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness Book of Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q934045" start="1973" end="1987" title="Mindbender (Galaxyland)" label="The Mindbender"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="2645" end="2661" title="drinking alcohol" label="drinking alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q79817" start="2666" end="2674" title="cannabis" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37602" start="2765" end="2769" title="hail" label="hail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925" start="2774" end="2778" title="rain" label="rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036476" start="2895" end="2910" title="World Waterpark" label="World Waterpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966166" start="2917" end="2923" title="sewage" label="sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q178516" start="4498" end="4503" title="Gucci" label="Gucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530892" start="4505" end="4515" title="Balenciaga" label="Balenciaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282172" start="4517" end="4530" title="Yves Saint Laurent (brand)" label="Saint Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548951" start="4548" end="4555" title="Moncler" label="Moncler"/>
<link wikidata="Q191485" start="4560" end="4573" title="Louis Vuitton" label="Louis Vuitton"/>
<link wikidata="Q934045" start="5176" end="5190" title="Mindbender (Galaxyland)" label="the Mindbender"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173243" start="5255" end="5268" title="Peter Charney" label="Peter Charney"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036476" start="5298" end="5313" title="World Waterpark" label="World Waterpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="5494" end="5517" title="the Walt Disney Company" label="the Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q673656" start="5868" end="5881" title="Ferrari World" label="Ferrari World"/>
<link wikidata="Q390365" start="6197" end="6207" title="Space Shot (ride)" label="Space Shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037480" start="6211" end="6241" title="Double Shot (ride)" label="S&amp;amp;S Double Shot Tower Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q501476" start="6299" end="6305" title="Hasbro" label="Hasbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q934045" start="6531" end="6541" title="Mindbender (Galaxyland)" label="Mindbender"/>
<link wikidata="Q740326" start="6701" end="6710" title="waterpark" label="waterpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q827349" start="6789" end="6798" title="wave pool" label="wave pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="7541" end="7563" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282870" start="7587" end="7595" title="ice rink" label="ice rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="7627" end="7642" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27631" start="7995" end="8010" title="Remembrance Day" label="Remembrance Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q754796" start="8334" end="8348" title="miniature golf" label="miniature golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q534974" start="8476" end="8499" title="Pebble Beach Golf Links" label="Pebble Beach Golf Links"/>
<link wikidata="Q441647" start="8636" end="8664" title="Galaxyland Powered by Hasbro" label="Galaxyland Powered by Hasbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q521839" start="9347" end="9361" title="shooting range" label="shooting range"/>
<link wikidata="Q107900" start="9443" end="9454" title="Santa María (ship)" label="Santa María"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="9489" end="9509" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q845540" start="9521" end="9540" title="San Salvador Island" label="San Salvador Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q16341017" start="9864" end="9878" title="Famous Players" label="Famous Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q55137422" start="10265" end="10277" title="The Rec Room" label="The Rec Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984218" start="10280" end="10287" title="West 49" label="West 49"/>
<link wikidata="Q909906" start="10378" end="10387" title="skatepark" label="skatepark"/>
<link wikidata="Q234852" start="10395" end="10403" title="basement" label="basement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617652" start="10545" end="10568" title="Stitches (store)" label="Stitches Factory Outlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720000" start="10575" end="10584" title="The Brick" label="The Brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="10709" end="10723" title="Radio broadcasting" label="radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011848" start="10725" end="10736" title="CIRK-FM" label="97.3 K-Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010488" start="10753" end="10761" title="CFCW (AM)" label="840 CFCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012403" start="10802" end="10813" title="Sports 1440" label="Sports 1440"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012514" start="10829" end="10844" title="CKRA-FM" label="96.3 The Breeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617429" start="10885" end="10899" title="Stingray Digital" label="Stingray Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="11314" end="11325" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q894578" start="11404" end="11416" title="Boston Pizza" label="Boston Pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326525" start="11418" end="11423" title="Earls (restaurant chain)" label="Earls"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020087" start="11540" end="11560" title="Marble Slab Creamery" label="Marble Slab Creamery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927497" start="11584" end="11596" title="Moxie&amp;#x27;s" label="Moxie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754912" start="11609" end="11634" title="The Old Spaghetti Factory" label="The Old Spaghetti Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484081" start="12167" end="12177" title="G-Star Raw" label="G-Star Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126126" start="12223" end="12234" title="Dr. Martens" label="Dr. Martens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210329" start="12408" end="12424" title="La Maison Simons" label="La Maison Simons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171795" start="12511" end="12520" title="Petcetera" label="Petcetera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536234" start="12522" end="12537" title="Gold&amp;#x27;s Gym" label="Gold&amp;#x27;s Gym"/>
<link wikidata="Q813782" start="12913" end="12934" title="Bed Bath &amp;amp; Beyond Inc." label="Bed Bath &amp;amp; Beyond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003352" start="13036" end="13047" title="BuyBuy Baby" label="BuyBuy Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q696334" start="13159" end="13182" title="Babies &amp;quot;R&amp;quot; Us" label="Babies &amp;quot;R&amp;quot; Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046643" start="13184" end="13196" title="Eaton&amp;#x27;s" label="Eaton&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q845330" start="13250" end="13257" title="Zellers" label="Zellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q918151" start="13366" end="13380" title="Hard Rock Cafe" label="Hard Rock Cafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854572" start="13426" end="13429" title="HMV Canada" label="HMV"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600373" start="13473" end="13488" title="Sunrise Records (retailer)" label="Sunrise Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q54078" start="13676" end="13680" title="IKEA" label="IKEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063455" start="13959" end="13969" title="Lego Store" label="Lego Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262325" start="13983" end="13995" title="Sears Canada" label="Sears Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984218" start="14086" end="14093" title="West 49" label="West 49"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617652" start="14123" end="14131" title="Stitches (store)" label="Stitches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720000" start="14179" end="14188" title="The Brick" label="The Brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="14252" end="14258" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q641129" start="14310" end="14317" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay (department store)" label="The Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4140889" start="14390" end="14403" title="Target Canada" label="Target Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q845257" start="14456" end="14463" title="Winners" label="Winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844433" start="14464" end="14473" title="HomeSense" label="HomeSense"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022054" start="14495" end="14504" title="Structube" label="Structube"/>
<link wikidata="Q696334" start="14506" end="14529" title="Babies &amp;quot;R&amp;quot; Us" label="Babies &amp;quot;R&amp;quot; Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847837" start="14594" end="14615" title="Toys &amp;quot;R&amp;quot; Us Canada" label="Toys &amp;quot;R&amp;quot; Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558254" start="14724" end="14739" title="Woodward&amp;#x27;s" label="Woodward&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q641129" start="14797" end="14800" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay (retailer)" label="Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q845330" start="14877" end="14884" title="Zellers" label="Zellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4140889" start="15057" end="15070" title="Target Canada" label="Target Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q554539" start="15189" end="15212" title="Christmas in Wonderland" label="Christmas in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132636" start="15229" end="15243" title="Paper Marriage" label="Paper Marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427260" start="15284" end="15291" title="FUBAR 2" label="FUBAR 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q772183" start="15348" end="15353" title="6teen" label="6teen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57305" start="15550" end="15560" title="trade show" label="trade show"/>
<link wikidata="Q182060" start="15591" end="15606" title="office building" label="office building"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="15623" end="15641" title="apartment building" label="apartment building"/>
<link wikidata="Q309998" start="15997" end="16007" title="Al-Shabaab (militant group)" label="al-Shabaab"/>
<link wikidata="Q335175" start="16239" end="16268" title="Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="Royal Canadian Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665312" start="16408" end="16416" title="lockdown" label="lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048058" start="17112" end="17136" title="Edmonton Transit Service" label="Edmonton Transit Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285861" start="17280" end="17297" title="Edmonton LRT" label="LRT system&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091313" start="17298" end="17314" title="Valley Line (Edmonton)" label="Valley Line West"/>
<link wikidata="Q55138190" start="17484" end="17493" title="87 Avenue, Edmonton" label="87 Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048058" start="17735" end="17738" title="Edmonton Transit Service" label="ETS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586770" start="17743" end="17761" title="St. Albert Transit" label="St. Albert Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639376" start="18073" end="18105" title="List of shopping malls in Canada" label="List of shopping malls in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625009" start="18107" end="18156" title="List of largest enclosed shopping malls in Canada" label="List of largest enclosed shopping malls in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="18158" end="18201" title="List of largest shopping malls in the world" label="List of largest shopping malls in the world"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276963" wikidata="Q641129" url="?curid=276963" title="Hudson's Bay (department store)">
<text>Hudson&#x27;s Bay (), formerly and still colloquially known as The Bay (French: ), is a Canadian department store chain. It is the flagship brand of the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company (HBC), the oldest and longest-surviving company in North America as well as one of the oldest and largest continuously operating companies in the world.

Founded on 2 May 1670, the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company opened its first department store in 1881 in Winnipeg, Manitoba. The chain operated under the company name until 1965, when the stores were rebranded as The Bay. Operating primarily in Western Canada at first, the chain eventually achieved nationwide presence in the second half of the 20th century by opening new locations as well as successively acquiring and converting the department stores Morgan&#x27;s, Freimans, Simpsons, and Woodward&#x27;s. In 2013, the chain rebranded as Hudson&#x27;s Bay; since 2021, the HBC has used the previous The Bay branding for its e-commerce operations, which had been separated from those of the Hudson&#x27;s Bay retail chain.

, Hudson&#x27;s Bay operates 86 locations in seven Canadian provinces. Its full-line department stores focus on high-end fashion apparel, accessories, and home goods; flagship stores carry a bigger range and selection of goods than typical locations. The flagship stores are often multi-storey, historic buildings and are in Canada&#x27;s largest cities (Toronto, Montreal, Vancouver, Calgary, and Ottawa). The largest of the flagship stores is the Toronto store on Queen Street, at about . Amid the financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in Canada and other factors, the chain has closed multiple flagship locations since 2020, including locations in Edmonton, Toronto, and Winnipeg.

==History==
===Early history===

The diversification of the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company (HBC) became necessary with the decline of fur trade in the latter half of the 19th century, and the Deed of Surrender in which ownership of the North-Western Territory and Rupert&#x27;s Land was transferred from HBC to the newly established country of Canada in 1870. The first Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company store opened in 1881 in Winnipeg, Manitoba, with an inventory consisting of dry goods, groceries, and hardware. HBC reorganized into fur trade, lands sales, and retail divisions in 1910; with the guidance of a director from the British department store Harrods, they began construction of full-line department stores in 1913. This &quot;modernization program&quot; resulted the &quot;original six&quot; department stores in Calgary and Edmonton in Alberta; Vancouver and Victoria in British Columbia; Winnipeg in Manitoba; and Saskatoon in Saskatchewan.

Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company made inroads to the provinces of Ontario and Quebec with its acquisition of the Montreal-based Morgan&#x27;s department store chain in November 1960.

===Following renaming to The Bay===
Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company adopted the name The Bay for its retail stores in 1965. The stores in Quebec continued with the Morgan&#x27;s banner until they were renamed La Baie in 1972. That same year, Hudson&#x27;s Bay purchased Ottawa&#x27;s Freimans department store and moved from the former Morgan&#x27;s building on Sparks Street to the Freiman building on Rideau Street, closer to competing Ogilvy&#x27;s and Caplan&#x27;s.

The Bay further expanded its presence in Eastern Canada by absorbing the Simpsons department store chain in 1978 and 1993 in Western Canada by taking over many former Woodward&#x27;s outlets. The Toronto Queen Street flagship store was previously a Simpsons department store. In 1998, Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company acquired the Canadian operations of Kmart and although the vast majority of the 112 locations either converted to Zellers or closed altogether, a few of them did became The Bay stores. Most of these former Kmart locations were turned into The Bay specialty outlets but the one at Georgian Mall was converted as a regular The Bay store.

In 1991, Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company stopped selling fur. In 1997 the company reopened its fur salons, including a wider assortment of high-end designer furs. Fur salons included many exclusive fur designers, including Louis Féraud, Givenchy, Black Diamond Mink, and Grosvenor.

On 16 July 2008, it was announced that Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company had been purchased by the US firm NRDC Equity Partners, which owned Saks Fifth Avenue.

In August 2008, Bonnie Brooks was hired as president and chief executive officer of the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company. As the result of market research, Brooks began to focus on bolstering high-end fashion as a growth segment. These moves included a major revamp of the chain&#x27;s selection of labels, and a renovation and relaunch of The Room—a luxury women&#x27;s department at the Queen Street location. During the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver, a heritage-oriented campaign was used to promote The Bay and an accompanying line of Olympic-themed apparel, which was considered to be a significant success. In 2010, the Queen Street location saw a 22% increase in year-over-year sales. In 2011, The Bay launched White Space—a new younger-skewing &quot;contemporary&quot; department—at selected locations.
===Following renaming to Hudson&#x27;s Bay===

Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company announced alongside its initial public offering that The Bay stores would be renamed to Hudson&#x27;s Bay beginning in October 2012; replacing the stylized yellow &quot;B&quot; used since 1965 with the Hudson&#x27;s Bay wordmark and coat of arms. The new Hudson&#x27;s Bay rebranding campaign was officially launched on 6 March 2013.

On 31 August 2019, the company announced that all 15 of its Dutch locations would be sold by year end, the final chapter of HBC&#x27;s European venture.

Hudson&#x27;s Bay stores were temporarily closed beginning on 17 March 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in Canada. The stores began gradually reopening on 19 May.

In August 2021, HBC split the online business of Hudson&#x27;s Bay into its own separate division. The online portion is now officially called The Bay, while the physical stores retained the Hudson&#x27;s Bay name.

==Flagship stores==
Hudson&#x27;s Bay operates six flagship stores in four provinces. These flagship stores are in multi-storey historic buildings in the downtowns of Canada&#x27;s largest cities. The largest, the Toronto store building on the southwest corner of Yonge Street and Queen Street West, was converted from Simpsons in 1991. Considered the flagship of the chain, it currently occupies , while a fifth of previously occupied space was converted to the Canadian Saks Fifth Avenue flagship store in 2015. Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company sold the building to Cadillac Fairview, which owns the adjacent Toronto Eaton Centre, in 2014 and entered into a leaseback agreement through at least 2039. Conversely, the Ottawa store on Rideau Street occupies and is the smallest flagship that remains in a landmark building; it was converted from Freimans in 1973.
Hudson&#x27;s Bay formerly operated a store in the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Centre, at the intersection of Yonge Street and Bloor Street at the east end of the Mink Mile in Toronto, opened in 1974 and succeeded the Winnipeg location to become the flagship store of the chain (despite being actually smaller in size than the former), and then was replaced as the chain&#x27;s flagship by the Queen Street West store in 1991. The Hudson&#x27;s Bay Centre store shuttered on 13 May 2022, with the site expected to be redeveloped in conjunction with a major overhaul of the Bloor-Yonge TTC station.

Hudson&#x27;s Bay operated flagship stores in Victoria, Edmonton (see below), Regina and Saskatoon but vacated these locations in 1999, in favor of spaces in major downtown shopping centres that were left vacant by the bankruptcy of rival department store chain Eaton&#x27;s that year. After the exit of Hudson&#x27;s Bay, these former flagship locations have been repurposed for other tenants. Recently in October 2020, due to changing shopping habits towards online purchasing as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the parent of Hudson&#x27;s Bay has considered downsizing some stores and redeveloping the surplus space for mixed-use.

Two flagship stores in the Canadian Prairies were announced to be phased out in the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic in Canada. The 1926-built downtown Winnipeg store on Portage Avenue was the flagship of the chain between 1926 and 1974. The Winnipeg building was valued at $0 by Cushman &amp; Wakefield in 2019, due to the expense of renovating the heritage-protected building for other uses, as well as the competition from newer commercial real estate properties in the suburbs like Polo Park. The downtown Edmonton store on Jasper Avenue was built in 1939 on land that had been occupied by Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company since 1893. It closed in 1995, two years after another The Bay store opened as an anchor tenant of the Edmonton City Centre. The latter eventually relocated to the former Eaton&#x27;s store of the same shopping mall in 2002. Consequently, at , it was the smallest Hudson&#x27;s Bay flagship. The Winnipeg store was closed on 30 November 2020, and the Edmonton store phased out on 3 June 2021.

HBC stated that it was exploring the option of a leaseback agreement for the 1927-built Vancouver store in 2017, which has yet to materialize.


==Store format==
===The Room and West End Shop===
The Room is a luxury boutique found in selected Hudson&#x27;s Bay locations, which features a curated selection of women&#x27;s apparel from upscale brands such as Balmain, Emmanuel Ungaro, Halston, Gianfranco Ferre, Giorgio Armani, Moschino, and others. Nicholas Mellamphy is the vice-president and buying director of The Room. Its namesake at the Yonge &amp; Queen location in Toronto was established in the 1930s as the St. Regis Room, dating back to its time as a Simpsons store. It underwent a major renovation in 2009 by the design firm Yabu Pushelberg, with an increase to in floor space, and expanding its stock from around 12 brands to 70 (including more &quot;moderately-priced&quot; options). The $5.3 million renovation was positioned by Brooks as part of a plan to increase The Bay&#x27;s focus on high-end fashion; there were also plans to expand The Room as a featured department at other flagship locations. The Room opened at the downtown Vancouver location in 2011, in the north-east section of the second floor. The department includes many of the designers available in the Toronto Queen Street flagship store, and some not available in the flagship store, including DSquared2, Jeremy Liang, and Sid Neigum. The Room opened in the downtown Montreal Hudson&#x27;s Bay store in late 2013. The Toronto version of The Room was relocated to a different part of the store in 2015 to accommodate a new Saks Fifth Avenue location.

The West End Shop is the men&#x27;s version of The Room. The Toronto Queen Street and the Vancouver Granville West End Shops recently underwent an extensive renovation. The current collection contains labels such as Hugo Boss, Ermenegildo Zegna, Armani Collezioni, Ben Sherman, and Strellson.

===Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company Signature Shop===
The Bay offers products from the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company Collection in a dedicated store, including items such as the iconic Point Blankets, coats, bed sheets, bags, T-shirts, lotions, scents, and candles. HBC has also partnered with Canadian companies like Virginia Johnson, Pink Tartan, and Klaxon Howl to create exclusive, limited edition merchandise. Customized canoes and oars are also available. HBC has also teamed up with international companies for limited edition products, such as Steiff (heritage teddy bear, limited run of 2 500), and Best Made Axe Co. While the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company shops appear mainly in flagship stores and its Banff, Alberta location, products from the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company Collection (not including limited edition items) are also available at other locations, most notably the Point Blanket. The four-point stripes have also been trademarked worldwide, and are planned to be sold through international retailers which including Lord &amp; Taylor in the US, and Colette in France, in an attempt to market HBC as a brand.

===Designer label boutiques===
Boutiques for Ralph Lauren are in select locations, including Queen Street, Yorkdale, Bayshore Ottawa, Carrefour Laval, Galeries d&#x27;Anjou, Vancouver Downtown, Victoria Downtown, Laurier Québec, and Montreal Downtown. Each boutique contains customized decor, and dedicated company specialists.

The Toronto Queen Street and Montreal Downtown store has opened ground floor boutiques for Burberry, Coach Leathergoods, and See by Chloé. Vancouver and Montreal ground-floor designer boutiques will follow. Hudson&#x27;s Bay has ended its partnership with Saint-Laurent-based Browns Shoes, and closed all Browns locations in its stores, to allow the department store to offer a larger selection of shoes, and to partner with the Montreal-based ALDO Group. Hudson&#x27;s Bay is now also offering higher-end brands, keeping in line with offerings from The Room and the West End Shop. The partnership with the Aldo Group began in spring 2011 when the revived Pegabo brand of footwear is going to be carried in Hudson&#x27;s Bay and in Aldo&#x27;s own FeetFirst and Locale locations. The website includes online shopping for home fashions and beauty products, and a gift registry.

==Brand identity==
===Logo===
The Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company wordmark was written in Blackletter script before 1965.
Lippincott &amp; Margulies designed the &quot;folk-friendly&quot; 1965 The Bay logo, which features a stylized yellow &quot;B&quot; that was previously seen on the header of Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company&#x27;s royal charter from 1670. Morgan&#x27;s stores in Quebec featured a logo with an &quot;M&quot; stylized similarly to the &quot;B&quot; from 1969 until they were rebranded to La Baie in 1972.
Lipman designed the 2013 Hudson&#x27;s Bay rebranding campaign; it restores the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company&#x27;s heraldic achievement, redrawn by Mark Summers. The wordmark is used on all public-facing materials, and has been compared to the typeface used by British fashion house Burberry. The coat of arms is reserved for limited occasions. Before the official rebranding launch, the logo appeared on the exterior of the Vancouver flagship store in December 2012.

==See also==

*HBC Rewards
*List of Canadian department stores
==References==
==External links==

*The Bay Formerly the website of Hudson&#x27;s Bay. Now a separate division of HBC.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q641129" start="0" end="17" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay (department store)" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q641129" start="63" end="70" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay (department store)" label="The Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q216107" start="97" end="113" title="department store" label="department store"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="153" end="178" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q776496" start="266" end="330" title="List of oldest companies" label="oldest and largest continuously operating companies in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="431" end="439" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145847" start="571" end="585" title="Western Canada" label="Western Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210937" start="781" end="794" title="Morgan&amp;#x27;s" label="Morgan&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501419" start="796" end="804" title="Freimans" label="Freimans"/>
<link wikidata="Q935959" start="806" end="814" title="Simpsons (department store)" label="Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558254" start="820" end="835" title="Woodward&amp;#x27;s" label="Woodward&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q212930" start="955" end="965" title="Online shopping" label="e-commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="1105" end="1123" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="Canadian provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q12684" start="1175" end="1182" title="fashion" label="fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="1409" end="1416" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="1418" end="1426" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="1428" end="1437" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="1439" end="1446" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="1452" end="1458" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715934" start="1503" end="1532" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Queen Street" label="Toronto store on Queen Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873580" start="1578" end="1605" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Canada" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="1803" end="1828" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="1872" end="1881" title="fur trade" label="fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630851" start="1930" end="1947" title="Deed of Surrender" label="Deed of Surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998931" start="1974" end="1997" title="North-Western Territory" label="North-Western Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q738395" start="2002" end="2020" title="Rupert&amp;#x27;s Land" label="Rupert&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="2158" end="2166" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q332474" start="2387" end="2394" title="Harrods" label="Harrods"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="2558" end="2565" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="2570" end="2578" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="2582" end="2589" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="2591" end="2600" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="2605" end="2613" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="2617" end="2633" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566" start="2661" end="2670" title="Saskatoon" label="Saskatoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="2674" end="2686" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="2748" end="2755" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="2760" end="2766" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="2795" end="2803" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210937" start="2810" end="2823" title="Morgan&amp;#x27;s" label="Morgan&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501419" start="3144" end="3152" title="Freimans" label="Freimans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430680" start="3222" end="3235" title="Sparks Street" label="Sparks Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449733" start="3263" end="3276" title="Rideau Street" label="Rideau Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080056" start="3298" end="3311" title="Ogilvy&amp;#x27;s" label="Ogilvy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036031" start="3316" end="3329" title="Caplan&amp;#x27;s" label="Caplan&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q935959" start="3405" end="3413" title="Simpsons (department store)" label="Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558254" start="3499" end="3514" title="Woodward&amp;#x27;s" label="Woodward&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753080" start="3679" end="3684" title="Kmart" label="Kmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q845330" start="3757" end="3764" title="Zellers" label="Zellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548033" start="3923" end="3936" title="Georgian Mall" label="Georgian Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q197195" start="4031" end="4034" title="Fur clothing" label="fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871683" start="4197" end="4209" title="Louis Féraud" label="Louis Féraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q759210" start="4211" end="4219" title="Givenchy" label="Givenchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17700" start="4235" end="4239" title="Mink" label="Mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955119" start="4356" end="4376" title="NRDC Equity Partners" label="NRDC Equity Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723882" start="4390" end="4407" title="Saks Fifth Avenue" label="Saks Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942296" start="4426" end="4439" title="Bonnie Brooks" label="Bonnie Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="4826" end="4846" title="2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="5315" end="5338" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873580" start="5875" end="5902" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Canada" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715934" start="6383" end="6396" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Queen Street" label="Toronto store"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725" start="6433" end="6445" title="Yonge Street" label="Yonge Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067220" start="6450" end="6467" title="Queen Street (Toronto)" label="Queen Street West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723882" start="6641" end="6658" title="Saks Fifth Avenue" label="Saks Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025186" start="6730" end="6747" title="Cadillac Fairview" label="Cadillac Fairview"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278419" start="6773" end="6793" title="Toronto Eaton Centre" label="Toronto Eaton Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q633304" start="6822" end="6831" title="leaseback" label="leaseback"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501419" start="6881" end="6893" title="Freimans" label="Ottawa store"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449733" start="6897" end="6910" title="Rideau Street" label="Rideau Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633806" start="7077" end="7101" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Centre" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725" start="7126" end="7138" title="Yonge Street" label="Yonge Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q885416" start="7143" end="7155" title="Bloor Street" label="Bloor Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q18167804" start="7179" end="7188" title="Mink Mile" label="Mink Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067220" start="7410" end="7427" title="Queen Street (Toronto)" label="Queen Street West"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7589" end="7612" title="Bloor–Yonge station#Future expansion" label="Bloor-Yonge TTC station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046643" start="7877" end="7889" title="Eaton&amp;#x27;s" label="Eaton&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364746" start="8280" end="8297" title="Canadian Prairies" label="Canadian Prairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873580" start="8354" end="8381" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Canada" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q508130" start="8398" end="8415" title="downtown Winnipeg" label="downtown Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025807" start="8425" end="8439" title="Winnipeg Route 85" label="Portage Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146061" start="8535" end="8558" title="Cushman &amp;amp; Wakefield" label="Cushman &amp;amp; Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102577" start="8741" end="8750" title="Polo Park" label="Polo Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303426" start="8756" end="8773" title="downtown Edmonton" label="downtown Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q43379507" start="8783" end="8796" title="Jasper Avenue" label="Jasper Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q557201" start="8957" end="8970" title="anchor tenant" label="anchor tenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339023" start="8978" end="8998" title="Edmonton City Centre" label="Edmonton City Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046643" start="9046" end="9058" title="Eaton&amp;#x27;s" label="Eaton&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928473" start="9357" end="9372" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Vancouver" label="Vancouver store"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385309" start="9628" end="9635" title="Balmain (fashion house)" label="Balmain"/>
<link wikidata="Q529203" start="9637" end="9652" title="Emmanuel Ungaro" label="Emmanuel Ungaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q456243" start="9654" end="9661" title="Halston" label="Halston"/>
<link wikidata="Q470436" start="9663" end="9679" title="Gianfranco Ferre" label="Gianfranco Ferre"/>
<link wikidata="Q635484" start="9681" end="9695" title="Giorgio Armani S.p.A." label="Giorgio Armani"/>
<link wikidata="Q659863" start="9697" end="9705" title="Moschino" label="Moschino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046391" start="10007" end="10022" title="Yabu Pushelberg" label="Yabu Pushelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867873" start="10651" end="10660" title="Dean and Dan Caten" label="DSquared2"/>
<link wikidata="Q20684953" start="10680" end="10690" title="Sid Neigum" label="Sid Neigum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723882" start="10879" end="10896" title="Saks Fifth Avenue" label="Saks Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q491627" start="11124" end="11133" title="Hugo Boss" label="Hugo Boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355904" start="11135" end="11152" title="Ermenegildo Zegna Group" label="Ermenegildo Zegna"/>
<link wikidata="Q635484" start="11154" end="11171" title="Armani" label="Armani Collezioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q18169875" start="11173" end="11184" title="Ben Sherman" label="Ben Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q686414" start="11190" end="11199" title="Strellson" label="Strellson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928482" start="11376" end="11389" title="Point Blanket" label="Point Blanket"/>
<link wikidata="Q101508" start="11743" end="11749" title="Richard Steiff" label="Steiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q58337" start="11900" end="11914" title="Banff, Alberta" label="Banff, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641437" start="12363" end="12375" title="Ralph Lauren Corporation" label="Ralph Lauren"/>
<link wikidata="Q56273715" start="12748" end="12753" title="Coach, Inc." label="Coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075391" start="12772" end="12784" title="See by Chloé" label="See by Chloé"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954153" start="12923" end="12935" title="Browns Shoes" label="Browns Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832297" start="13091" end="13101" title="ALDO Group" label="ALDO Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q213686" start="13609" end="13620" title="Blackletter" label="Blackletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827515" start="13641" end="13667" title="Lippincott (brand consultancy)" label="Lippincott &amp;amp; Margulies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="13848" end="13861" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532754" start="14151" end="14171" title="heraldic achievement" label="heraldic achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q390107" start="14319" end="14327" title="Burberry" label="Burberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928465" start="14520" end="14531" title="HBC Rewards" label="HBC Rewards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14533" end="14567" title="List of department stores#Canada" label="List of Canadian department stores"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276966" wikidata="Q904840" url="?curid=276966" title="Multichannel Television Sound">
<text>Multichannel Television Sound (MTS) is the method of encoding three additional audio channels into analog 4.5 MHz audio carriers on System M and System N.The system was developed by an industry group known as the Broadcast Television Systems Committee (BTSC), a parallel to color television&#x27;s National Television System Committee, which developed the NTSC television standard.

MTS works by adding additional audio signals in otherwise empty portions of the television signal, and allows up to a total of four audio channels, with two producing the left and right stereo channels. An additional second audio program (SAP) is used to broadcast other languages or radio services, including weather radio that could be accessed by the user, typically through a button on their remote control. The fourth channel was a professional audio channel used for internal purposes by broadcasters and is indecipherable with a common consumer receiver.

== History ==
Initial work on design and testing of a stereophonic audio system began in 1975 when Telesonics approached Chicago public television station WTTW. WTTW was producing a music show titled &quot;Soundstage&quot; at that time, and was simulcasting the stereo audio mix on local FM stations. Telesonics offered a way to send the same stereo audio over the existing television signals, thereby removing the need for the FM simulcast.

Telesonics and WTTW formed a working relationship and began developing the system which was similar to FM stereo modulation. Twelve WTTW studio and transmitter engineers added the needed broadcast experience to the relationship. The Telesonics system was tested and refined using the WTTW transmitter facilities on the Sears Tower.

In 1979, WTTW had installed a stereo Grass Valley master control switcher and had added a second audio channel to the microwave STL (Studio Transmitter Link). By that time, WTTW engineers had further developed stereo audio on videotape recorders in their plant, using split audio track heads manufactured to their specifications, outboard record electronics, and Dolby noise reduction that allowed &quot;Soundstage&quot; to be recorded and electronically edited. In addition, an Ampex MM1100, 24-track audio recorder was also used for music production and mixing. PBS member stations who wished to deliver &quot;Soundstage&quot; in stereo were provided with a four-track (left, right, vertical drive, and time code) audiotape that could be synced with the video machines in those cities.

During the FCC approval process, several manufacturers applied to the FCC for consideration. Most notably the Electronic Industries Alliance (EIA) and Japanese EIA asked to be included in order to represent their members in the testing and specification phases of the approval process. WTTW engineers helped set standards for frequency response, separation, and other uses of the spectrum. They also provided program source material used for the testing and maintained the broadcast chain. A 3M 24-track audio recorder was used to allow the selection of 12 different stereo programs for testing. The Matsushita Quasar TV manufacturing plant and laboratory, just west of Chicago, was used as the source for all testing of the competing systems. Following the testing, several questions were raised about the validity of some of the tests, and a second round of testing began.

WTTW installed a Broadcast Electronics prototype stereo modulator in October 1983 and began full-time broadcasting in stereo at that time using the Telesonics system prior to Federal Communications Commission (FCC) rule-making on the BTSC system. MTS was officially adopted by the FCC on 23 April 1984. Following EIA and FCC recommendations, the BE modulator was modified to meet BTSC specifications, and by August 1984 was in full-time use on WTTW. 

Sporadic network transmission of stereo audio began on NBC on July 26, 1984, with &quot;The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson&quot;, although at the time only the network&#x27;s New York City flagship station, WNBC, had stereo broadcast capability; regular stereo transmission of NBC programs began during early 1985. ABC and CBS followed suit in 1986 and 1987, respectively. FOX was the last network to join in 1987, with the four networks having their entire prime-time schedules in stereo by late 1994 (The WB and UPN launched the following season with their entire line-ups in stereo). One of the first television receiving systems to include BTSC capability was the RCA Dimensia, released in 1984.

From 1985 to 2000, the networks would display the disclaimer &quot;in stereo (where available)&quot; at the beginning of stereo programming, sometimes using marketing tags such as CBS&#x27;s &quot;StereoSound&quot; to describe their institution of stereo service. Networks in Canada and Mexico, which also used the NTSC video standard, utilized MTS sound when made available.

=== DTV transition in the United States ===
As a component of the NTSC standard, MTS is no longer being used in U.S. full-power television broadcasting after the June 12, 2009 DTV transition in the United States. It remains in use in LPTV and in analogue cable television. All coupon-eligible converter boxes (CECBs) are required to output stereo sound via RCA connectors, but MTS is merely optional for the RF modulator that every CECB contains. NTIA has stated that MTS was made optional for cost reasons; this may have been due to a belief that MTS still required royalty payments to THAT Corporation, which is no longer true except for some digital implementations.

THAT created consumer pages on the DTV transition and how it affected MTS by the choice of CECB, as some only receive stereo-incompatible RF signals and only output mono sound.

==Specification==

The original North American television standards provided a significant amount of bandwidth for the audio signal, 0.5 MHz, although the audio signal itself was defined to extend from 50 Hz to 15,000 Hz. This was centered on the audio carrier signal 4.5 MHz above the video signal, and given 25 kHz on either side of the carrier, using only 15 kHz of it.

This meant the lower and upper 0.2475 MHz of the audio channel was unused. Due to the nature of the NTSC color signals added in the 1950s, the upper parts of the color signal pushed into the lower audio sideband. With the audio signal centered within the 0.5 MHz channel, and the lower 0.25 MHz being partially infringed on by leftover video signal, the upper 0.25 MHz was left largely empty.

MTS worked by adding new signals to the free portion of this upper 0.25 MHz allocation. The original audio signal was left alone and broadcast as it always had been. Under MTS, this is the Main Channel. The actual signal in this channel is constructed by adding together the two stereo channels to produce a signal largely identical to the original monoaural signals and can be received on any NTSC television even without stereo circuitry.

A second channel is then added, the Stereo Subchannel, centered at 31.468 kHz and extending 15 kHz on either side. This left a small gap between the Main and Stereo signals at 15.734 kHz. This pilot signal is also known as &quot;H&quot;, or &quot;1H&quot;, and its frequency is selected to be a harmonic of the video&#x27;s horizontal scan signal so that it can be accurately recreated from the video signal using a phase locked loop. If there is any signal present at the 1H frequency, the television knows a stereo version of the signal is present.

The Stereo Subchannel consisted of the same two audio signals, L and R, but mixed out of phase to produce the &quot;L–R&quot; signal, or &quot;difference&quot;. This signal is sent at a higher amplitude and encoded using dbx compression to reduce high-frequency noise. To lower total average power, the carrier is not sent (which means there is no always-on signal at that frequency). On reception, the receiver uses the video signal to create the Pilot, and then examines that frequency to see if there is any signal present. If there is, the difference signal is extracted by filtering out the signal between 1H and 3H into a separate channel, and the carrier is re-created by adding 2H to this. This signal is then decompressed from its dbx format, and then fed, along with the original Main, to a stereo decoder. FM stereo radio works in the same fashion, differing mainly in that the equivalent to the H signal is 19 kHz, not 15.734.

SAP, if present, is centered on 5H, but encodes a monaural signal at lower audio fidelity and amplitude. The PRO signal is likewise encoded at 7H. A signal using all four channels extends only to about half of the available bandwidth in the original audio upper sideband.

=== Usage of audio channels ===
The second audio program (SAP) also is part of the standard, providing another language, a video description service like DVS, or a completely separate service like a campus radio station or weatheradio. This sub-carrier is at 5x horizontal sync and is also dBx encoded.

A third PRO (professional) channel is provided for internal use by the station, and may handle audio or data. The PRO channel is normally used with electronic news gathering during news broadcasts to talk to the remote location (such as a reporter on-location), which can then talk back through the remote link to the TV station. Specialized receivers for the PRO channel are generally only sold to broadcast professionals. This sub-carrier is at 6.5x horizontal sync.

MTS signals are indicated to the television receiver by adding a 15.734 kHz pilot tone to the signal.
The MTS pilot is locked or derived from the horizontal sync signal used to lock the video display. Variations in phase or frequency of the horizontal sync are therefore transferred to the audio. UHF transmitters in use in 1984 generally had significant phase errors introduced in this signal making the transmission of stereo audio on UHF stations of that time nearly impossible. Later refinements in UHF transmitters minimized these effects and allowed stereo transmission for those stations.

Most FM broadcast receivers are capable of receiving the audio portion of NTSC Channel 6 at 87.75 MHz, but only in monaural. Because the pilot tone frequency at 15.734 kHz is different from that of the ordinary FM band (19 kHz), such radios cannot decode MTS.

== Real-world performance ==
In ideal circumstances, MTS Stereo is better in performance than standard VHF FM stereo. In both FM Stereo and MTS the L-R subchannel is AM double-sideband modulated. AM is known to be susceptible to interference and noise reduction to the sub-channel aids in the improvement of SNR over standard FM broadcast. The sub-channel information is dbx-encoded to improve the audio with typical SNR greater than 50 dB. By adding noise reduction to the sub-channel only, complete mono compatibility was maintained. Viewers who owned mono TV sets would hear normal audio, only limited to 15 kHz bandwidth.

The original specifications called for a brick wall elliptical filter in each of the audio channels prior to encoding. The cutoff frequency of this filter was 15 kHz to prevent any horizontal sync interference (15.734 kHz) from being encoded in the audio. Manufacturers of modulators, however, used lower cutoff filters as they saw fit, also reducing the cost of audio filters. Typically, they chose 14 kHz although some used filters as low as 12.5 kHz. The elliptical filter was chosen for having the greatest bandwidth with the lowest phase distortion at the cutoff frequency. In comparison, standard FM modulators filter the audio at slightly higher frequencies but still must protect the 19 kHz pilot signal. The filter used during EIA/FCC testing had a characteristic that was −60 dB at 15.5 kHz. As transformer audio coupling was common at that time, the lower frequency limit was set to 50 Hz although modulators without transformer inputs were flat down to at least 20 Hz.

Typical separation was better than 35 dB. However, level matching between channels was essential to achieve this specification. Left and Right audio levels needed to be matched within less than 0.1 dB to achieve the separation stated.

Maintaining the phase stability of the horizontal sync is essential to good audio in the decode process. During transmission, the phase of the horizontal sync could vary with picture and chroma levels. ICPM (Incidental Carrier Phase Modulation), a measure of transmitted phase stability, needs to be less than 4.5% for best audio sub channel decoding. This was more of a problem with UHF transmitters of the day. Multi-cavity klystron RF amplifiers of that time typically had an ICPM above 7%. This made UHF transmission of MTS stereo impossible. Later UHF transmitter designs improved ICPM performance and allowed MTS stereo transmission.

== Licensing ==
Because of the use of dbx companding, every TV device that decoded MTS originally required the payment of royalties—first to dbx, Inc., then to THAT Corporation which was spun off from dbx in 1989 and acquired its MTS patents in 1994; however, those patents expired worldwide in 2004. Though THAT now owns some patents related to digital implementations of MTS, a letter from THAT to the National Telecommunications and Information Administration in 2007 confirms that no license is required from THAT for all analog and some digital implementations of MTS.

== Adoption ==
Several nations outside North America using the NTSC standard adopted the MTS format for their analog systems, including Chile, Colombia, Taiwan and the Philippines. Japan adopted their own EIAJ MTS standard, within their own domestic NTSC variant. Two countries, Brazil and Argentina, used the MTS standard with alternate PAL standards.

== See also ==
* NICAM
* Zweikanalton
* EIAJ MTS

== References ==
=== Sources ===

* Alan Skierkiewicz (November 1985), &quot;Stereo one year later&quot;, Television Broadcast, p. 76</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q904840" start="0" end="29" title="Multichannel Television Sound" label="Multichannel Television Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q904840" start="31" end="34" title="Multichannel Television Sound" label="MTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650799" start="79" end="92" title="audio channel" label="audio channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q258137" start="99" end="105" title="analog television" label="analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="114" end="119" title="Sound" label="audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q499193" start="120" end="127" title="carrier wave" label="carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009598" start="132" end="140" title="CCIR System M" label="System M"/>
<link wikidata="Q110443031" start="145" end="153" title="CCIR System N" label="System N"/>
<link wikidata="Q849194" start="274" end="290" title="color television" label="color television"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="356" end="360" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406949" start="600" end="620" title="second audio program" label="second audio program"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417006" start="693" end="706" title="weather radio" label="weather radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q185091" start="779" end="793" title="remote control" label="remote control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1067" end="1074" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017413" start="1101" end="1105" title="WTTW" label="WTTW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564972" start="1152" end="1162" title="Soundstage (TV program)" label="Soundstage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933770" start="1191" end="1200" title="simulcast" label="simulcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q181417" start="1234" end="1236" title="Frequency modulation" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q29294" start="1708" end="1719" title="Willis Tower" label="Sears Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475272" start="1759" end="1771" title="Thomson Grass Valley" label="Grass Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q747066" start="1840" end="1849" title="Microwave radio relay" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q732942" start="1948" end="1966" title="videotape recorder" label="videotape recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707153" start="2085" end="2106" title="Dolby noise-reduction system" label="Dolby noise reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q261952" start="2201" end="2206" title="Ampex" label="Ampex"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="2286" end="2289" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q719713" start="2427" end="2436" title="time code" label="time code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156461" start="2621" end="2651" title="Electronic Industries Alliance" label="Electronic Industries Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054694" start="2837" end="2855" title="frequency response" label="frequency response"/>
<link wikidata="Q159433" start="3003" end="3005" title="3M" label="3M"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="3111" end="3121" title="Panasonic Corporation" label="Matsushita"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="3562" end="3595" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057742" start="3927" end="3966" title="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" label="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731065" start="4051" end="4055" title="WNBC" label="WNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="4217" end="4220" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="FOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q844972" start="4347" end="4353" title="The WB" label="The WB"/>
<link wikidata="Q206272" start="4358" end="4361" title="UPN" label="UPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276051" start="4512" end="4524" title="RCA Dimensia" label="RCA Dimensia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922416" start="5098" end="5133" title="DTV transition in the United States" label="DTV transition in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015033" start="5156" end="5160" title="LPTV" label="LPTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="5177" end="5193" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178042" start="5199" end="5228" title="coupon-eligible converter box" label="coupon-eligible converter box"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="5262" end="5274" title="Stereophonic sound" label="stereo sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q399653" start="5279" end="5292" title="RCA connector" label="RCA connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563565" start="5330" end="5342" title="RF modulator" label="RF modulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q249998" start="5872" end="5881" title="Bandwidth (signal processing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q499193" start="6024" end="6038" title="carrier signal" label="carrier signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="6245" end="6249" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267009" start="6348" end="6356" title="sideband" label="sideband"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323979" start="6888" end="6897" title="monoaural" label="monoaural"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095206" start="7174" end="7186" title="pilot signal" label="pilot signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q52637" start="7397" end="7414" title="phase locked loop" label="phase locked loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q344489" start="7754" end="7757" title="dbx (noise reduction)" label="dbx"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406949" start="8782" end="8802" title="second audio program" label="second audio program"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="8857" end="8865" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q653542" start="8869" end="8886" title="video description" label="video description"/>
<link wikidata="Q653542" start="8900" end="8903" title="Descriptive Video Service" label="DVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436229" start="8945" end="8957" title="campus radio" label="campus radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417006" start="8969" end="8980" title="weatheradio" label="weatheradio"/>
<link wikidata="Q21012160" start="9198" end="9223" title="electronic news gathering" label="electronic news gathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q38926" start="9231" end="9235" title="news" label="news"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="9236" end="9245" title="Broadcasting" label="broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="9289" end="9297" title="reporter" label="reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312166" start="9349" end="9360" title="remote pickup unit" label="remote link"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616075" start="9368" end="9378" title="TV station" label="TV station"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="9392" end="9401" title="Receiver (radio)" label="receivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095206" start="9596" end="9606" title="pilot tone" label="pilot tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323979" start="10232" end="10240" title="monaural" label="monaural"/>
<link wikidata="Q344489" start="10749" end="10752" title="DBX (noise reduction)" label="dbx"/>
<link wikidata="Q188889" start="10753" end="10759" title="Code" label="encode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780765" start="12906" end="12916" title="companding" label="companding"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="12986" end="12995" title="royalties" label="royalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243771" start="13005" end="13014" title="dbx, Inc." label="dbx, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13024" end="13040" title="THAT Corporation" label="THAT Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978888" start="13268" end="13326" title="National Telecommunications and Information Administration" label="National Telecommunications and Information Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="13502" end="13506" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q449485" start="13575" end="13580" title="Television in Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697015" start="13582" end="13590" title="Television in Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697064" start="13592" end="13598" title="Television in Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697077" start="13607" end="13618" title="Television in the Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407200" start="13620" end="13625" title="Television in Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371860" start="13644" end="13652" title="EIAJ MTS" label="EIAJ MTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955505" start="13680" end="13701" title="NTSC-J" label="domestic NTSC variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q546129" start="13718" end="13724" title="Television in Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q495865" start="13729" end="13738" title="Television in Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973" start="13777" end="13780" title="PAL" label="PAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927826" start="13810" end="13815" title="NICAM" label="NICAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q232914" start="13818" end="13830" title="Zweikanalton" label="Zweikanalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371860" start="13833" end="13841" title="EIAJ MTS" label="EIAJ MTS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276968" wikidata="Q5888609" url="?curid=276968" title="Home Outfitters">
<text>Home Outfitters (known as Déco Découverte in Quebec; originally called Bed, Bath &amp; More) was a Canadian retail home decor chain, owned by Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company, that sold bedding, towels, housewares, and other home accessories. All 37 remaining stores were phased out in July 2019.

==History==
Home Outfitters originally launched in 1998 as Bed, Bath &amp; More, before being revamped and relaunched under the new name in 1999. The chain peaked at 69 locations in October 2014.

In July 2014, HBC announced that it would begin integrating Home Outfitters into its Hudson&#x27;s Bay retail division (including increased availability of its product line through Hudson&#x27;s Bay locations and its website), along with the closure of 2 stores. In 2016, HBC rebranded three Home Outfitters locations in Winnipeg under the banner Hudson&#x27;s Bay Home as a pilot.

In February 2019, HBC announced all 37 locations of Home Outfitters would be phased out.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5888609" start="0" end="15" title="Home Outfitters" label="Home Outfitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888609" start="26" end="41" title="Home Outfitters" label="Déco Découverte"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="45" end="51" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888609" start="71" end="91" title="Home Outfitters" label="Bed, Bath &amp;amp; More"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="142" end="167" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762457" start="179" end="186" title="bedding" label="bedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q131696" start="188" end="193" title="towel" label="towel"/>
<link wikidata="Q369594" start="196" end="205" title="houseware" label="houseware"/>
<link wikidata="Q641129" start="573" end="590" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay (retailer)" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276969" wikidata="Q686726" url="?curid=276969" title="Humberto González">
<text>Humberto González (born March 25, 1966) is a Mexican former professional boxing champion. He held the WBC three times, IBF and Lineal Jr. Flyweight titles. He was nicknamed &quot;Chiquita&quot;.

== Professional career ==
Gonzalez made his professional boxing debut on September 1, 1984 in Mexico City with a four round decision win over Jorge Ortega Perez. Little over three months later, he had his first knockout win, as he beat Narciso Perez in the first round.

By the end of 1987, Gonzalez was 20-0 and held the Mexico light-flyweight title.

In 1988, he won four fights, all by knockout. He retained the national belt against Jose Luis Zepeda in six rounds at Tijuana, and Javier Vazquez, beaten in five at Mexico City.

His next fight, on June 25, 1989, brought two &quot;firsts&quot; to his career: Celebrated in Chonju, South Korea, it was his first fight abroad. Being for the WBC world Jr. Flyweight championship, it was also his first world title try. Gonzalez outpointed world champion Yul-Woo Lee over 12 rounds to crown himself world champion. On December 9, he again fought in South Korea, retaining his world championship against former champion and future hall of fame member Jung-Koo Chang by a decision in 12. Chang had previously defended the same title a then division record 15 times before vacating it following a brief retirement the year prior.

In 1990, Gonzalez retained the title four times, including a win against future champion Francisco Tejedor, but on December 19, he suffered a shocking defeat to Rolando Pascua, a boxer who was unknown to most boxing experts, in Inglewood. The knockout in round six suffered by Gonzalez that night cost him the world title.

After a win in 1991, Gonzalez recovered the world title, by defeating the man who had taken the world championship away from Pascua: Melchor Cob Castro. Gonzalez and Castro met on June 3 at Las Vegas, and Gonzalez won a 12 round decision.

In 1992, he retained the title four times, beating Castro in a rematch, reigning Olympic flyweight gold medalist Kim Kwang-sun, Domingo Sosa and former world champion Napa Kiatwanchai.

By then, talks about a &quot;superfight&quot; between him and IBF world champion Michael Carbajal were common among boxing fans. The fight, which came on March 13, 1993, was the first million-dollar fight in Jr. Flyweight boxing history (both fighters were guaranteed one million dollars in earnings) and also the first Jr. Flyweight fight in history to head a Pay Per View boxing card. In front of many Hollywood stars and thousands of fans at the arena, Gonzalez dropped Carbajal in rounds two and five, but Carbajal recovered to knock Gonzalez out in round seven. He finished the year with two ten round decision wins, including one against Pablo Tiznado, a boxer who also fought against Alex Sanchez.

Carbajal and Gonzalez met in a rematch February 19, 1994 at Inglewood, and the second time around, Gonzalez became a three time world Jr. Flyweight champion by beating Carbajal by decision in 12. With that win, he joined an exclusive group of boxers who have been world champions three times or more in the same division, alongside such others as Muhammad Ali, Carlos De León, Evander Holyfield and Sugar Ray Robinson. Gonzalez won two more fights, one a non-title bout, and the other a title defense versus Juan Domingo Córdoba. Then, on November 12 of the same year, he and Carbajal had a rubber match, this time in Mexico City. Gonzalez again prevailed, on points over 12 rounds.

After retaining the title once in 1995, on July 15 of that year, he fought for the last time. Again, he dropped his rival, Saman Sorjaturong, a couple of times before being knocked out in round seven to lose his world title.

==Professional boxing record==

==Retirement==
Immediately after the fight with Sorjaturong, he announced he was retiring, to pursue another dream of his: to become a successful businessman in Mexico City. Gonzalez had a record of 43 wins and 3 losses as a professional boxer, with 30 wins by knockout.

==Life after boxing==
Gonzalez has stayed retired ever since, and he has been able to open three meat markets in Mexico. He is a part-time butcher in his shops, and has been able to reach the business success he dreamed about.

==Trivia==
His first fight with Carbajal and his fight with Sorjaturong were both chosen as 1993 and 1995&#x27;s Fight of the Year by &quot;The Ring&quot;. &quot;The Ring&quot; also placed Carbajal and Gonzalez on their list of the 100 greatest punchers of all time.

Both Humberto González and former rival Michael Carbajal were elected into the International Boxing Hall of Fame in 2006.

He earned many admirers during his professional boxing career. Female boxer Delia Gonzalez was one of them, and is nicknamed &quot;Chikita&quot; after Humberto.

==See also==

*Lineal championship
*List of Mexican boxing world champions
*List of world light-flyweight boxing champions

==References==
==External links==
*Humberto González profile at Cyber Boxing Zone
*Humberto González profile at International Boxing Hall of Fame</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q686726" start="0" end="17" title="Humberto González" label="Humberto González"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="73" end="79" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="290" end="301" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q668642" start="407" end="415" title="knockout" label="knockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q124739" start="667" end="674" title="Tijuana" label="Tijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q42140" start="822" end="828" title="Chonju" label="Chonju"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="830" end="841" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q724450" start="888" end="891" title="World Boxing Council" label="WBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q624453" start="1000" end="1011" title="Yul-Woo Lee" label="Yul-Woo Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q491728" start="1195" end="1209" title="Jung-Koo Chang" label="Jung-Koo Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161506" start="1462" end="1479" title="Francisco Tejedor" label="Francisco Tejedor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16307841" start="1534" end="1548" title="Rolando Pascua" label="Rolando Pascua"/>
<link wikidata="Q621549" start="1601" end="1610" title="Inglewood, California" label="Inglewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q14931629" start="1830" end="1848" title="Melchor Cob Castro" label="Melchor Cob Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="1887" end="1896" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q562542" start="2050" end="2063" title="Kim Kwang-sun" label="Kim Kwang-sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267571" start="2104" end="2120" title="Napa Kiatwanchai" label="Napa Kiatwanchai"/>
<link wikidata="Q742944" start="2185" end="2188" title="International Boxing Federation" label="IBF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355868" start="2204" end="2220" title="Michael Carbajal" label="Michael Carbajal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="2403" end="2410" title="US dollars" label="dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="2484" end="2496" title="Pay Per View" label="Pay Per View"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="2527" end="2536" title="Hollywood (film industry)" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717862" start="2814" end="2826" title="Alex Sánchez (boxer)" label="Alex Sanchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="3176" end="3188" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042851" start="3190" end="3204" title="Carlos De León" label="Carlos De León"/>
<link wikidata="Q313451" start="3206" end="3223" title="Evander Holyfield" label="Evander Holyfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q316706" start="3228" end="3246" title="Sugar Ray Robinson" label="Sugar Ray Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531680" start="3337" end="3357" title="Juan Domingo Córdoba" label="Juan Domingo Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q764086" start="3636" end="3653" title="Saman Sorjaturong" label="Saman Sorjaturong"/>
<link wikidata="Q864793" start="4384" end="4401" title="The Ring magazine Fight of the Year" label="Fight of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140774" start="4411" end="4419" title="The Ring (magazine)" label="The Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q572227" start="4618" end="4651" title="International Boxing Hall of Fame" label="International Boxing Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q961015" start="4725" end="4737" title="Women&amp;#x27;s boxing" label="Female boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253869" start="4738" end="4752" title="Delia Gonzalez" label="Delia Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q886814" start="4839" end="4858" title="Lineal championship" label="Lineal championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4860" end="4898" title="List of Mexican boxing world champions#List of world champions" label="List of Mexican boxing world champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075727" start="4900" end="4946" title="List of world light-flyweight boxing champions" label="List of world light-flyweight boxing champions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276971" wikidata="Q422056" url="?curid=276971" title="Torricelli">
<text>Torricelli may refer to:

==People with the surname==
* Evangelista Torricelli (1608–1647), Italian physicist and mathematician
* Robert Torricelli (born 1951), United States politician
* Moreno Torricelli (born 1970), Italian football player
* Giuseppe Antonio Torricelli (1662–1719), Italian sculptor

==Science==
* Torricelli&#x27;s law, a theorem in fluid dynamics
* Torricelli&#x27;s equation, an equation created by Evangelista Torricelli
* Torricelli&#x27;s trumpet or Gabriel&#x27;s Horn, a geometric figure
* Torricelli point or Fermat point, a point such that the total distance from the three vertices of the triangle to the point is the minimum possible
* Torricelli&#x27;s experiment, an experiment named after Torricelli

==Italian submarines==
* &quot;Evangelista Torricelli&quot;, an 
* &quot;Torricelli&quot;, a 
* , the former USS &quot;Lizardfish&quot;

==Other==
* Torricelli (crater), a lunar crater in the Sinus Asperitatis
* Torricelli Act, another part of the United States&#x27; long running embargo against Cuba
* Torricelli languages, a language family of Papua New Guinea
* Torricelli Mountains, a mountain range in Papua New Guinea

==See also==
* Torr or mm Hg, a unit of pressure named after Evangelista Torricelli</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q422056" start="0" end="10" title="Torricelli" label="Torricelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q102490" start="56" end="78" title="Evangelista Torricelli" label="Evangelista Torricelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q326316" start="130" end="147" title="Robert Torricelli" label="Robert Torricelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q371904" start="188" end="205" title="Moreno Torricelli" label="Moreno Torricelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565329" start="245" end="272" title="Giuseppe Antonio Torricelli" label="Giuseppe Antonio Torricelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q728969" start="318" end="339" title="Torricelli&amp;#x27;s law" label="Torricelli&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670060" start="371" end="397" title="Torricelli&amp;#x27;s equation" label="Torricelli&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q723694" start="476" end="495" title="Gabriel&amp;#x27;s Horn" label="Gabriel&amp;#x27;s Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q914929" start="538" end="550" title="Fermat point" label="Fermat point"/>
<link wikidata="Q9210537" start="668" end="696" title="Torricelli&amp;#x27;s experiment" label="Torricelli&amp;#x27;s experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277239" start="885" end="904" title="Torricelli (crater)" label="Torricelli (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444667" start="948" end="962" title="Torricelli Act" label="Torricelli Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333831" start="1040" end="1060" title="Torricelli languages" label="Torricelli languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323115" start="1102" end="1122" title="Torricelli Mountains" label="Torricelli Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q185648" start="1177" end="1181" title="Torr" label="Torr"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276972" wikidata="Q796658" url="?curid=276972" title="Oracle Team USA">
<text>Oracle Team USA is an American yacht racing syndicate initially formed to compete for the 2003 America&#x27;s Cup. They competed again in the 2007 event before winning the 33rd America&#x27;s Cup regatta in 2010 – representing the Golden Gate Yacht Club. The team also won the 34th America&#x27;s Cup in 2013.

The syndicate was initially named &quot;Oracle&quot; for the 2003 campaign and backed primarily by Larry Ellison, the co-founder and CEO of Oracle Corporation, but was renamed in August 2004 to &quot;Oracle BMW Racing&quot; to reflect the German company&#x27;s role, and subsequently revised again to &quot;BMW Oracle Racing&quot; to reflect increased involvement from &quot;BMW&quot;. At the end of December 2010 it was announced that by mutual agreement of both partners, BMW was bringing to a close its longstanding partnership with Oracle Racing and thereby ending its involvement in the America&#x27;s Cup. Subsequently, the syndicate was renamed to &quot;Oracle Team USA&quot; to compete for the 2013 34th America&#x27;s Cup.

==History==
===31st America&#x27;s Cup (2003)===

The team was created by purchasing the assets of Paul Cayard’s AmericaOne syndicate which was the losing finalist against Luna Rossa in the 2000 Louis Vuitton Cup. The syndicate got off to a rocky start with changes in the skipper position, alternating between Cayard and Chris Dickson, to Dickson alone, to Peter Holmberg, and then back to Dickson. Bob Wylie was a key member of the 2003 team contributing mainly to the tactics. Oracle reached the finals of the 2003 Louis Vuitton Cup, losing to Alinghi 5–1.

===32nd America&#x27;s Cup (2007)===

BMW Oracle Racing through the GGYC was the Challenger-of-Record for the 2007 America’s Cup which was held in Valencia, Spain. BMW Oracle Racing, lost to Luna Rossa Challenge 5 to 1 in the 2007 Louis Vuitton Cup Semi Finals.

===33rd America&#x27;s Cup (2010)===
Larry Ellison hired Russell Coutts to be the CEO of the 33rd America&#x27;s Cup campaign. In July 2007, the Golden Gate Yacht Club, sponsoring BMW Oracle Racing, filed a challenge with the Société Nautique de Genève for the 33rd America&#x27;s Cup stating that they did not believe that SNG&#x27;s hand picked challenger, Club Náutico Español de Vela (CNEV) was a qualified club under the Deed of Gift.

After extensive court action, Golden Gate Yacht Club was declared Challenger of Record and sailed against SNG&#x27;s team: Alinghi, in February 2010 in Valencia, Spain. The competing boats, &quot;Alinghi 5&quot; and &quot;USA 17&quot; were both 90-foot multihulls.

BMW Oracle Racing won the America&#x27;s Cup on February 14, 2010, off Valencia, Spain, beating &quot;Alinghi&quot; 2–0 in the best-of-three series and becoming the first American syndicate to win the cup since 1992. The rigid wing sail of &quot;USA 17&quot; provided a decisive advantage and Golden Gate Yacht Club won the 2010 America&#x27;s Cup by a considerable margin.

===2011–13 America&#x27;s Cup World Series===
Oracle Team USA competed in the 2011–13 America&#x27;s Cup World Series. In August 2013, the competition jury received a report from Oracle Team USA that their boat and others they had loaned had unauthorized modifications. The team withdrew from the competition on 8 August 2013. Penalties imposed included expelling three team members, a $250,000 fine, and a one-point penalty for each of the first two races of the Match in which they would otherwise score a point.

===34th America&#x27;s Cup (2013)===

Oracle Team USA&#x27;s Larry Ellison declared that the 34th America&#x27;s Cup would be sailed on AC72 class wing-sail catamarans.

Oracle Team USA experienced the first major accident involving the new AC72 class, when the boat capsized during training off San Francisco on October 16, 2012.

Oracle Team USA successfully defended the trophy and won the 2013 America&#x27;s Cup on September 25, 2013. They accomplished this achievement by coming back from 7 points down and one point away from defeat in the series, and completing the largest in-series comeback in America&#x27;s Cup history. &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; later called it &quot;one of the greatest comebacks in sports history&quot;.

===2015–16 America&#x27;s Cup World Series===
Oracle Team USA was runner up in 2015–16 America&#x27;s Cup World Series.

===35th America&#x27;s Cup (2017)===
Oracle Team USA was the defender of the 35th America&#x27;s Cup. The event took place in the Great Sound of Bermuda in 2017, with challenger selection through the 2017 Louis Vuitton Cup on June 5–25. The finals against Emirates Team New Zealand were June 17–26. The new AC50 class rule governed the races; Oracle Team USA launched their yacht in February 2017. Oracle Team USA ultimately lost the challenge 7–1 to Emirates Team New Zealand.

===36th America&#x27;s Cup (2021)===
Oracle Team USA did not issue a challenge within the initial challenging deadline for the 36th America’s Cup presented by Prada, June 30, 2018, ending Oracle&#x27;s fifteen year presence in the Cup races. Oracle Team USA skipper James Spithill previously indicated he was returning to challenging team Luna Rossa for that competition.

==Boats==

The BMW Oracle/Oracle USA team has owned a number of boats, including: 
* &quot;USA 71&quot;, trial boat for the 2003 America’s Cup.
* &quot;USA 76&quot;, race boat for the 2003 America’s Cup. 
* &quot;USA 87&quot;, used in preparations for the 2007 Louis Vuitton Cup.
* &quot;USA 98&quot;, raced in the Louis Vuitton Cup 2007 campaign.
* &quot;USA 17&quot;, trimaran. Sailing with a rigid wing sail, she won the 2010 America&#x27;s Cup, in a Deed of Gift match against SNG/Alinghi Valencia. 
* &quot;17&quot;, an AC72 catamaran for the 2013 America&#x27;s Cup defence. Extensively damaged in a 16 October 2012 capsize.
* &quot;Oracle Team USA 17&quot;, an AC72 catamaran. Successfully defended in the 2013 America&#x27;s Cup. 
* &quot;17&quot;, AC50 wing sail catamaran. Unsuccessfully defended the 2017 America&#x27;s Cup.

==Miscellaneous==
The team also appeared on the Series 20 premiere of &quot;Top Gear&quot;, emerging victorious in what was called by some a &quot;Cat Vs. Car&quot; race. Set in New Zealand, it matched Oracle in its AC45 with James May as a passenger against Jeremy Clarkson in a rented Toyota Corolla or Toyota Auris from the northern tip of the Coromandel Peninsula to the northern tip of New Zealand&#x27;s North Island.

==References==
==External links==

*Oracle Racing
*Golden Gate Yacht Club</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q796658" start="0" end="15" title="Oracle Team USA" label="Oracle Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046440" start="31" end="43" title="yacht racing" label="yacht racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q467557" start="95" end="113" title="America&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="America&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q225699" start="172" end="195" title="33rd America&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="33rd America&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q611962" start="231" end="253" title="Golden Gate Yacht Club" label="Golden Gate Yacht Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615241" start="277" end="300" title="2013 America&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="34th America&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q92759" start="410" end="423" title="Larry Ellison" label="Larry Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="444" end="447" title="CEO" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q19900" start="451" end="469" title="Oracle Corporation" label="Oracle Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="518" end="521" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="550" end="556" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q728222" start="1143" end="1154" title="Paul Cayard" label="Paul Cayard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513127" start="1216" end="1226" title="Luna Rossa Challenge" label="Luna Rossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593647" start="1239" end="1256" title="Louis Vuitton Cup" label="Louis Vuitton Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117719" start="1366" end="1379" title="Chris Dickson (sailor)" label="Chris Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041357" start="1402" end="1416" title="Peter Holmberg" label="Peter Holmberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601551" start="1557" end="1579" title="2003 Louis Vuitton Cup" label="2003 Louis Vuitton Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q688545" start="1591" end="1598" title="Alinghi" label="Alinghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q796658" start="1643" end="1660" title="BMW Oracle Racing" label="BMW Oracle Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q225137" start="1715" end="1733" title="2007 America’s Cup" label="2007 America’s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="1752" end="1760" title="Valencia (city in Spain)" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1762" end="1767" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999267" start="1831" end="1853" title="2007 Louis Vuitton Cup" label="2007 Louis Vuitton Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q389597" start="1925" end="1939" title="Russell Coutts" label="Russell Coutts"/>
<link wikidata="Q225699" start="1961" end="1984" title="33rd America&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="33rd America&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q611962" start="2013" end="2035" title="Golden Gate Yacht Club" label="Golden Gate Yacht Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q676599" start="2094" end="2120" title="Société Nautique de Genève" label="Société Nautique de Genève"/>
<link wikidata="Q225699" start="2129" end="2152" title="America&amp;#x27;s Cup (33rd edition)" label="33rd America&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704651" start="2294" end="2306" title="Deed of Gift of the America&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="Deed of Gift"/>
<link wikidata="Q611962" start="2339" end="2361" title="Golden Gate Yacht Club" label="Golden Gate Yacht Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="2461" end="2469" title="Valencia, Spain" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2471" end="2476" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q681813" start="2505" end="2514" title="Alinghi 5" label="Alinghi 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129854" start="2531" end="2537" title="USA 17 (yacht)" label="USA 17"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2796" end="2811" title="Sail#Types" label="rigid wing sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q225699" start="2899" end="2922" title="2010 America&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="2010 America&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819036" start="3028" end="3067" title="2011–13 America&amp;#x27;s Cup World Series" label="2011–13 America&amp;#x27;s Cup World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650479" start="3602" end="3606" title="AC72" label="AC72"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025330" start="3613" end="3622" title="Wingsail" label="wing-sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="3623" end="3633" title="catamarans" label="catamarans"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="3762" end="3775" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="4104" end="4127" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22570197" start="4291" end="4330" title="2015–16 America&amp;#x27;s Cup World Series" label="2015–16 America&amp;#x27;s Cup World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515638" start="4410" end="4433" title="35th America&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="35th America&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208740" start="4533" end="4555" title="2017 Louis Vuitton Cup" label="2017 Louis Vuitton Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q586949" start="4589" end="4614" title="Team New Zealand" label="Emirates Team New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125152" start="4640" end="4644" title="AC50" label="AC50"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840950" start="5276" end="5282" title="List of IACC yachts" label="USA 71"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865787" start="5337" end="5343" title="USA 76 (America’s Cup Class)" label="USA 76"/>
<link wikidata="Q224219" start="5369" end="5387" title="2003 America’s Cup" label="2003 America’s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q796658" start="5398" end="5404" title="USA 87 (America’s Cup Class)" label="USA 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840950" start="5473" end="5479" title="List of IACC yachts" label="USA 98"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999267" start="5500" end="5522" title="Louis Vuitton Cup 2007" label="Louis Vuitton Cup 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129854" start="5541" end="5547" title="USA 17 (yacht)" label="USA 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q225699" start="5609" end="5632" title="2010 America&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="2010 America&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704651" start="5639" end="5651" title="Deed of Gift of the America&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="Deed of Gift"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650479" start="5710" end="5714" title="AC72" label="AC72"/>
<link wikidata="Q17636120" start="5824" end="5842" title="Oracle Team USA 17" label="Oracle Team USA 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="5858" end="5867" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615241" start="5898" end="5921" title="2013 America&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="2013 America&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125152" start="5942" end="5946" title="AC50" label="AC50"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025330" start="5947" end="5956" title="Wingsail" label="wing sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="5957" end="5966" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515638" start="5996" end="6019" title="2017 America&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="2017 America&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250843" start="6070" end="6079" title="Top Gear (series 20)" label="Series 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q33162" start="6098" end="6106" title="Top Gear (2002 TV series)" label="Top Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q314504" start="6248" end="6257" title="James May" label="James May"/>
<link wikidata="Q216160" start="6281" end="6296" title="Jeremy Clarkson" label="Jeremy Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q243543" start="6309" end="6323" title="Toyota Corolla" label="Toyota Corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q818614" start="6327" end="6339" title="Toyota Auris" label="Toyota Auris"/>
<link wikidata="Q763064" start="6369" end="6389" title="Coromandel Peninsula" label="Coromandel Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="6432" end="6444" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276974" wikidata="Q3269993" url="?curid=276974" title="Osowa">
<text>Osowa (; ) is a neighborhood (in the past village suburb) of Gdańsk, Poland, located about north-west from the center of the city. Mainly filled with family houses, Osowa Lake with sandy beaches and a water sport center is also found there.

The Circle Highway of Tricity goes through Osowa, with an exit there and the shopping mall Osowa Center. There are bus connections to Oliwa and other quarters of the city.

Population in 2020 was 16,121 inhabitants in an area of 13.7 km2 (population density 1174 inhabitants/km2) - population migration increase 2010–20 +19%.

==References==
== External links ==
Official website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3269993" start="0" end="5" title="Osowa" label="Osowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q123705" start="16" end="28" title="neighborhood" label="neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="50" end="56" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="61" end="67" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="69" end="75" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="165" end="175" title="Osowa Lake" label="Osowa Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q732001" start="264" end="271" title="Tricity, Poland" label="Tricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447540" start="376" end="381" title="Oliwa" label="Oliwa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276975" wikidata="Q2120234" url="?curid=276975" title="Textured vegetable protein">
<text>Textured or texturized vegetable protein (TVP), also known as textured soy protein (TSP), soy meat, or soya chunks, is a defatted soy flour product, a by-product of extracting soybean oil. It is often used as a meat analogue or meat extender. It is quick to cook, with a protein content comparable to some meats.

TVP may be produced from any protein-rich seed meal left over from vegetable oil production. Specifically, a wide range of pulse seeds besides soybean, including lentils, peas, and faba beans, may be used for TVP production. Peanut-based TVP is produced in China where peanut oil is a popular cooking oil.

==History==
Textured vegetable protein was invented by the agricultural commodities and food processing company Archer Daniels Midland in the 1960s; the company owns the name &quot;textured vegetable protein&quot; and the acronym TVP as registered trademarks. Archer Daniels Midland had developed a textured soy protein isolate made with an extruder in the shape of rods or tubes. The soy protein isolate was produced in a small pilot plant and sold for use in chili powder, but the product was not commercially successful. By 1968, TVP was widely used in a variety of food products, and consumption skyrocketed after 1971, when TVP was approved for use in school lunch programs. By 1980, similar products were being produced by rival companies in America, but Archer Daniels Midland remained the leader in TVP production.

==Manufacturing process==
TVP is usually made from high soy flour (approx. 50% soy protein) or concentrate (approx. 70% protein), but can also be made from cottonseed, wheat, and oats. It is extruded into various shapes (chunks, flakes, nuggets, grains, and strips) and sizes, exiting the nozzle while still hot and expanding as it does so. The defatted thermoplastic proteins are heated to , which denatures them into a fibrous, insoluble, porous network that can soak up as much as three times its weight in liquids. As the pressurized molten protein mixture exits the extruder, the sudden drop in pressure causes rapid expansion into a puffy solid that is then dried.

Many TVP producers use hexane to separate soy fat from soy protein, and trace amounts of the solvent are left after manufacturing. But the rodent studies that have been done suggest it would be almost impossible to get enough hexane from TVP to cause harm. Measured levels of residual hexane in TVP are around 20 parts per million; and studies in rodents suggest that 5 g/kg is the minimum dose at which undesirable effects may be observed.

==Properties==

TVP can be made from soy flour or concentrate, containing 50% and 70% soy protein, respectively; they have a mild beany flavor. Both require rehydration before use, sometimes with flavoring added in the same step. TVP is extruded, causing a change in the structure of the soy protein which results in a fibrous, spongy matrix, similar in texture to meat. In its dehydrated form, TVP has a shelf life of longer than a year, but will spoil within several days after being hydrated. In its flaked form, it can be used similarly to ground meat.

==Nutrition==
Dried textured vegetable protein is 6% water, 51% protein, 33% carbohydrates, and 3% fat (table). In a reference amount, it provides of food energy, and is a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of several B vitamins, including folate (76% DV), and dietary minerals, especially copper, zinc, phosphorus, magnesium, and iron (40–168% DV; table).

Textured soy protein is a source of soy phytoestrogens. The processing required to arrive at defatted soy flour does not remove a lot of isoflavones. The process of extrusion cooking in making TVP reduces the concentration of antinutritional factors such as phytate.

==Uses==
As much as 50% protein when dry, TVP can be rehydrated at a 2:1 ratio, which drops the percentage of protein to an approximation of ground meat at 16%. TVP is primarily used as a meat substitute due to its very low cost at less than a third the price of ground beef and, when cooked together, will help retain more nutrients from the meat by absorbing juices normally lost.

Textured vegetable protein is a versatile substance; different forms allow it to take on the texture of whatever ground meat it is substituting. Using TVP, one can make vegetarian or vegan versions of traditionally meat-based dishes, such as chili con carne, spaghetti bolognese, sloppy joes, tacos, burgers, or burritos.

Soy protein can also be used as a low cost and high nutrition extender in comminuted meat and poultry products, and in tuna salads. Food service, retail and institutional (primarily school lunch and correctional) facilities regularly use such &quot;extended&quot; products. Extension may result in diminished flavor, although extra seasoning can suffice, but fat and cholesterol levels are decreased. TVP being used by itself as a substitute has no fat at all, and can be effectively seasoned to taste like red meat.

Textured vegetable protein can be found in health food stores and larger supermarkets, usually in the bulk section. TVP is also very lightweight and is often used in backpacking recipes. Because of its relatively low cost, high protein content, and long shelf life, TVP is often used in prisons and schools, as well as for disaster preparedness. Those with soy allergy, however, should avoid TVP.

==See also==
* 
* 

==References==
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2120234" start="0" end="8" title="Textured vegetable protein" label="Textured"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120234" start="12" end="40" title="Textured vegetable protein" label="texturized vegetable protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120234" start="42" end="45" title="Textured vegetable protein" label="TVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120234" start="62" end="82" title="Textured vegetable protein" label="textured soy protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120234" start="84" end="87" title="Textured vegetable protein" label="TSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120234" start="90" end="98" title="Textured vegetable protein" label="soy meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120234" start="103" end="114" title="Textured vegetable protein" label="soya chunks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182909" start="121" end="129" title="defatted" label="defatted"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="130" end="139" title="soy flour" label="soy flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="176" end="183" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343997" start="211" end="224" title="meat analogue" label="meat analogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804265" start="228" end="241" title="Meat extenders" label="meat extender"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="271" end="278" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="437" end="448" title="legume" label="pulse seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q131342" start="495" end="504" title="faba bean" label="faba bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q265878" start="583" end="593" title="peanut oil" label="peanut oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q632694" start="733" end="755" title="Archer Daniels Midland" label="Archer Daniels Midland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072946" start="1082" end="1094" title="chili powder" label="chili powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571993" start="1524" end="1535" title="soy protein" label="soy protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104079" start="1601" end="1611" title="cottonseed" label="cottonseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="1613" end="1618" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="1624" end="1627" title="oat" label="oat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465462" start="1636" end="1644" title="Food extrusion" label="extruded"/>
<link wikidata="Q380677" start="1799" end="1812" title="thermoplastic" label="thermoplastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q273186" start="1844" end="1853" title="denaturation (biochemistry)" label="denatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q150440" start="2140" end="2146" title="hexane" label="hexane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764992" start="2256" end="2270" title="animal testing on rodents" label="rodent studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465462" start="2796" end="2804" title="Food extrusion" label="extruded"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="3181" end="3188" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="3194" end="3206" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="3216" end="3219" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q186205" start="3267" end="3278" title="food energy" label="food energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366307" start="3321" end="3332" title="Daily Value" label="Daily Value"/>
<link wikidata="Q183206" start="3349" end="3359" title="B vitamins" label="B vitamins"/>
<link wikidata="Q127060" start="3371" end="3377" title="folate" label="folate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="3392" end="3408" title="mineral (nutrient)" label="dietary minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754605" start="3421" end="3427" title="copper in biology" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q112872206" start="3429" end="3433" title="zinc in biology" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="3435" end="3445" title="phosphorus in biology" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634419" start="3447" end="3456" title="magnesium in biology" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q112359536" start="3462" end="3466" title="iron in biology" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q414496" start="3529" end="3543" title="phytoestrogens" label="phytoestrogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q409679" start="3747" end="3754" title="phytate" label="phytate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400960" start="3898" end="3909" title="ground meat" label="ground meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="4310" end="4320" title="vegetarian" label="vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="4324" end="4329" title="vegan" label="vegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863794" start="4383" end="4398" title="chili con carne" label="chili con carne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162965" start="4400" end="4419" title="spaghetti bolognese" label="spaghetti bolognese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095632" start="4421" end="4431" title="sloppy joe" label="sloppy joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q191655" start="4434" end="4438" title="taco" label="taco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663" start="4441" end="4447" title="hamburger" label="burger"/>
<link wikidata="Q390823" start="4453" end="4460" title="burrito" label="burrito"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4526" end="4534" title="meat extender" label="extender"/>
<link wikidata="Q191671" start="4538" end="4548" title="Comminution" label="comminuted"/>
<link wikidata="Q864440" start="5025" end="5043" title="Health food store" label="health food stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q180846" start="5055" end="5066" title="supermarket" label="supermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014173" start="5148" end="5159" title="backpacking (wilderness)" label="backpacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q219239" start="5160" end="5166" title="recipe" label="recipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="5305" end="5326" title="disaster preparedness" label="disaster preparedness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571981" start="5339" end="5350" title="soy allergy" label="soy allergy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276979" wikidata="Q2605026" url="?curid=276979" title="La Belle Dame sans Merci">
<text>&quot;La Belle Dame sans Merci&quot; (&quot;The Beautiful Lady without Mercy&quot;) is a ballad produced by the English poet John Keats in 1819. The title was derived from the title of a 15th-century poem by Alain Chartier called &quot;La Belle Dame sans Mercy&quot;.

Considered an English classic, the poem is an example of Keats&#x27; poetic preoccupation with love and death. The poem is about a fairy who condemns a knight to an unpleasant fate after she seduces him with her eyes and singing. The fairy inspired several artists to paint images that became early examples of 19th-century &quot;femme fatale&quot; iconography. The poem continues to be referred to in many works of literature, music, art, and film.

==Poem==
The poem is simple in structure with twelve stanzas of four lines each in an ABCB rhyme scheme. Below are both the original and revised version of the poem:

==Inspiration==
In 2019 literary scholars Richard Marggraf Turley and Jennifer Squire proposed that the ballad may have been inspired by the tomb effigy of Richard FitzAlan, 10th Earl of Arundel (d. 1376) in Chichester Cathedral. At the time of Keats&#x27; visit in 1819, the effigy stood mutilated and separated from that of Arundel&#x27;s second wife, Eleanor of Lancaster (d. 1372), in the northern outer aisle. The figures were reunited and restored by Edward Richardson in 1843, and later inspired Philip Larkin&#x27;s 1956 poem &quot;An Arundel Tomb&quot;.

Like the author&#x27;s other 1819 poems such as “Ode to a Nightingale,” “Ode on Melancholy,” and “Ode on Indolence,” the poem was written at the heat of Keats&#x27; passion for his fiancée Fanny Brawne. This is why some critics think that its theme partly reflects their relationship. However, critics such as Amy Lowell argue that &quot;La Belle Dame sans Merci&quot; is not biographical and that it is &quot;not connected, except in the most general way, with Keats himself and Fanny Brawne.”

== In other media ==

=== Visual depictions ===

&quot;La Belle Dame sans Merci&quot; was a popular subject for the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood. It was depicted by Frank Dicksee, Frank Cadogan Cowper, John William Waterhouse, Arthur Hughes, Walter Crane, and Henry Maynell Rheam. It was also satirized in the 1 December 1920 edition of &quot;Punch&quot; magazine.

=== Musical settings ===
Around 1910, Charles Villiers Stanford produced a musical setting for the poem. It is a dramatic interpretation requiring a skilled (male) vocalist and equally skilled accompanist. In the 21st century it remains popular and is included on many anthologies of English song or British Art Music recorded by famous artists.

In 1935, Patrick Hadley wrote a version of the Stanford score for tenor, four-part chorus, and orchestra.

Ukrainian composer Valentyn Silvestrov wrote a song for baritone and piano after Russian translation of the poem. It belongs to Silvestrov&#x27;s song cycle &quot;Quiet Songs (Silent Songs)&quot; (1974–1975).

The poem is set to music in two different versions entitled &quot;O What Can Ail Thee...&quot; on German Darkwave band © Printed At Bismarck&#x27;s Death&#x27;s 1993 EP &quot;Can Dance&quot;

A setting of the poem, in German translation, appears on the 2009 music album &quot;Buch der Balladen&quot; by Faun.

A lyrical, mystical musical setting of this poem has been composed by Loreena McKennitt, published in her 2018 CD &quot;Lost Souls&quot;.

=== Film ===
The 1915 American film &quot;The Poet of the Peaks&quot; was based upon the poem.

Germaine Dulac&#x27;s 1920 &quot;La Belle Dame sans Merci&quot; explores the archetype of the &quot;femme fatale&quot;.

Natassia Malthe stars as &quot;The Lady&quot; in Hidetoshi Oneda 2005 fantasy short of the same title.

Ben Whishaw recites the poem in the 2009 Keats biopic &quot;Bright Star&quot;.

===Books ===
The poem is mentioned in the story entitled &quot;The Adventure of the Three Gables&quot; from the 1927 book &quot;The Case-Book of Sherlock Holmes&quot; by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. In it Holmes compares and matches the character sketch of Isadora Klein with La Belle Dame sans Merci.

In Agatha Christie&#x27;s 1936 mystery novel &quot;Murder in Mesopotamia&quot;, the plot is centered upon an unusual woman named Louise Leidner who is described multiple times as &quot;a kind of Belle Dame sin Merci&quot;. One character describes her as possessing a &quot;calamitous magic that plays the devil with things&quot;.

Vladimir Nabokov&#x27;s books &quot;The Real Life of Sebastian Knight&quot; (1941), &quot;Lolita&quot; (1955) and &quot;Pale Fire&quot; (1962) allude to the poem.

The last two lines of the first verse (&quot;The sedge has withered from the lake/And no birds sing&quot;) were used as an epigraph for Rachel Carson&#x27;s book &quot;Silent Spring&quot; (1962), about the environmental damage caused by the irresponsible use of pesticides. The second line was repeated later in the book, as the title of a chapter about their specific effects on birds.

The last two lines of the 11th verse are used as the title of a science fiction short story, &quot;And I awoke and found me here on the cold hill&#x27;s side&quot; (1973) by James Tiptree Jr.

Roger Zelazny&#x27;s &quot;Amber Chronicles&quot; refer to the poem in Chapter Five of &quot;The Courts of Chaos&quot; (1978) wherein the protagonist journeys to a land that resembles the poem.

John Kennedy Toole&#x27;s novel &quot;A Confederacy of Dunces&quot; (1980) alludes to the poem in initially describing the main character&#x27;s home.

Farley Mowat&#x27;s 1980 memoir of his experiences in World War II is entitled &quot;And No Birds Sang&quot;.

&quot;Pale Kings and Princes&quot;, a 1987 Spenser novel by Robert B. Parker, takes its title from the poem.

The line is also featured in Philip Roth&#x27;s &quot;The Human Stain&quot; (2000) in reaction to Coleman describing his new, far younger love interest.

In Chapter 32 of Kristine Smith&#x27;s novel &quot;Law Of Survival&quot; (2001) the protagonist, Jani, reveals her true hybrid eyes to the general public for the first time, then she asks another character, Niall, what she looks like. Niall smiles and quotes a snippet of La Belle Dame sans Merci and gives Keats credit for his words.

The Beldam in Neil Gaiman&#x27;s 2002 horror-fantasy novel &quot;Coraline&quot; refers to the mysterious woman who is also known as Belle Dame. Both share many similarities as both lure their protagonists into their lair by showing their love towards them and giving them treats to enjoy. The protagonists in both stories also encounter the ghosts who have previously met both women and warn the protagonist about their true colours and at the end of the story, the protagonist is stuck in their lair, with the exception of Coraline who managed to escape while the unnamed knight in this poem is still stuck in the mysterious fairy&#x27;s lair.

L. A. Meyer&#x27;s &quot;Bloody Jack&quot; series (2002–2014) features a take on La Belle Dame sans Merci, adapted to reflect the protagonists age. Mary &quot;Jacky&quot; Faber became known as &quot;La belle jeune fille sans merci&quot;.

In &quot;Hunting Ground&quot; (2009) by Patricia Briggs, La Belle Dame sans Merci is identified as The Lady of the Lake and is a hidden antagonist.

David Foster Wallace&#x27;s 2011 novel &quot;The Pale King&quot; alludes to the poem in its title.

Cassandra Clare&#x27;s 2016 collection of novellas &quot;Tales From the Shadowhunter Academy&quot; includes a novella titled Pale Kings and Princes, named after the line &quot;I saw pale kings and princes too/Pale warriors, death-pale were they all&quot;. Three of the poem&#x27;s stanzas are also excerpted in the story.

The last two lines of the first verse (&quot;The sedge has withered from the lake/And no birds sing&quot;) are used in the text of the 2019 Nebula award-winning science fiction story &quot;This Is How You Lose the Time War&quot; by Amal El-Mohtar and Max Gladstone (2019).

===Television===

&quot;Rumpole of the Bailey&quot; – Season 7, Episode 3

&quot;Rosemary &amp; Thyme&quot; – Season 1, Episode 1

&quot;Californication&quot; – Season 1, Episode 5

&quot;Downton Abbey&quot; – Season 6, Episode 5

&quot;Victoria&quot; – Season 2, Episode 3

&quot;Samurai Jack&quot; - &quot;The Four Seasons of Death&quot;&#x27;s final segment, based around Spring, has Jack being tempted to stay in the garden of a forest nymph for eternity, only for his drive to defeat Aku to be the thing that breaks him out of the daze and fight his way out of the nymph&#x27;s vines.

The theme of a woman seducing and sacrificing men to keep herself immortal are: Helen Of Troy (Kolchak: The Night Stalker); Queen Cleopatria/Pamela Morris &quot;Queen of the Nile&quot;; Unnamed Model &quot;The Girl with the Hungary Eyes&quot; (Rod Serling&#x27;s &quot;Night Gallery);Lady Die (Friday the 13th: The Series); Mary Beth (Freakazoid!); Mirror Queen (The Brothers Grimm);Pamela Dare (The Adventures of Superboy).

Star Trek animated cartoon series &quot;The Lorelei Signal&quot; Kirk, Spock and McCoy are captured by beautiful femme fatales who use science to drain the lifeforce out of the male crewmen to remain young; &quot;Favorite Son&quot; (Star Trek: Voyager) Ensign Kim finds his life energy drained by an all female society; &quot;Otherworld (TV series) episode [&quot;Paradise Lost&quot;] in which beautiful femme fatales who use science to drain the lifeforce out of males to remain young;&quot;Ark II&quot; 1976 [last episode] &quot;Orkus&quot; where the crew rapidly ages after encountering a group of Immortals.

&quot;The Quality of Mercy&quot; [Babylon 5] a wounded insane serial killer named Karl Mueller tried to force a terminally ill physician to use an alien healing device to heal him or he would harm her and her daughter; the physician used the device to transfer her disease to him and then used it to drain his life energy from him until he literally dropped dead. A 1990 comic movie (Based on Twilight Zone &quot;Queen of the Nile&quot;) had a vain woman using and sacrificing dozens of willing men to maintain her beauty until to her shock and horror one man refuses her..and she becomes older!

It has also been suggested that there is a strong similarity with the plot of Monty Python&#x27;s Seduced Milkmen sketch.

===Other===
In a March 2017 interview with &quot;The Quietus&quot; the English songwriter and musician John Lydon cited the poem as a favourite.

In the popular trading card game, &quot;&quot;, the card &quot;Merieke Ri Berit&quot; is modelled after this poem.

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2605026" start="6" end="30" title="La Belle Dame sans Merci" label="La Belle Dame sans Merci"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="89" end="95" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q82083" start="125" end="135" title="John Keats" label="John Keats"/>
<link wikidata="Q982038" start="208" end="222" title="Alain Chartier" label="Alain Chartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206563" start="236" end="260" title="La Belle Dame sans Mercy" label="La Belle Dame sans Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028" start="400" end="405" title="fairy" label="fairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="599" end="611" title="femme fatale" label="femme fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756348" start="773" end="779" title="stanza" label="stanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264652" start="811" end="823" title="rhyme scheme" label="rhyme scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327632" start="929" end="952" title="Richard Marggraf Turley" label="Richard Marggraf Turley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934800" start="1043" end="1081" title="Richard FitzAlan, 10th Earl of Arundel" label="Richard FitzAlan, 10th Earl of Arundel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736182" start="1095" end="1115" title="Chichester Cathedral" label="Chichester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325750" start="1241" end="1261" title="Eleanor of Lancaster" label="Eleanor of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q313758" start="1390" end="1403" title="Philip Larkin" label="Philip Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749819" start="1427" end="1442" title="An Arundel Tomb" label="An Arundel Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349126" start="1500" end="1520" title="Ode to a Nightingale" label="Ode to a Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q13133847" start="1524" end="1541" title="Ode on Melancholy" label="Ode on Melancholy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077574" start="1549" end="1565" title="Ode on Indolence" label="Ode on Indolence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066446" start="1640" end="1652" title="Fanny Brawne" label="Fanny Brawne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066446" start="1931" end="1943" title="Fanny Brawne" label="Fanny Brawne"/>
<link wikidata="Q184814" start="2063" end="2089" title="Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood" label="Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q684057" start="2110" end="2123" title="Frank Dicksee" label="Frank Dicksee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398238" start="2125" end="2145" title="Frank Cadogan Cowper" label="Frank Cadogan Cowper"/>
<link wikidata="Q212754" start="2147" end="2170" title="John William Waterhouse" label="John William Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q434575" start="2172" end="2185" title="Arthur Hughes (artist)" label="Arthur Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q660917" start="2187" end="2199" title="Walter Crane" label="Walter Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="2288" end="2293" title="Punch (magazine)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q368264" start="2349" end="2374" title="Charles Villiers Stanford" label="Charles Villiers Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q538439" start="2667" end="2681" title="Patrick Hadley" label="Patrick Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948826" start="2731" end="2747" title="SATB" label="four-part chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q706765" start="2784" end="2803" title="Valentyn Silvestrov" label="Valentyn Silvestrov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3094" end="3128" title="© Printed At Bismarck&amp;#x27;s Death" label="© Printed At Bismarck&amp;#x27;s Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q691139" start="3278" end="3282" title="Faun (band)" label="Faun"/>
<link wikidata="Q274562" start="3355" end="3372" title="Loreena McKennitt" label="Loreena McKennitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757577" start="3466" end="3487" title="The Poet of the Peaks" label="The Poet of the Peaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q275597" start="3520" end="3534" title="Germaine Dulac" label="Germaine Dulac"/>
<link wikidata="Q235677" start="3641" end="3656" title="Natassia Malthe" label="Natassia Malthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q342617" start="3745" end="3756" title="Ben Whishaw" label="Ben Whishaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190988" start="3805" end="3816" title="Bright Star (film)" label="Bright Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041815" start="3888" end="3921" title="The Adventure of the Three Gables" label="The Adventure of the Three Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129378" start="3953" end="3985" title="The Case-Book of Sherlock Holmes" label="The Case-Book of Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="3999" end="4017" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="4126" end="4141" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q642911" start="4174" end="4195" title="Murder in Mesopotamia" label="Murder in Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36591" start="4454" end="4470" title="Vladimir Nabokov" label="Vladimir Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351667" start="4490" end="4523" title="The Real Life of Sebastian Knight" label="The Real Life of Sebastian Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q127149" start="4544" end="4550" title="Lolita" label="Lolita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229792" start="4574" end="4583" title="Pale Fire" label="Pale Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q100948" start="4754" end="4767" title="Rachel Carson" label="Rachel Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q591623" start="4786" end="4799" title="Silent Spring" label="Silent Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q234928" start="5180" end="5197" title="James Tiptree Jr." label="James Tiptree Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q295406" start="5199" end="5212" title="Roger Zelazny" label="Roger Zelazny"/>
<link wikidata="Q313739" start="5394" end="5412" title="John Kennedy Toole" label="John Kennedy Toole"/>
<link wikidata="Q627749" start="5432" end="5455" title="A Confederacy of Dunces" label="A Confederacy of Dunces"/>
<link wikidata="Q966679" start="5546" end="5558" title="Farley Mowat" label="Farley Mowat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127066" start="5663" end="5685" title="Pale Kings and Princes" label="Pale Kings and Princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576315" start="5700" end="5707" title="Spenser (character)" label="Spenser"/>
<link wikidata="Q550819" start="5717" end="5733" title="Robert B. Parker" label="Robert B. Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q187019" start="5796" end="5807" title="Philip Roth" label="Philip Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q52451163" start="5938" end="5952" title="Kristine Smith" label="Kristine Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="6271" end="6282" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q475125" start="6322" end="6330" title="Coraline" label="Coraline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456226" start="6903" end="6914" title="L. A. Meyer" label="L. A. Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q372737" start="7182" end="7197" title="Patricia Briggs" label="Patricia Briggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q313246" start="7291" end="7311" title="David Foster Wallace" label="David Foster Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642719" start="7336" end="7349" title="The Pale King" label="The Pale King"/>
<link wikidata="Q235364" start="7391" end="7406" title="Cassandra Clare" label="Cassandra Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q18397345" start="7448" end="7483" title="Tales From the Shadowhunter Academy" label="Tales From the Shadowhunter Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q73742845" start="7903" end="7936" title="This Is How You Lose the Time War" label="This Is How You Lose the Time War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900109" start="8012" end="8033" title="Rumpole of the Bailey" label="Rumpole of the Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715806" start="8069" end="8089" title="Rosemary &amp;amp; Thyme" label="Rosemary &amp;amp; Thyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q326143" start="8119" end="8146" title="Californication (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Californication&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q83071" start="8176" end="8189" title="Downton Abbey" label="Downton Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q21450492" start="8225" end="8233" title="Victoria (UK TV series)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q694101" start="8269" end="8281" title="Samurai Jack" label="Samurai Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625108" start="8740" end="8757" title="Queen of the Nile (The Twilight Zone)" label="Queen of the Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3790936" start="10313" end="10328" title="Seduced Milkmen" label="Seduced Milkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759110" start="10387" end="10398" title="The Quietus" label="The Quietus"/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="10441" end="10451" title="John Lydon" label="John Lydon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276980" wikidata="Q510686" url="?curid=276980" title="List of cities in Sri Lanka">
<text>The following is a list of [[Human settlement|settlements]] in [[Sri Lanka]] with a population over 50,000.

==Cities==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q510686" start="27" end="76" title="List of cities in Sri Lanka" label="[[Human settlement|settlements]] in [[Sri Lanka]]"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276984" wikidata="Q217841" url="?curid=276984" title="Liévin">
<text>Liévin (; ; ) is a commune in the Pas-de-Calais department in northern France. The inhabitants are called &quot;Liévinois&quot; in French.

==Overview==
The town of Liévin is an old mining area of Pas-de-Calais. Near Lens, this town is of modest size but has several nursery schools, schools, colleges, a university, a swimming pool, a city library, a cultural and social center (CCS), a hospital, a covered stadium, several gardens and parks, two movie theaters, two cemeteries, a Catholic church, a shopping center, a National Police station, a fire station, a complete intercommunity transportation system (Tadao ), regional newspapers, the main ones being &quot;L&#x27;Avenir de l&#x27;Artois&quot; [the Future of Artois], &quot;La Voix du Nord&quot; (&quot;Voice of the North&quot;) and &quot;Nord Éclair&quot; (&quot;Northern Flash&quot;), etc.

==Administration==
Liévin is the seat of two cantons. It belongs to the Agglomeration community of Lens – Liévin) which consists of 36 communes, with a total population of 250,000 inhabitants.

==History==

===Prehistory and Middle Ages===
The history of Liévin begins in ancient times. The foothill of Riaumont (highest point in Liévin) is a rich archaeological site. Traces of Neolithic and Gallo-Roman periods have been found there, and 752 tombs attest that Liévin was once a Merovingian burial ground.

In 1414, there were barely 150 inhabitants in Liévin. At that time, it was a village mainly concerned with agriculture. The population grew steadily until the First World War. 

* 600 inhabitants in 1759
* 900 inhabitants in 1789
* 1223 inhabitants in 1820

===Industrial Revolution===

Coal was discovered in the vicinity of Lens, Pas-de-Calais in 1849, and near Liévin in 1857. This precipitated a time of great productivity, prosperity, and population growth. The population of Liévin was 25,698 in 1914.

From 1858, the Lens mining company opened its pit no. 3 - 3 bis in the city, the Aix mining company its pit of Aix, which ten years later became no. 2 of Liévin, and the Liévin mining company its pit no. 1 bis - 1 ter. Secondary pits opened later. From 1899, the latter opened its pit no. 5 - 5 bis. During the 20th century, the Lens mining company opened its ventilation shafts no. 9 bis, 11 bis and 16 bis. The last shafts were backfilled in 1979, the installations were destroyed, with the exception of the headframes of shafts 1 bis and 3 bis.

===World War I===
The First World War brutally ended Liévin&#x27;s expansion. The city was ruined, the churches and castles destroyed. Human losses were 400 civilian and 600 military, and it saw severe fighting during the Battle of Loos, which took place not far to the north. The city of Liévin was awarded the Croix de Guerre in 1920.

After the war, it was necessary to rebuild everything. After a few years, Liévin was again an active city, and mining recommenced. In 1936, the nearby (5.6 km) Canadian National Vimy Memorial was dedicated to the Battle of Vimy Ridge (part of the Battle of Arras) and the Canadian forces killed during the First World War; it is also the site of two WWI Canadian cemeteries.

===World War II===

World War II again stopped the progress of the city. In 1940, Liévin was evacuated, and the city was occupied by the Germans. Resistance was organized, in particular with the help of the &quot;Voix du Nord&quot; newspaper which is nowadays the main daily newspaper of Nord-Pas-de-Calais. In this war, there were 220 civilian and 225 military casualties. Liévin was liberated on 2 September 1944 by the British Eighth Army.

After the war, mining recommenced in force; coal mining was vital to the reconstruction of the French economy. Silicosis, which would kill many miners, made its appearance.

===End of coal mining===
In addition to silicosis, miners were in daily peril of being lost in mining catastrophes. There were five major mining catastrophes during the coal mining period:

* 28 November 1861, pit no. 1, 2 dead
* 13 August 1882, pit no. 3, 8 dead
* 14 January 1885, pit no. 1, 28 dead
* 28 January 1907, pit no. 3, 3 dead
* 16 March 1957, pit no. 3, 10 dead
* 27 December 1974, Saint-Amé pit, 42 dead

Additionally, a recession in the mining industry began and with it a recession in Liévin. From 1960 to 1970, 60 of the 67 pits closed. Following the tragedy in pit number 3 in Saint-Amé, the last coal mining pit closed in 1974. Liévin no longer produces coal, and has moved on to a new chapter.

In 2014, French Prime Minister Manuel Valls commemorates the 40th anniversary of the Saint-Amé tragedy.

===Liévin without coal and beginning of the 21st century===
Liévin suffered a great deal when coal mining was abandoned, since it had depended primarily on the mines. The city converted to other industries. While it may not have the same economic dynamism of the earlier epoch, the commercial and industrial areas are a source of employment for many, and the city remains relatively prosperous with 33,430 inhabitants (see above).

A major storage facility for the Louvre is located in Liévin. It houses approximately 250,000 items.

On 2 February 2022 French current President Emmanuel Macron went to Liévin to the remembrance stone of Saint-Amé. With members of the Young Municipal Council, the mayor Laurent Duporge and his constituents, he laid a wreath of flowers in tribute to the 42 miners who died on 27 December 1974 in the biggest European post-war mining disaster: before him, Prime Ministers Jacques Chirac, Manuel Valls and President François Mitterrand had visited the site. He then participated in a work reunion with locals politicians, especially about the renovation of mining housing and the revitalization of the territory. At the end of the day, he visited the Louvre-Lens museum where students present The Seated Scribe, a famous work of ancient Egyptian art.

===Lefebvre family and sinking of the Titanic===

In 2017, a letter written in French is found sealed in a bottle on a beach in Hopewell Rocks, Bay of Fundy, in the Canadian province of New Brunswick. It claims to be written by Mathilde Lefebvre, a 12-year-old passenger of the Titanic travelling with her mother, brothers and sisters. The message says &quot;&quot;I am throwing this bottle into the sea in the middle of the Atlantic. We are due to arrive in New York in a few days. If anyone finds it, tell the Lefebvre family in Liévin&quot;.

In March 2022, Coraline Hausenblas, a psychomotricity specialist who carefully studied the letter, claims in a 51 pages report that the document is &quot;fake, as long as it cannot be proved true&quot;. Even though the letter is fake, it sheds light on the history of this family. In 2002, the city of Liévin built a remembrance stone in tribute to the five family members who died during the sinking. In 1911, Franck Lefebvre, Mathilde&#x27;s father, a 40-year-old coal miner, decided to settle in the United States thanks to a friend who also wanted to leave France and who offered him the trip. Franck arrived in the United States in March 1911 with one of his sons, Anselme, born in 1901, and settled in Iowa, where he worked in the Lodwick mines. During one year, he saved money and sent it to Liévin to allow his family to join him. In April 1912, his wife Marie Lefebvre, born Daumont (1872-1912), as well as their four children, Mathilde (1899-1912), 12-year-old, Jeanne (1903-1912), 8-year-old, Henri (1906-1912), 5-year-old and Ida (1908-1912), 3-year-old, left Liévin to join him. They embarked at Southampton on Wednesday 10 April 1912 aboard the Titanic in third class. The five family members died during the sinking and their bodies were never found. In the United States, while Franck is looking for them, the American administration realizes that he entered the territory illegally and he was expelled. He then returned to Liévin, became a coal miner again and died in 1948 in Haillicourt.

===Mayors of Liévin since the French Revolution===

* 1790–1810, Procope-Alexandre-Joseph de Ligne
* 1810–1819, Pierre Caron
* 1820–1822, Jacques Delaby
* 1822–1825, Pierre Caron
* 1825–1856, Henri-Antoine de Ligne
* 1856–1871, Nicolas Antoine Delaby
* 1871–1878, Alexandre-Procope Comte Jonglez de Ligne
* 1879–1892, Louis Schmidt
* 1892, Félix Pamart
* 1893–1905, Edouard Defernez
* 1905–1912, Arthur Lamendin
* 1912–1913, Pierre Leroy
* 1914, François Pouvier
* 1914–1919 : (evacuation)
* 1919–1925, Léon Degreaux
* 1925–1929, Jules Bédart
* 1930–1935, Silas Goulet
* 1936–1939, Henri-Joseph Thiébaut
* 1939–1944, Louis Thobois
* 1944–1945, Henri Bertin
* 1945–1947, Florimond Lemaire
* 1947–1952, Eugène Gossart
* 1952–1981, Henri Darras
* 1981–2013, Jean-Pierre Kucheida
* 2013–present, Laurent Duporge
==Population==

==Notable people==
Famous people from Liévin include:

* Georges Carpentier (boxer)
* Robert Enrico (film director)
* Arnold Sowinski (footballer)
* Mounir Chouiar (footballer)
* Jean-Marc Tellier (politician)

==International relations==
Liévin is twinned with:

* Hohenlimburg, Germany 
* Pasvalys, Lithuania 
* Bruck an der Mur, Austria 
* La Valette-du-Var, France 
* Roccastrada, Italy

* Rybnik, Poland 
==References==
==External links==

* Town council website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217841" start="0" end="6" title="Liévin" label="Liévin"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="19" end="26" title="communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q12689" start="34" end="47" title="Pas-de-Calais" label="Pas-de-Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567583" start="733" end="748" title="La Voix du Nord (daily)" label="La Voix du Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375812" start="798" end="809" title="Nord Éclair" label="Nord Éclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q184188" start="897" end="904" title="cantons of France" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119951" start="924" end="964" title="Agglomeration community of Lens – Liévin" label="Agglomeration community of Lens – Liévin"/>
<link wikidata="Q365027" start="1155" end="1163" title="Riaumont" label="Riaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1231" end="1240" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364601" start="1245" end="1256" title="Gallo-Roman" label="Gallo-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q59488" start="1332" end="1343" title="Merovingian dynasty" label="Merovingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1519" end="1534" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="1647" end="1651" title="Coal" label="Coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q165271" start="1686" end="1705" title="Lens, Pas-de-Calais" label="Lens, Pas-de-Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245157" start="2640" end="2654" title="Battle of Loos" label="Battle of Loos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727598" start="2730" end="2745" title="Croix de guerre 1914–1918 (France)" label="Croix de Guerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561040" start="2916" end="2947" title="Canadian National Vimy Memorial" label="Canadian National Vimy Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q393299" start="2969" end="2989" title="Battle of Vimy Ridge" label="Battle of Vimy Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q239255" start="3003" end="3018" title="Battle of Arras (1917)" label="Battle of Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3062" end="3077" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="3620" end="3631" title="coal mining" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q653318" start="3687" end="3696" title="Silicosis" label="Silicosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10287" start="4496" end="4508" title="Manuel Valls" label="Manuel Valls"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="5035" end="5041" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052772" start="5148" end="5163" title="Emmanuel Macron" label="Emmanuel Macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="5474" end="5488" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q10287" start="5490" end="5502" title="Manuel Valls" label="Manuel Valls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="5517" end="5536" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q405543" start="5752" end="5763" title="Louvre-Lens" label="Louvre-Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q378034" start="5794" end="5811" title="The Seated Scribe" label="The Seated Scribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627589" start="5981" end="5995" title="Hopewell Rocks" label="Hopewell Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q181857" start="5997" end="6009" title="Bay of Fundy" label="Bay of Fundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="6039" end="6052" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q113839545" start="6064" end="6098" title="Mathilde Lefebvre letter" label="to be written by Mathilde Lefebvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173" start="6131" end="6138" title="Titanic" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="7107" end="7111" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173" start="7558" end="7565" title="Titanic" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q983406" start="8788" end="8806" title="Georges Carpentier" label="Georges Carpentier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387339" start="8817" end="8830" title="Robert Enrico" label="Robert Enrico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2863379" start="8849" end="8864" title="Arnold Sowinski" label="Arnold Sowinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q26251608" start="8880" end="8894" title="Mounir Chouiar" label="Mounir Chouiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q63763998" start="8910" end="8927" title="Jean-Marc Tellier" label="Jean-Marc Tellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="8980" end="8987" title="twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q314439" start="8997" end="9009" title="Hagen-Hohenlimburg" label="Hohenlimburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461920" start="9022" end="9030" title="Pasvalys District Municipality" label="Pasvalys"/>
<link wikidata="Q259893" start="9045" end="9061" title="Bruck an der Mur" label="Bruck an der Mur"/>
<link wikidata="Q321128" start="9074" end="9091" title="La Valette-du-Var" label="La Valette-du-Var"/>
<link wikidata="Q214997" start="9103" end="9114" title="Roccastrada" label="Roccastrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q107094" start="9125" end="9131" title="Rybnik" label="Rybnik"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276987" wikidata="Q211230" url="?curid=276987" title="Syros">
<text>Syros ( ), also known as Siros or Syra, is a Greek island in the Cyclades, in the Aegean Sea. It is south-east of Athens. The area of the island is and at the 2021 census it had 21,124 inhabitants.

The largest towns are Ermoupoli, Ano Syros, and . Ermoupoli is the capital of the island, the Cyclades, and the South Aegean. It has always been a significant port town, and during the 19th century it was even more significant than Piraeus. Other villages are Galissas, Foinikas, Pagos, Manna, Kini, Azolimnos and Poseidonia.

==Ermoupoli==

Ermoupoli () stands on a naturally amphitheatrical site, with neo-classical buildings, old mansions, and white houses cascading down to the harbour. It was built during the Greek War of Independence in the 1820s.

The city hall is in the center of the town, in Miaoulis Square, ringed with cafés, seating areas, and palm trees. Dubbed the &quot;City of Hermes&quot;, Syros has numerous churches, such as Metamorphosis, Koimisis, St. Demetrius, Three Hierarchs, Anastasis, Evangelistria, and St. Nicolas. There is an archaeological museum and a municipal library.

The quarter of Vaporia is where sea captains traditionally lived. There are numerous neo-classical mansions along the quarter&#x27;s narrow streets.

==Ano Syros==


Ano Syros is the second town of Syros and was built by the Venetians at the beginning of the 13th century on the hill of San Giorgio, north-west of Ermoupoli. Ano Syros maintains a medieval atmosphere. Innumerable steps between narrow streets and houses with coloured doors lead to the top of the town. The medieval settlement of Ano Syros is accessible by car; the town is served mostly by marble steps. The distance from the harbour up to the main entry point of the town is about 1000 metres. The Catholic cathedral of Saint George dominates Ano Syros. The cathedral church was constructed during the 13th century. From the cathedral visitors have a panoramic view of the neighbouring islands of Tinos, Delos, Mykonos, Paros, Andros and Naxos.

==History==
===Kastri culture===
The history of settlement on Syros goes back at least 5,000 years, to the Early Bronze Age of the Cycladic civilization. This is when the hill-top settlement of began. Archaeologists describe Early Cycladic III (ECIII) culture as Kastri culture. It had links with the Anatolian Trade Network, connected with Limantepe in Asia Minor.

Kastri, dated by archaeologists to 2800-2300 BC, was one of the earliest settlements in Greece that were protected by stone walls with rounded bastions. Also the cemetery of Chalandriani is associated with Kastri. Inside the fortification, the houses shared party walls and were packed close together. It is estimated that the fortified town was home to up to 300 people.

The site was first discovered and excavated in 1898 by Christos Tsountas, the &quot;father of Cycladic research&quot;. Kastri had some of the earliest metalwork in the region, and also some of the earliest use of potter&#x27;s wheel.

===Antiquity===
Throughout history, the island was known as Syra (), then Syros or Siros (Σῦρος). In later times, it appears to have been inhabited by the Phoenicians. In the Odyssey, Syros was the country of the swineherd Eumaeus who described it at length (Odyssey, XV, 403 sq.), although it has also been suggested that Eumaeus referred to Syracuse, Sicily.

The island was also the home of the philosopher Pherecydes, the teacher of Pythagoras. It possessed two leading cities, Syros (now the modern Ermoupoli) and another city (Galessus) on the western coast where Galissas now stands.

The island did not play an important role during antiquity or the early Christian years. It was not even a diocese at a time when even the smallest island possessed its bishop. During Roman times, the capital of Syros was situated in the area of contemporary Ermoupoli.

===Middle Ages===

At the end of ancient times, barbarian raids and piracy, which affected the Aegean for many centuries, led Syros to decline. The island, along with the other Cyclades, was devastated several times during the Middle Ages by raiders from different directions including Sicilians, Arabs, Turks and Venetians.

In the Byzantine years Syros constituted part of the Theme of the Aegean Sea, along with the rest of the Cycladic islands. After the overthrow of Byzantium in the Fourth Crusade by the Venetians and Franks in 1204, the island was definitively conquered by the Venetians under the leadership of Marco Sanudo. As part of the Duchy of the Archipelago, Syros would remain under Venetian rule until 1566 although after 1540 this was only maintained by payment of tribute to the Ottoman Sultan.

It was at this time that Ano Syros was founded. During the Latin period, the majority of the local community were Roman Catholics, but maintained the Greek language. During the reign of almost three and a half centuries of the Duchy of the Archipelago, Syros had a singular feudal regime.

===Ottoman Era===


By the 16th century, the Ottoman fleet became dominant in the Aegean and the Duchy fell apart. In 1522 the corsair Barbarossa took possession of the island, which would be known as &quot;Sire&quot; during Ottoman rule. However, negotiations of the local authorities with the Ottomans gave the Cyclades substantial privileges, such as religious freedom and the reduction of taxes.

At the same time, following an agreement of France and the Holy See with the Ottoman authorities, the Catholics of the island came under the protection of France and Rome and so Syros sometimes was called &quot;the Pope&#x27;s island&quot;.

The Roman Catholic diocese of Syros was a Latin diocese, suffragan of Naxos. The Venetians had established there a Latin bishopric which was subject to the Latin Archbishopric of Athens until 1525. From the time of the island&#x27;s occupation by the Turks in the 16th century, the Greeks established an Orthodox metropolitan on Syros: Joseph is the earliest known, along with Symeon who died in 1594 and Ignatius in 1596. The island became for the most part Catholic.

The list of titular bishops may be found in Le Quien and in Eubel. The most celebrated among them is Ioannis Andreas Kargas, whom the Turks strangled in 1617 because he refused to convert to Islam and because he was helping Greek revolutionaries hiding on the island.

After the second half of the 17th century, a period of economic recovery of the Aegean began, climaxing during the transition from the 18th to the 19th century. The special regime of the islands allowed the development of local self-government. The decline of piracy since the beginning of the 19th century led to the gradual liberation of the sea routes of the Eastern Mediterranean.

===In Independent Greece===

====Greek War of Independence and 19th century====

Due to its crucial geographical position, Syros became known as a maritime way-point. Moreover, the special social, religious and institutional conditions prevailing on the island, led Syriots to neutrality at the beginning of the Greek Revolution in 1821. As a result, Syros became a secure shelter during the Revolution, attracting many Greek refugees from Asia Minor, Chios, Spetses, Psara, Aivali, Smyrna, Kydonia, Kassos and other places.
These refugees built Ermoupoli.
In 1827 Syros became part of the newly founded First Hellenic Republic and later (1834) the Greek Kingdom. The island returned to peace and tranquility, Syros became known as a cross-road in the Aegean and as an international commercial center linking Western Europe and the Mediterranean sea to the East. The construction of the first buildings began in 1822, and in 1824 the first Orthodox Church Metamorphosis and the largest Greek sanatorium was constructed.

Because of the Venetian domination from the Middle Ages onwards, the islanders had a Roman Catholic majority. However, due to immigration from other islands, Catholics now constitute some 47% of the population. The majority of the population are Greek Orthodox. Intermarriage between Churches is very common in Syros. There is also a single parish of the Byzantine Greek Catholic Church. 

During 1831 Syros played a prominent role in the elaboration of the new Greek Constitution. Under Ioannis Kapodistrias (Giovanni Capo D&#x27;Istria), the first Governor of the new state, the population of Ermoupolis had reached 13,805 residents and the city had evolved into a seat of government.

It had a Commercial Court of Law, a post office (one of the first in Greece), insurance brokerages, the first public school, a branch of the National Bank of Greece, art gallery, museum, library, a social club for the elite society etc. However, in 1854 cholera and a series of other epidemics plunged Syros into mourning. A number of charitable institutions for public health and social services were established during this period: orphanages, poorhouses and a mental hospital.

Newcomers, mainly mariners and tradesmen, gave the island a new dynamic, which along with its demographic and economic development, turned it into an administrative and cultural centre. Newcomers flocked to the island and founded the town of Ermoupoli, which rapidly became the leading port of Greece.

Between 1822 and 1865, Ermoupoli was rebuilt in a Neoclassical style, merging Greek Classicism with elements of the Renaissance. Many landmarks such as the City Hall (designed by the German architect Ernst Ziller), the Apollo Theatre by the Italian architect Pietro Campo (a miniature version of the La Scala in Milan), the main Library, the General Hospital of Syros (Vardakeio-Proio), Miaoulis square and other buildings were built during that period of time. Passing through on 6 April 1864, the effect of all the sugary marble is such that the English artist Edward Lear, refers to the town fondly in his diary as &quot;the old sparkly pile&quot;.

The European architects (mainly Germans and Italians) and also Greeks who participated in the design and planning of Ermoupolis respected the classical and ancient Greek architecture and harmonized it with the romanticism of the West. Ermoupoli has a high density of neoclassical architecture. The prosperity of Syros was connected with the development of social and cultural life. The evolutionary cycle was completed with the creation of the first industrial units during the decade of 1860–70.

Most public buildings, churches, schools, stadiums and many mansions were built in the same elegant and neoclassical style, making Ermoupoli at the time a very modern city with a unique character. As a result, Syros changed almost overnight from a rather quiet island into a vigorous centre of crafts, industry and production. Also, due to its large port of Ermoupoli, it turned into a major centre for ship building and refitting. Neorion was the first shipyard of Greece. To this very day, it remains a place where many ships are serviced and refitted.

Since 1830 the commerce of fabrics, silk, ship building, leather and iron developed on Syros and at the same time a powerful banking system was created. The tremendous growth and development of Ermoupolis continued and until 1860 Syros was the most important commercial harbour in Greece. Together with commerce and ship building, construction and public works were also developed. The Greek Steamship Company was founded in 1856.

A period of decline then followed, as sailing gave way to steam, the importance of the geographical situation of the island was reduced and Piraeus harbour finally took the predominant position in Greece - with the competition of Patras also reducing Syros&#x27; commercial importance.

====20th century====

Beginning at the end of the 19th century and for several decades, a temporary economic recovery took place, due to the development of the textile industry (&quot;Foustanos-Karellas-Velissaropoulos &amp; Co&quot;).

As a result of the imperial ambitions and fascist ideology of Benito Mussolini&#x27;s Italy, which invaded and occupied Syros during World War II, the island&#x27;s inhabitants experienced a devastating famine causing thousands of deaths. (See Sheila Lecoeur: Mussolini&#x27;s Greek Island: Fascism and the Occupation of Syros in World War II (2009/ 2015))

The Second World War reduced Syros&#x27; economic development, as was the case for every economic centre in Greece. However, already since the 1980s, along with the generalized economic recovery and the rise of the living standards in Greece, elements of improvement appeared with tourism as its central axis. At the same time, the re-opening of the Neorion shipyards, as well as a number of other activities, indicate that Syros is on an upward trend.

Ermoupoli today has 7 elementary schools, 2 junior high schools, 2 high schools, 2 technical schools and the Aegean University with a department of Fine Arts and system design, with a proposed future addition in Applied Arts and Visual Arts. The Syros Island National Airport, the Aegean casino, the frequent passenger boat transportation system and all other modern amenities help to attract many domestic and foreign tourists to the island all year round.

Syros also has a British cemetery where various people are buried, including many seamen and servicemen who died in the Cyclades region, particularly during the Second World War. The numerous consulates of countries such as France, Britain, Italy, the Netherlands and Scandinavian countries bear witness to the connection of Syros with the wider European scene.

==Administration==
Syros is a separate regional unit of the South Aegean region. The only municipality of the regional unit is Syros-Ermoupoli. As a part of the 2011 Kallikratis government reform, the regional unit Syros was created out of part of the former Cyclades Prefecture. At the same reform, the municipality Syros-Ermoupoli was created out of the 3 former municipalities:

*Ermoupoli
*Ano Syros
*Poseidonia

The municipality also includes the uninhabited island Gyaros and several other islets. The total area of the municipality is .

===Province===
The province of Syros () was one of the provinces of the Cyclades Prefecture. Its territory corresponded with that of the current regional units Syros and Mykonos. It was abolished in 2006.

==Religion==
As in the rest of Greece, Syros has Eastern Orthodox churches. &quot;Metamorphosis&quot; is the most important Orthodox church on the island, &quot;Kimisis tis Theotokou&quot; is also significant and noted for the fact that it hosts a masterpiece by painter El Greco. There is also an equal number of Catholic Church buildings on the island and some entirely Catholic villages; thus, it is one of the most significant places for Catholic Church in Greece. Syros is one of a few places where Catholics and Orthodox share a common date for Easter, which in Syros&#x27; case, is the Orthodox date.

The Catholic diocese numbers 9000 worshippers, 21 secular priests and 8 regulars, 7 parishes, 7 churches with a resident priest, 3 without a priest, and 57 chapels. The Capuchins and Jesuits each have an establishment; the Sisters of Charity, 2 houses, one of which is a hospital; the Sisters of St Joseph of the Apparition have a boarding school and St George, a De La Salle Public School.

There is also a single church of the Greek Byzantine Catholic Church which is not part of the diocese but subject to the Byzantine Exarchate of Greece.

==Cuisine==

Local specialities of the island include:

*&quot;Kaparosalata&quot; (salad with capers)
*&quot;Maidanosalata&quot; (salad with parsley)
*&quot;Frisoura&quot; (appetizer)
*&quot;Delagraciano&quot;
*&quot;Ladopita&quot;
*&quot;Marathopita&quot;
*&quot;Tomatokeftedes&quot; (fried tomato balls)
*&quot;Kalamari gemistó&quot; (stuffed grilled squid)
*&quot;Sfougato&quot;
*San Michali cheese
*Loukoumi (dessert)
*&quot;Halvadopita&quot; (dessert)
*&quot;Pastelaria&quot; (dried figs dessert)

==Sports==
*Foinikas Syros V.C.
*Aris Syros, basketball/volleyball 
*Hellas Syros, football
*Athletic Club Syros, basketball/football
*Syros Windsurfing School
*Komito Watersports

==Airport==
==Notable residents==
*Eumaeus, character in the Odyssey
*Pherecydes (c. 600–550 BC), philosopher
*Ioannis Andreas Kargas, Catholic bishop of Syros and martyr
*Michail Melas (1833–1897), Greek politician and merchant, father to Pavlos Melas 
*Demetrius Vikelas (1835–1908), writer and the first president of the International Olympic Committee
*Emmanuel Roidis (1836–1904), writer and journalist
*Stamata Revithi (1866–?), the first woman to compete in the Olympic Games and run the Marathon
*Antonio Gregorio Vuccino (Voutsinos) A.A. (1891–1968), Archbishop of Corfu, Zante and Cefalonia, Greece
*Anna Kalouta (el) (1918–2010), actress
*Markos Vamvakaris (1905–1972), musician
*Rita Boumi-Pappa (1906–1984), poet and translator
*Anargyros Printezis, titular bishop of Gratianopolis and Apostolic Exarch of the Byzantine Rite Catholics in Greece
*Olga Broumas (1949–), poet and translator
*Stelios Mainas (1957–), actor
*Georgios Printezis (1985–), professional basketball player

==Gallery==
==See also==
*List of islands of Greece

==References==

==External links==

*Official website of Municipality of Áno Sýros 
*Official website of Municipality of Ermoúpoli 
*University of the Aegean in Ermoúpoli 
*Department of Product and Systems design from University of the Aegean
*Information about Syros from syros-online.com 
*Syros The Official website of the Greek National Tourism Organisation
*Festival of the Aegean (Official website of the music festival that has been held on the island since 2005.)
*Complete travel guide for Syros island </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q211230" start="0" end="5" title="Syros" label="Syros"/>
<link wikidata="Q211230" start="25" end="30" title="Syros" label="Siros"/>
<link wikidata="Q211230" start="34" end="38" title="Syros" label="Syra"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="45" end="50" title="Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q171132" start="65" end="73" title="Cyclades" label="Cyclades"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="82" end="92" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="114" end="120" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q210087" start="221" end="230" title="Ermoupoli" label="Ermoupoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801890" start="232" end="241" title="Ano Syros" label="Ano Syros"/>
<link wikidata="Q171132" start="293" end="301" title="Cyclades" label="Cyclades"/>
<link wikidata="Q173616" start="311" end="323" title="South Aegean" label="South Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="431" end="438" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12873070" start="499" end="508" title="Azolimnos Syros" label="Azolimnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560409" start="513" end="523" title="Poseidonia" label="Poseidonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210087" start="541" end="550" title="Ermoupoli" label="Ermoupoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q54831" start="576" end="591" title="amphitheater" label="amphitheatrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="714" end="739" title="Greek War of Independence" label="Greek War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="894" end="900" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q310633" start="970" end="983" title="St. Demetrius" label="St. Demetrius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1120" end="1127" title="Vaporia" label="Vaporia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="1190" end="1203" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="neo-classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801890" start="1271" end="1280" title="Ano Syros" label="Ano Syros"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="1330" end="1339" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetians"/>
<link wikidata="Q210087" start="1419" end="1428" title="Ermoupoli" label="Ermoupoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1452" end="1460" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="1662" end="1668" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1771" end="1779" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4425971" start="1780" end="1805" title="Saint George&amp;#x27;s Cathedral (Roman Catholic)" label="cathedral of Saint George"/>
<link wikidata="Q41363" start="1924" end="1933" title="panorama" label="panoramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q213881" start="1959" end="1966" title="List of islands of Greece" label="islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q211285" start="1970" end="1975" title="Tinos" label="Tinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q173148" start="1977" end="1982" title="Delos" label="Delos"/>
<link wikidata="Q190210" start="1984" end="1991" title="Mykonos" label="Mykonos"/>
<link wikidata="Q201272" start="1993" end="1998" title="Paros" label="Paros"/>
<link wikidata="Q175741" start="2000" end="2006" title="Andros" label="Andros"/>
<link wikidata="Q188527" start="2011" end="2016" title="Naxos" label="Naxos"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2126" end="2142" title="Early Bronze Age" label="Early Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q318144" start="2150" end="2171" title="Cycladic civilization" label="Cycladic civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735483" start="2282" end="2296" title="Kastri culture" label="Kastri culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261739" start="2360" end="2369" title="Limantepe" label="Limantepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12886007" start="2560" end="2572" title="Chalandriani" label="Chalandriani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343321" start="2814" end="2831" title="Christos Tsountas" label="Christos Tsountas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128390" start="2972" end="2991" title="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="3149" end="3160" title="Phoenicians" label="Phoenicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="3169" end="3176" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658473" start="3207" end="3216" title="swineherd" label="swineherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333846" start="3217" end="3224" title="Eumaeus" label="Eumaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="3337" end="3353" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse, Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="3392" end="3403" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q311485" start="3404" end="3414" title="Pherecydes of Syros" label="Pherecydes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261" start="3431" end="3441" title="Pythagoras" label="Pythagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q210087" start="3476" end="3481" title="Syros (city)" label="Syros"/>
<link wikidata="Q210087" start="3498" end="3507" title="Ermoupoli" label="Ermoupoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q65040333" start="3527" end="3535" title="Galessus" label="Galessus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3564" end="3572" title="Galissas" label="Galissas"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="3635" end="3644" title="Classical Antiquity" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="3658" end="3667" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3770" end="3775" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q210087" start="3845" end="3854" title="Ermoupoli" label="Ermoupoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q134313" start="3905" end="3914" title="barbarian" label="barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="3925" end="3931" title="piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="3952" end="3958" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="4143" end="4152" title="Sicily" label="Sicilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="4154" end="4159" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="4161" end="4166" title="Turkish people" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="4171" end="4180" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="4190" end="4199" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q254304" start="4236" end="4259" title="Theme of the Aegean Sea" label="Theme of the Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="4346" end="4360" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q542844" start="4477" end="4489" title="Marco I Sanudo" label="Marco Sanudo"/>
<link wikidata="Q777981" start="4506" end="4530" title="Duchy of the Archipelago" label="Duchy of the Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801890" start="4698" end="4707" title="Ano Syros" label="Ano Syros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197995" start="4732" end="4744" title="Latinokratia" label="Latin period"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4787" end="4801" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="4823" end="4837" title="Greek language" label="Greek language"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="4947" end="4953" title="feudalism" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="5008" end="5015" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="5090" end="5097" title="Privateer" label="corsair"/>
<link wikidata="Q200582" start="5098" end="5108" title="Hayreddin Barbarossa" label="Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q171132" start="5276" end="5284" title="Cyclades" label="Cyclades"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="5317" end="5334" title="freedom of religion" label="religious freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="5356" end="5359" title="tax" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="5423" end="5431" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q876905" start="5610" end="5641" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Syros and Milos" label="Roman Catholic diocese of Syros"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426709" start="5663" end="5672" title="suffragan bishop" label="suffragan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188527" start="5676" end="5681" title="Naxos (island)" label="Naxos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233755" start="5762" end="5791" title="Latin Archbishopric of Athens" label="Latin Archbishopric of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q189854" start="5919" end="5931" title="Metropolitan bishop" label="metropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810265" start="6088" end="6103" title="titular (Catholicism)" label="titular bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q666632" start="6120" end="6128" title="Le Quien" label="Le Quien"/>
<link wikidata="Q74759" start="6136" end="6141" title="Eubel" label="Eubel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12878289" start="6177" end="6199" title="Ioannis Andreas Kargas" label="Ioannis Andreas Kargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="6267" end="6272" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="6605" end="6611" title="piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="7043" end="7067" title="Greek War of Independence" label="Greek Revolution in 1821"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="7171" end="7181" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q160483" start="7183" end="7188" title="Chios" label="Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q368275" start="7190" end="7197" title="Spetses" label="Spetses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330873" start="7199" end="7204" title="Psara" label="Psara"/>
<link wikidata="Q793383" start="7206" end="7212" title="Aivali" label="Aivali"/>
<link wikidata="Q35997" start="7214" end="7220" title="İzmir" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481525" start="7222" end="7229" title="Kydonia" label="Kydonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q533410" start="7231" end="7237" title="Kassos" label="Kassos"/>
<link wikidata="Q528546" start="7335" end="7358" title="First Hellenic Republic" label="First Hellenic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="7483" end="7489" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="7540" end="7554" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q46124" start="7723" end="7733" title="sanatorium" label="sanatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="7796" end="7807" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7837" end="7851" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="7998" end="8012" title="Greek Orthodox" label="Greek Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573466" start="8214" end="8232" title="Constitution of Greece" label="Greek Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q220430" start="8240" end="8260" title="Ioannis Kapodistrias" label="Ioannis Kapodistrias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816028" start="8581" end="8604" title="National Bank of Greece" label="National Bank of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910239" start="8658" end="8671" title="High society (group)" label="elite society"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="8694" end="8701" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q708676" start="8775" end="8785" title="Charitable organization" label="charitable"/>
<link wikidata="Q45199" start="8939" end="8946" title="sailor" label="mariner"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="9274" end="9286" title="Neoclassicism" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9302" end="9318" title="Greek Classicism" label="Greek Classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="9340" end="9351" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q66108" start="9424" end="9436" title="Ernst Ziller" label="Ernst Ziller"/>
<link wikidata="Q16327379" start="9443" end="9457" title="Theater Apollon, Syros" label="Apollo Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9483" end="9495" title="Pietro Campo" label="Pietro Campo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471" start="9524" end="9532" title="La Scala" label="La Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="9536" end="9541" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q309759" start="9787" end="9798" title="Edward Lear" label="Edward Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="9909" end="9916" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="9921" end="9929" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="10087" end="10098" title="romanticism" label="romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q210087" start="10112" end="10121" title="Ermoupoli" label="Ermoupoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q210087" start="10733" end="10742" title="Ermoupoli" label="Ermoupoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556906" start="10807" end="10814" title="Neorion" label="Neorion"/>
<link wikidata="Q190928" start="10829" end="10837" title="shipyard" label="shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601890" start="11317" end="11340" title="Greek Steamship Company" label="Greek Steamship Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="11503" end="11510" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133123" start="11593" end="11599" title="Patras" label="Patras"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="11810" end="11817" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12249" end="12265" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="12460" end="12476" title="standard of living" label="living standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="12526" end="12533" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556906" start="12595" end="12602" title="Neorion" label="Neorion"/>
<link wikidata="Q190928" start="12603" end="12612" title="shipyards" label="shipyards"/>
<link wikidata="Q593556" start="12808" end="12825" title="Aegean University" label="Aegean University"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="12847" end="12856" title="Fine Arts" label="Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q207241" start="12911" end="12923" title="Applied Arts" label="Applied Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="12928" end="12939" title="Visual Arts" label="Visual Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663518" start="12945" end="12974" title="Syros Island National Airport" label="Syros Island National Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q133215" start="12987" end="12993" title="casino" label="casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="13023" end="13037" title="transportation" label="transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q867393" start="13066" end="13075" title="amenities" label="amenities"/>
<link wikidata="Q39614" start="13183" end="13191" title="cemetery" label="cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843791" start="13350" end="13359" title="consulate" label="consulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234255" start="13560" end="13573" title="regional units of Greece" label="regional unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q173616" start="13581" end="13593" title="South Aegean" label="South Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349648" start="13611" end="13623" title="Communities and Municipalities of Greece" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722495" start="13682" end="13716" title="Kallikratis Programme" label="2011 Kallikratis government reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q171132" start="13780" end="13799" title="Cyclades Prefecture" label="Cyclades Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q210087" start="13904" end="13913" title="Ermoupoli" label="Ermoupoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801890" start="13915" end="13924" title="Ano Syros" label="Ano Syros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560409" start="13926" end="13936" title="Poseidonia" label="Poseidonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147663" start="13992" end="13998" title="Gyaros" label="Gyaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860467" start="14121" end="14130" title="provinces of Greece" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q190210" start="14236" end="14243" title="Mykonos" label="Mykonos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="14321" end="14337" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q301" start="14543" end="14551" title="El Greco" label="El Greco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="14586" end="14601" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="14823" end="14829" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="14865" end="14873" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q876905" start="14885" end="14901" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Syros and Milos" label="Catholic diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q924774" start="14931" end="14945" title="secular priest" label="secular priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="14965" end="14971" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q108325" start="15037" end="15043" title="chapel" label="chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q124862" start="15050" end="15059" title="Order of Friars Minor Capuchin" label="Capuchins"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="15064" end="15071" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531309" start="15104" end="15122" title="Sisters of Charity" label="Sisters of Charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q33117" start="15166" end="15204" title="Sisters of St Joseph" label="Sisters of St Joseph of the Apparition"/>
<link wikidata="Q44476" start="15310" end="15341" title="Greek Byzantine Catholic Church" label="Greek Byzantine Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q156251" start="15520" end="15525" title="caper" label="caper"/>
<link wikidata="Q25284" start="15567" end="15574" title="parsley" label="parsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q60744885" start="15690" end="15704" title="Tomatokeftedes" label="Tomatokeftedes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15809" end="15820" title="San Michali" label="San Michali"/>
<link wikidata="Q182339" start="15829" end="15837" title="Turkish delight" label="Loukoumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9261136" start="15941" end="15960" title="Foinikas Syros V.C." label="Foinikas Syros V.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1333846" start="16145" end="16152" title="Eumaeus" label="Eumaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="16171" end="16178" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311485" start="16180" end="16190" title="Pherecydes of Syros" label="Pherecydes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="16208" end="16219" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q12878289" start="16221" end="16243" title="Ioannis Andreas Kargas" label="Ioannis Andreas Kargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835697" start="16282" end="16295" title="Michail Melas" label="Michail Melas"/>
<link wikidata="Q527944" start="16350" end="16362" title="Pavlos Melas" label="Pavlos Melas"/>
<link wikidata="Q297024" start="16365" end="16382" title="Demetrius Vikelas" label="Demetrius Vikelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="16434" end="16465" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q211350" start="16467" end="16482" title="Emmanuel Roidis" label="Emmanuel Roidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="16507" end="16517" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725297" start="16519" end="16534" title="Stamata Revithi" label="Stamata Revithi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="16579" end="16592" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q40244" start="16605" end="16613" title="Marathon" label="Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128462" start="16615" end="16639" title="Antonio Gregorio Vuccino" label="Antonio Gregorio Vuccino"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="16670" end="16680" title="Archbishop" label="Archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="16684" end="16689" title="Corfu" label="Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q144880" start="16691" end="16696" title="Zante" label="Zante"/>
<link wikidata="Q178488" start="16701" end="16710" title="Cefalonia" label="Cefalonia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16720" end="16732" title="Anna Kalouta" label="Anna Kalouta"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16734" end="16736" title=":el:Άννα Καλουτά#Πηγές" label="el"/>
<link wikidata="Q510704" start="16760" end="16777" title="Markos Vamvakaris" label="Markos Vamvakaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q12149807" start="16801" end="16817" title="Rita Boumi-Pappa" label="Rita Boumi-Pappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q446270" start="16852" end="16871" title="Anargyros Printezis" label="Anargyros Printezis"/>
<link wikidata="Q948657" start="16873" end="16887" title="titular bishop" label="titular bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543614" start="16891" end="16904" title="Gratianopolis (episcopal see)" label="Gratianopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144428" start="16909" end="16925" title="Apostolic Exarch" label="Apostolic Exarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q44476" start="16933" end="16967" title="Greek Byzantine Catholic Church" label="Byzantine Rite Catholics in Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007001" start="16969" end="16981" title="Olga Broumas" label="Olga Broumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="17000" end="17010" title="translator" label="translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175410" start="17012" end="17026" title="Stelios Mainas" label="Stelios Mainas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290438" start="17043" end="17061" title="Georgios Printezis" label="Georgios Printezis"/>
<link wikidata="Q213881" start="17129" end="17154" title="List of islands of Greece" label="List of islands of Greece"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276997" wikidata="Q1001384" url="?curid=276997" title="Ilta-Sanomat">
<text>is one of Finland&#x27;s two prominent tabloid-size evening newspapers and the largest paper in the country. Its counterpart and biggest rival is &quot;Iltalehti&quot;.

According to the National Media Research done in 2019, &quot;Ilta-Sanomat&quot; is also the biggest digital media in Finland and reaches about 2.5 million Finns.

Johanna Lahti has been the editor-in-chief of &quot;Ilta-Sanomat&quot; since November 2019, when the previous editor-in-chief Tapio Sadeoja retired after 38 years in office.

==History and profile==
The paper was established in 1932 as the afternoon edition of &quot;Helsingin Sanomat&quot;. In 1949 it became a separate newspaper and was named &quot;Ilta-Sanomat&quot;.

Its sister paper is &quot;Helsingin Sanomat&quot; and both papers are part of Sanoma. &quot;Ilta-Sanomat&quot; is published in tabloid format six times per week. The paper has an independent political stance.

==Circulation==
The circulation of &quot;Ilta-Sanomat&quot; was 212,854 copies in 1993, making it the second largest newspaper in Finland after its sister paper &quot;Helsingin Sanomat&quot;. In the period of 1995-1996 the paper had a circulation of 213,600 copies.

&quot;Ilta-Sanomat&quot; had a circulation of 215,000 copies in 2000. Its circulation was 218,829 copies in 2001, making it the second most read paper in the country. In 2002 it had a circulation of 214,610 copies on weekdays and 243,443 copies in weekends. It was again the second best selling newspaper with a circulation of 205,000 copies in 2003. Next year the circulation of the paper was down to 201,000 copies.

The paper had a circulation of 195,673 copies in 2005, and of 186,462 copies in 2006. Its circulation was 176,531 copies in 2007. The circulation of &quot;Ilta-Sanomat&quot; was 161,615 copies in 2008 and 152,948 copies in 2009. It was 150,351 copies in 2010 and 143,321 copies in 2011.

In 2010 the online version of &quot;Ilta-Sanomat&quot; was the second most visited website in Finland in 2010 and was visited by 1,823,956 people per week.

==Editors-in-chief==

* Johanna Lahti 2019–
*Reijo Ruokanen ?–2010
*Tapio Sadeoja 2007–2019
*Hannu Savola 2006–2007
*Antti-Pekka Pietilä 2003–2006
*Vesa-Pekka Koljonen 1984–2003
*Martti Huhtamäki 1974–1983
*Olavi Aarrejärvi 1966–1973
*Heikki Tikkanen 1961–1966
*Teo Mertanen 1956–1961
*Eero Petäjäniemi 1949–1956
*Yrjö Niiniluoto 1938–1949 (also the editor-in-chief &quot;Helsingin Sanomat&quot;)
*Eljas Erkko 1932–1938 (also the editor-in-chief &quot;Helsingin Sanomat&quot;)

==See also==
*List of newspapers in Finland

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1449648" start="39" end="46" title="Tabloid (newspaper format)" label="tabloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421561" start="152" end="161" title="Iltalehti" label="Iltalehti"/>
<link wikidata="Q366921" start="600" end="617" title="Helsingin Sanomat" label="Helsingin Sanomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540297" start="783" end="789" title="Sanoma" label="Sanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449648" start="832" end="846" title="tabloid format" label="tabloid format"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2114" end="2127" title="Tapio Sadeoja" label="Tapio Sadeoja"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2139" end="2151" title="Hannu Savola" label="Hannu Savola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001384" start="2163" end="2182" title="Antti-Pekka Pietilä" label="Antti-Pekka Pietilä"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2194" end="2213" title="Vesa-Pekka Koljonen" label="Vesa-Pekka Koljonen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2225" end="2241" title="Martti Huhtamäki" label="Martti Huhtamäki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2253" end="2269" title="Olavi Aarrejärvi" label="Olavi Aarrejärvi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2281" end="2296" title="Heikki Tikkanen" label="Heikki Tikkanen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2308" end="2320" title="Teo Mertanen" label="Teo Mertanen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2332" end="2348" title="Eero Petäjäniemi" label="Eero Petäjäniemi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2360" end="2375" title="Yrjö Niiniluoto" label="Yrjö Niiniluoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q589298" start="2396" end="2411" title="editor-in-chief" label="editor-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q366921" start="2418" end="2435" title="Helsingin Sanomat" label="Helsingin Sanomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983791" start="2444" end="2455" title="Eljas Erkko" label="Eljas Erkko"/>
<link wikidata="Q855615" start="2538" end="2567" title="List of newspapers in Finland" label="List of newspapers in Finland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277003" wikidata="Q151197" url="?curid=277003" title="Combat engineer">
<text>A combat engineer (also called pioneer or [[sapper]]) is a type of soldier who performs military engineering tasks in support of land forces combat operations. Combat engineers perform a variety of military engineering, tunnel and mine warfare tasks, as well as construction and demolition duties in and out of combat zones.

Combat engineers facilitate the mobility of friendly forces while impeding that of the enemy. They also work to assure the survivability of friendly forces, building fighting positions, fortifications, and roads. They conduct demolition missions and clear minefields manually or through use of specialized vehicles. Common combat engineer missions include construction and breaching of trenches, tank traps and other obstacles and fortifications; obstacle emplacement and bunker construction; route clearance and reconnaissance; bridge and road construction or destruction; emplacement and clearance of land mines; and combined arms breaching. Typically, combat engineers are also trained in infantry tactics and, when required, serve as provisional infantry.

==Combat engineer organization==

Combat engineers play a key role in all armed forces of the world. They are invariably found closely integrated into the force structure of divisions, combat brigades, and smaller fighting units. 

=== Combat support formations ===
In many countries, combat engineers provide combat support members of a broader military engineering corps or branch. Other nations have distinct combat engineering corps or branches; they are separate from other types of military engineers. The Danish military engineers&#x27; corps, for example, is almost entirely organized into one regiment of combat engineers, simply named Ingeniørregimentet (&quot;The Engineering Regiment&quot;). 

=== Combat arms formations ===
Combat engineer battalions are usually a part of a brigade combat team. During the War in Afghanistan and the 2003–2011 Iraq War, the U.S. Army tasked its combat engineers with route clearance missions designed to counter rising threats of improvised explosive devices (IEDs). To increase the effectiveness of these units, EOD and mechanic teams were typically embedded with the combat engineer platoon. Due to rising IED threats, the U.S. Army sends some combat engineers to complete Explosive Ordnance Clearance Agent training.

=== Special operations units ===
Individual combat engineers are often assigned as a component of both covert and overt direct action special operations teams. For example, the active duty US Army Special Forces and its two reserve components, the 19th SFG and 20th SFG of the US Army National Guard, employ combat engineer sergeants designated by MOS 18C. A Green Berets Operational Detachment Alpha, more commonly known as an &quot;A-Team&quot;, typically consists of 12 men, two of whom are combat engineer sergeants.

Another example is the Israeli Yahalom unit, which is a special operations engineering unit, that possess the abilities of sabotage, demolition of explosives and tunnel warfare.

==Terminology==
A general combat engineer is often called a &quot;pioneer&quot; or &quot;sapper&quot;, terms derived respectively from the French and British armies. In some armies, &quot;pioneer&quot; and &quot;sapper&quot; indicate specific military ranks and levels of combat engineers, who work under fire in all seasons and may be allocated to different corps, as they were in the former Soviet Army, or they may be organized in the same corps. Geomatics (surveying and cartography) is another area of military engineering but is often performed by the combat engineers of some nations and in other cases is a separate responsibility, as was formerly the case in the Australian Army. While the officers of a combat engineer unit may be professionally certified civil or mechanical engineers, the non-commissioned members are generally not.

===Sapper===

In the British, Indian, Canadian, Australian, and New Zealand armies, a sapper is a soldier who has specialized combat engineer training. The term &quot;sapper&quot; in the U.S. Army refers to a person who either possesses the combat engineer military occupational specialty or who has graduated from the Sapper Leader Course, more commonly called &quot;Sapper School.&quot; In Sapper School, volunteers from the ranks of combat engineers and other military occupational specialties (most of whom serve in the combat arms) undergo training in combat engineer and infantry battle drills, expedient demolitions, threat weapons, unarmed combat, mountaineering, and water operations. Some of the training in this 28-day course, arguably one of the most challenging in the U.S. Army, features covert infiltration techniques or survival skills.

In the Israeli Defense Forces, sapper (פלס) is a military profession code denoting a combat engineer who has graduated from various levels of combat engineering training. Sapper 05 is the basic level, Sapper 06 is the general level, Sapper 08 is the combat engineer commander&#x27;s level, and Sapper 11 is the combat engineer officer level. All IDF sappers are also trained as Rifleman 07, matching infantry.

In the Canadian Army, it is a term for soldiers that have completed the basic Combat Engineer training.

In the Portuguese Army, a &quot;sapador de engenharia&quot; (engineering sapper) is a soldier of the engineering branch that has specialized combat engineer training. A &quot;sapador de infantaria&quot; (infantry sapper) is a soldier of the infantry branch that has a similar training and that usually serves in the combat support sapper platoon of an infantry battalion.

The Italian Army uses the term &quot;guastatori&quot; for their combat engineers.

===Pioneer===

In the Finnish army, &quot;pioneeri&quot; is the private equivalent rank in the army for a soldier who has completed the basic combat engineering training. Naval engineers retain the rank &quot;matruusi&quot; but bear the &quot;pioneeri&quot; insignia on their sleeves.

The German Bundeswehr uses the term &quot;Pionier&quot; for their combat engineers and other specialized units, who are associated with Special Forces to clear obstacles and perform engineering duties. Also the combat engineers in the Austro-Hungarian k.u.k. Forces were called &quot;Pioniere&quot;.

===Assault pioneer===

In the British, Canadian, Australian and New Zealand armies, an assault pioneer is an infantry soldier with some limited combat engineer training in clearing obstacles during assaults and light engineering duties. Until recently, assault pioneers were responsible for the operation of flamethrowers.

===Field engineer===
Field engineer is a term used (or formerly used) in many Commonwealth armies. In modern usage, it is often synonymous with combat engineer. However, the term originally identified those military engineers who supported an army operating in the field instead of garrison engineers who built and supported permanent fixed bases. In its original usage, &quot;field engineering&quot; would have been inclusive of but broader than &quot;combat engineering.&quot;

===Specialisations===

Sappers specialising in tunnel warfare may be known as miners.

In the French Army, combat engineers specialising in bridge-building are called &quot;pontoniers&quot;, while in the Italian Army, combat engineers specialising in bridge-building are called &quot;pontieri&quot;.

==Practices and techniques==
Combat engineers are force multipliers and enhance the survival of other troops through the use and practice of camouflage, reconnaissance, communications and other services. These include the construction of roads, bridges, field fortifications, obstacles and the construction and running of water points. In these roles, combat engineers use a wide variety of hand and power tools. They are also responsible for construction rigging, the use of explosives, and the carrying out of demolitions, obstacle clearance, and obstacle construction, assault of fortifications, use of assault boats in water obstacle crossings, helipad construction, general construction, route reconnaissance and road reconnaissance, and erecting communication installations. Combat engineers build and run water distribution points, carrying out water filtration, and NBC decontamination when necessary, and storage prior to distribution.

All these role activities and technologies are divided into several areas of combat engineering:

=== Mobility ===
Improving the ability of one&#x27;s own force to move around the battlefield. Combat engineers typically support this role through reduction of enemy obstacles which include point and row minefields, anti-tank ditches, wire obstacles, concrete, and metal anti-vehicle barriers, and improvised explosive devices (IED) and wall and door breaching in urban terrain. Mechanized combat engineer units also have armored vehicles capable of laying short bridges for limited gap-crossing.
* Clearing terrain obstacles
* Overcoming trenches and ditches
* Opening routes for armored fighting vehicles
* Constructing roads and bridges
* Route clearance

=== Countermobility ===
Building obstacles to prevent the enemy from moving around the battlefield. Destroying bridges, blocking roads, creating airstrips, digging trenches, etc. Can also include planting land mines and anti-handling devices when authorized and directed to do so.

When the defender must retreat it is often desirable to destroy anything that may be of use to the enemy, particularly bridges, as their destruction can slow the advance of the attackers.
* Planting land mines
* Digging trenches and ditches
* Demolishing roads and bridges

=== Explosive material handling ===
The placement of land mines to create minefields and their maintenance and removal.
* Clearing fields of land mines
* Demolition

=== Assault ===
* Opening routes during an assault
* Demolishing enemy structures (using bulldozers or explosive charges).

=== Defense structures ===
Building structures which enable one&#x27;s own soldiers to survive on the battlefield. Examples include trenches, bunkers, shelters, and armored vehicle fighting positions.

Defensive fortifications are designed to prevent intrusion into the inner works by infantry. For minor defensive locations, these may only consist of simple walls and ditches. The design principle is to slow down the advance of attackers to where they can be destroyed by defenders from sheltered positions. Most large fortifications are not a single structure but rather a concentric series of fortifications of increasing strength.
* Building fortifications
* Building outposts
* Building fences
* Defense against WMD weapon threats

==Equipment and vehicles==
Combat engineers employ a wide range of transportation vehicles and equipment and use weapons unique to the engineers, including those used in land mine warfare.

=== Equipment used by combat engineers ===

Basic combat engineering tools include safe use of:
* driving tools and chopping tools (hammers, mauls, sledges, screwdriver, and bits)
* cutting tools and smoothing tools (saws, chisels, planes, files and rasps, brush-cutting tools, miscellaneous cutting tools)
* drilling tools, boring tools, and countersinking tools
* measuring tools, leveling tools and layout tools (rules, tapes, marking tools, levels, plumb bobs, squares)
* gripping tools, prying tools, and twisting tools (pliers, wrenches, bars)
* holding tools, raising tools, and grinding tools (vises, clamps, jacks, grinders, and oilstones)
* timber handling tools and climbing tools; digging tools (shovels, posthole diggers, picks, and mattocks)
* portable power tools and trailer-mounted tools (electric tool trailer and generator, portable power tools)
* miscellaneous tools.

=== Vehicles ===

==== Obstacle breaching ====
For obstacle breaching, including minefields, the combat engineers use a variety of vehicles, explosive devices, and plastic explosives including:
* Minefield breaching devices
** Dozer blade
** Mine rollers
** Bangalore torpedo
** Antipersonnel Obstacle Breaching System
** Mine-clearing line charge (MICLIC)
* Bomb disposal robots
* Explosives, mines, and bombs
* Field-deployable bridges, for example, French EFA and Bailey bridge.

== Historical publications ==
The &quot;Basic Field Manual, Engineer Soldier&#x27;s Handbook&quot;, 2 June 1943 (FM 21-105) was written to provide guidance to a new combat engineer in the United States.

==See also==
*17th Armored Engineer Battalion
*Engineer Combat Battalion
*List of combat engineering corps
*Military engineering
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="2" end="17" title="Combat engineer" label="combat engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="31" end="38" title="Combat engineer" label="pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="42" end="52" title="Combat engineer" label="[[sapper]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q158797" start="88" end="108" title="military engineering" label="military engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q88222" start="220" end="226" title="Tunnel warfare" label="tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="231" end="235" title="land mine" label="mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="262" end="274" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q331483" start="279" end="289" title="demolition" label="demolition"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="512" end="525" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="532" end="536" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q331483" start="552" end="562" title="demolition" label="demolition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047443" start="620" end="640" title="Military engineering vehicle" label="specialized vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="757" end="770" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q91122" start="798" end="804" title="bunker" label="bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280" start="855" end="861" title="bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="866" end="870" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="929" end="938" title="land mine" label="land mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q552994" start="1397" end="1411" title="combat support" label="combat support"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993443" start="1732" end="1750" title="Ingeniørregimentet" label="Ingeniørregimentet"/>
<link wikidata="Q915341" start="1875" end="1894" title="brigade combat team" label="brigade combat team"/>
<link wikidata="Q345707" start="1907" end="1925" title="War in Afghanistan" label="War in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="1944" end="1952" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q18391248" start="2001" end="2016" title="route clearance" label="route clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249453" start="2064" end="2091" title="improvised explosive device" label="improvised explosive device"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631521" start="2475" end="2488" title="Direct action (military)" label="direct action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060062" start="2489" end="2507" title="special operations" label="special operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677555" start="2532" end="2543" title="active duty" label="active duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q482421" start="2544" end="2566" title="United States Army Special Forces" label="US Army Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q657908" start="2579" end="2597" title="Reserve components of the United States Armed Forces" label="reserve components"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595819" start="2603" end="2611" title="19th Special Forces Group" label="19th SFG"/>
<link wikidata="Q14455833" start="2616" end="2624" title="20th Special Forces Group" label="20th SFG"/>
<link wikidata="Q689764" start="2635" end="2654" title="Army National Guard" label="Army National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114481" start="2703" end="2706" title="United States military occupation code" label="MOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q482421" start="2714" end="2726" title="Green Berets" label="Green Berets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2727" end="2755" title="United States Army Special Forces#Basic Element – SF Operational Detachment-A (SFODA) composition" label="Operational Detachment Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q368236" start="2908" end="2915" title="Yahalom (IDF)" label="Yahalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q88222" start="3039" end="3053" title="tunnel warfare" label="tunnel warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q13393921" start="3122" end="3129" title="pioneer (military)" label="pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324245" start="3145" end="3151" title="sapper" label="sapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3195" end="3201" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3206" end="3213" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q56019" start="3299" end="3312" title="military rank" label="military rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q619798" start="3506" end="3515" title="Geomatics" label="Geomatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q690109" start="4426" end="4437" title="combat arms" label="combat arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="4763" end="4785" title="Israeli Defence Forces" label="Israeli Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q61022630" start="5083" end="5090" title="officer" label="officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052080" start="5134" end="5142" title="Rifleman" label="Rifleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="5156" end="5164" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="5174" end="5187" title="Canadian Army" label="Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542269" start="5279" end="5294" title="Portuguese Army" label="Portuguese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q796411" start="5649" end="5661" title="Italian Army" label="Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383264" start="5750" end="5762" title="Finnish army" label="Finnish army"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="6025" end="6035" title="Bundeswehr" label="Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q265411" start="6266" end="6272" title="k.u.k." label="k.u.k."/>
<link wikidata="Q45183" start="6623" end="6635" title="flamethrower" label="flamethrower"/>
<link wikidata="Q88222" start="7166" end="7180" title="tunnel warfare" label="tunnel warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="7213" end="7224" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324245" start="7292" end="7301" title="pontonier" label="pontonier"/>
<link wikidata="Q796411" start="7323" end="7335" title="Italian Army" label="Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3598746" start="7403" end="7411" title="pontieri" label="pontieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="7674" end="7693" title="field fortification" label="field fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="7896" end="7905" title="explosive" label="explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797655" start="8026" end="8038" title="assault boat" label="assault boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q534159" start="8069" end="8076" title="helipad" label="helipad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371594" start="8113" end="8133" title="route reconnaissance" label="route reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249453" start="8763" end="8790" title="improvised explosive device" label="improvised explosive device"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002137" start="8811" end="8825" title="door breaching" label="door breaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852785" start="9004" end="9010" title="trench" label="trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="9046" end="9070" title="armored fighting vehicle" label="armored fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="9087" end="9091" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280" start="9097" end="9103" title="bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18391248" start="9107" end="9122" title="Route clearance" label="Route clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="9329" end="9338" title="land mine" label="land mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710235" start="9344" end="9364" title="anti-handling device" label="anti-handling device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760704" start="9429" end="9436" title="retreat (military)" label="retreat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001676" start="9568" end="9575" title="Offensive (military)" label="advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="9733" end="9742" title="land mine" label="land mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="9754" end="9763" title="minefield" label="minefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="9821" end="9830" title="land mine" label="land mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131677" start="9935" end="9944" title="bulldozer" label="bulldozer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991371" start="10045" end="10053" title="soldiers" label="soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="10182" end="10195" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="10255" end="10263" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="10617" end="10630" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321241" start="10643" end="10650" title="outpost (military)" label="outpost"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="10688" end="10698" title="WMD weapon" label="WMD weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q320343" start="11014" end="11028" title="chopping tools" label="chopping tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760958" start="11080" end="11093" title="cutting tools" label="cutting tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770203" start="11264" end="11279" title="measuring tools" label="measuring tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q898359" start="11951" end="11968" title="plastic explosive" label="plastic explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q806460" start="12045" end="12062" title="Bangalore torpedo" label="Bangalore torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774250" start="12066" end="12105" title="Antipersonnel Obstacle Breaching System" label="Antipersonnel Obstacle Breaching System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864043" start="12109" end="12134" title="Mine-clearing line charge" label="Mine-clearing line charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q649416" start="12146" end="12159" title="Bomb disposal" label="Bomb disposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280" start="12217" end="12223" title="bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342357" start="12246" end="12249" title="EFA (mobile bridge)" label="EFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q803818" start="12254" end="12267" title="Bailey bridge" label="Bailey bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507465" start="12488" end="12519" title="17th Armored Engineer Battalion" label="17th Armored Engineer Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23131389" start="12521" end="12546" title="Engineer Combat Battalion" label="Engineer Combat Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715825" start="12548" end="12580" title="List of combat engineering corps" label="List of combat engineering corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q158797" start="12582" end="12602" title="Military engineering" label="Military engineering"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277004" wikidata="Q269669" url="?curid=277004" title="Illeana Douglas">
<text>Illeana Hesselberg ( ; born July 25, 1961), known professionally as Illeana Douglas, is an American actress and filmmaker. She appeared in three episodes of &quot;Six Feet Under&quot;, for which she received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination as Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series and won the Best Guest Actress in a Drama Series award from OFTA, the Online Film &amp; Television Association, and in the TV series &quot;Action&quot; opposite Jay Mohr, for which she won a Satellite Award for Best Actress – Television Series Musical or Comedy. , she can be seen on Turner Classic Movies where she hosts specials focused on unheralded women directors from film history.

== Early life ==
Douglas was born on July 25, 1961 in New Haven, Connecticut, the daughter of Joan Douglas (née Georgescu), a schoolteacher, and Gregory Hesselberg, a painter. Douglas&#x27;s father was the son of Hollywood actor Melvyn Douglas and his wife, the artist Rosalind Hightower. Douglas had two older brothers, the late Stefan Gregor Hesselberg, a technician in the histology laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who also trained racehorses in Verona, Italy, and Erik Hesselberg, a journalist.

Douglas grew up primarily in Old Saybrook, Connecticut, and has said that she was also raised in many other cities, in Massachusetts where her father lived, Connecticut where her mother lived, and New York, where her extended family lived. During her childhood she spent time going back and forth between relatives during the summer. Douglas said that her parents were heavily influenced by the 1970s hippie culture—her father especially by the movie &quot;Easy Rider&quot;. They had a loose parenting style and did not pressure her to go to college. Comedy albums were popular in her family. They would put on dramatic interpretations and performances.

Douglas&#x27;s mother&#x27;s side is Roman Catholic—Italian and Romanian from Astoria, Queens. Her maternal grandmother worked in the restaurant at Gertz department store in Astoria; her maternal grandfather was a welder. Douglas said that her maternal grandmother, a former Rockette, had wanted to be an actor. She instilled in Douglas a love for the movies, which they attended together frequently when she was a child.

As a child she would visit her paternal grandfather, the actor Melvyn Douglas, in his apartment in Manhattan on the Upper West Side as well as at his home in the Hollywood Hills section of Los Angeles. Douglas said that during her summers with her grandfather, he introduced her to his interests, which included theater, elocution, reading, art, and history.

Douglas has said that her grandfather&#x27;s performance in &quot;Being There&quot; was influential on her own career. In the 1940s, Douglas&#x27; grandfather and Peter Sellers both served in the military during WWII and met in Burma. In the 1960s, the two men reconnected in London and talked about their time together in the war. During high school, Douglas visited the set while they were shooting on location in Asheville, North Carolina and met Sellers, whose work she admired greatly. It was the first time she was on a film set. She graduated from Haddam-Killingworth High School in Higganum, Connecticut in 1979.

Douglas notes the contrast between her working-class Italian roots and the glamorous Hollywood world of her paternal side of the family. Famous people including Myrna Loy, Gore Vidal, Gloria Steinem, politicians, writers, and others were often present, in a salon-like environment. Douglas has said it took her a long time to reconcile the different lifestyles she was exposed to in her youth. She identifies more with the Italian side of her family, and has said that she developed more of their &quot;rhythms and ways&quot; due to the amount of time she spent with them in Queens.

== Career ==

=== Early career ===

After graduating from high school, Douglas moved to New York City. Having been interested in movies from her childhood, Douglas wanted to be in show business. She stayed with relatives in various temporary arrangements. Douglas attended American Academy of Dramatic Arts, where she was a contemporary of Elias Koteas and Lou Mustillo. Following their first year, Mustillo and Douglas were not invited back to the school.

When she was 18 years old, Douglas went to work for Steve Rubell at the Morgans Hotel. While there, Douglas decided to reinvent herself, and began attending Neighborhood Playhouse School of the Theatre, where she studied with the acting teacher Richard Pinter. While she was working in a sketch comedy group called Manhattan Punchline, one of the troupe members suggested she try stand-up comedy. Douglas worked briefly at Stand Up New York, and found the writing and acting easy, but found the performing difficult. She did not like the raw comedy style then in vogue, and did not enjoy the lifestyle of a standup comic.

Douglas began working for a well-known publicist, Peggy Siegal. Through this position, she tried to send her headshot to Martin Scorsese&#x27;s casting director, but was not successful. At that time, Scorsese was editing his film &quot;Last Temptation of Christ&quot; in an office down the hall from Siegal&#x27;s offices. The editors needed a sound effect to convey Mary Magdalene screaming, and asked her to help out. In this way, Douglas met Scorsese, his editor, Thelma Schoonmaker, as well as filmmaker Michael Powell, and provided many ADR of crowd sounds. The group bonded over discussion of old films, which was a long-standing interest. Scorsese and Douglas eventually began a long-term relationship.

Soon afterwards, she got her first movie role: a small part in Scorsese&#x27;s segment of &quot;New York Stories.&quot; Douglas said that Lorraine Bracco took Douglas under her wing during the shooting of Scorsese&#x27;s &quot;Goodfellas&quot;, helping her to find an agent. It was then that Douglas became Scorsese&#x27;s girlfriend.

Douglas appeared in Scorsese&#x27;s &quot;Cape Fear&quot; (1991) – one of four Scorsese films in which she has appeared. After &quot;Cape Fear,&quot; she had several film roles where her character was eventually cut, including in &quot;Household Saints&quot;, &quot;Jungle Fever&quot;, and &quot;Quiz Show&quot;. &quot;It was kind of depressing,&quot; she commented.

Douglas acted in a low-budget movie called &quot;Grief&quot; that was accepted into Sundance, which led to her meeting director Allison Anders.

=== Feature work ===
Douglas had a supporting role in 1995&#x27;s &quot;To Die For&quot;, a film that boosted her career in which the director Gus Van Sant taught her about the technical aspects of filmmaking, such as camera blocking, film lenses, and modulating a performance for film. It was also a movie where she felt that the Meisner technique she learned at the Neighborhood Playhouse started to connect for her.

Douglas and Allison Anders wanted to collaborate on a film, and began work on a biography of Anne Sexton, which never came to fruition. As they were both interested in music, Douglas suggested a movie about the personalities of the Brill Building, where she had worked. This led to her first starring role as singer-songwriter Denise Waverly in Anders&#x27; 1996 film, &quot;Grace of My Heart&quot;.

She had another supporting role in &quot;Ghost World&quot; (2001).

In 2016, Douglas appeared opposite Sean Astin in the independent feature film, &quot;Unleashed.&quot;

=== Television work ===
On television, Douglas appeared in a memorable role as one of Garry Shandling&#x27;s love interests towards the end of the series, &quot;The Larry Sanders Show,&quot; in 1998. In 1999, she had a starring role opposite Jay Mohr in the series &quot;Action&quot;. She played a television executive who started out as a prostitute who had Mohr as a regular customer.

She guest starred on &quot;Seinfeld&quot;, &quot;Frasier&quot; and &quot;The Drew Carey Show&quot;, and has played a public defender on several episodes of &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot; in 2002 and 2003. She appeared in two episodes of the HBO TV series &quot;Six Feet Under&quot;, both of which earned Emmy nominations for Guest Actress in a Drama. She appeared as Mrs. Ari&#x27;s sister Marci in the Season 7 finale of &quot;Entourage&quot;.

In 2006, she starred in the Lifetime TV film &quot;Not Like Everyone Else&quot; and played herself in &quot;Pittsburgh&quot; opposite Jeff Goldblum. In 2007, Douglas was added to the cast of &quot;Ugly Betty&quot;, playing Sheila, an editor for &quot;MODE&quot; magazine.

Douglas spent time in Sweden shooting a TV show called &quot;Welcome to Sweden,&quot; which was produced by Amy Poehler and also starred Greg Poehler and Lena Olin. The series was a Swedish-American co-production that aired on Swedish TV as well as on NBC.

=== Writing and producing ===
Douglas has written and directed a comedy short &quot;The Perfect Woman&quot; (1993) (a satire about what men really want from women), the documentary &quot;Everybody Just Stay Calm—Stories in Independent Filmmaking&quot; (1994), and the satire &quot;Boy Crazy, Girl Crazier&quot; (1995). She has been the producer for several projects including &quot;Illeanarama&quot;, a collection of her short films for the Sundance Channel.

From 2008 to 2012, Douglas starred in a web series sponsored by IKEA called &quot;Easy to Assemble,&quot; where she plays herself as an actor-in-recovery-from-acting who goes to work at IKEA. Douglas said that she had a great deal of autonomy from sponsor IKEA, whose only condition was that the show be suitable for children and families. It was canceled after 4 seasons.

In 2015, Douglas produced and developed a series for Joey Soloway called &quot;The Skinny.&quot;

=== Turner Classic Movies ===
Douglas worked on a Turner Classic Movies series called &quot;Friday Night Spotlight,&quot; a prime-time show featuring a month-long festival of movies programmed by special guests. The season that she worked on focused on the theme &quot;Second Looks&quot;. Douglas said that curating, writing, and working on this series allowed her to use her movie knowledge while making it funny, entertaining, and informative.

In 2015, in association with the advocacy group, Women in Film, Douglas presented a month-long series on the TCM cable channel called &quot;Trailblazing Women,&quot; an initiative to highlight women&#x27;s contributions to the art of cinema. Douglas became involved in the project when she found out that the American Film Institute&#x27;s list of 100 greatest American movies didn&#x27;t include &quot;any&quot; movies directed by women. The series was also in response to active discussions about the gender imbalance in Hollywood. The series will present work by female pioneers like Dorothy Arzner, Alice Guy-Blaché, Agnès Varda, Lina Wertmüller, as well as interviews with Allison Anders, Amy Heckerling, Julie Dash, and others. The series will be a multi-year event, with the first year&#x27;s focus on women directors from the 1920s to the present. Each night is themed, with programming topics from foreign films to African-American filmmakers.

=== Other work ===
* In &quot;Spärhusen&quot;, a spinoff series from &quot;Easy to Assemble&quot;, Douglas plays Beirget Kattsson, a member of a band called Spärhusen, a Swedish pop group. Douglas describes them: &quot;Spärhusen has had their ups and downs over the years. They’ve been in many plane crashes, but they’ve survived and they’re together.&quot;
* At the Walt Disney World Resort in the Disney&#x27;s Hollywood Studios theme park, Douglas plays Aerosmith&#x27;s manager in the preshow video for the Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roller Coaster attraction. She later appeared in an Aerosmith music video as Liv Tyler&#x27;s mother.
* Douglas and the comedian Sarah Sweet produced and co-starred in a series professional variety shows called &quot;The Living Room Show,&quot; that is hosted in various Los Angeles living rooms.

In 2015 Douglas published a memoir called &quot;I Blame Dennis Hopper&quot; which was released through Flatiron Books. In the memoir, Douglas tells about her life via her love for the movies and her exposure to Hollywood through her paternal grandfather Melvyn Douglas. Not long after the book&#x27;s release, she began a podcast with the same title.

== Personal life ==
From 1989 until 1997, Douglas was in a relationship with director Martin Scorsese.

On May 16, 1998, she married producer and writer Jonathan Axelrod, the stepson of producer George Axelrod; they divorced in 2001. Douglas said that the period after her divorce was difficult both emotionally and financially, and that she relocated from living in Los Angeles to the New York area, where she took classes at her former school, the Neighborhood Playhouse, and worked in theater. She also began writing and directing.

Douglas is a vegetarian. She was named after Princess Ileana of Romania.

== Works and publications ==
* 

== Filmography ==

=== Film ===
=== Television ===
=== Web series ===
==References==
== External links ==
* 
* &quot;Illeana Douglas, Renaissance Woman,&quot; 2016 interview in Screen Comment</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q269669" start="0" end="18" title="Illeana Douglas" label="Illeana Hesselberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q269669" start="68" end="84" title="Illeana Douglas" label="Illeana Douglas,"/>
<link wikidata="Q216919" start="163" end="177" title="Six Feet Under (TV series)" label="Six Feet Under"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="210" end="230" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062632" start="245" end="288" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series" label="Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823636" start="428" end="434" title="Action (TV series)" label="Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q492321" start="450" end="458" title="Jay Mohr" label="Jay Mohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q29156708" start="480" end="550" title="Satellite Award for Best Actress – Television Series Musical or Comedy" label="Satellite Award for Best Actress – Television Series Musical or Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q749719" start="573" end="594" title="Turner Classic Movies" label="Turner Classic Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="732" end="754" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q312084" start="907" end="921" title="Melvyn Douglas" label="Melvyn Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168" start="1054" end="1063" title="histology" label="histology"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="1082" end="1119" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="1151" end="1164" title="Verona, Italy" label="Verona, Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020609" start="1231" end="1256" title="Old Saybrook, Connecticut" label="Old Saybrook, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="1603" end="1609" title="hippie" label="hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q503638" start="1659" end="1669" title="Easy Rider" label="Easy Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1894" end="1908" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q121765" start="1935" end="1950" title="Astoria, Queens" label="Astoria, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q16920592" start="2005" end="2010" title="Gertz (department store)" label="Gertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5965467" start="2132" end="2140" title="The Rockettes" label="Rockette"/>
<link wikidata="Q429687" start="2396" end="2411" title="Upper West Side" label="Upper West Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138378" start="2442" end="2457" title="Hollywood Hills" label="Hollywood Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255221" start="2601" end="2610" title="elocution" label="elocution"/>
<link wikidata="Q945074" start="2706" end="2717" title="Being There" label="Being There"/>
<link wikidata="Q177984" start="2803" end="2816" title="Peter Sellers" label="Peter Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q648501" start="3056" end="3081" title="Asheville, North Carolina" label="Asheville, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q754820" start="3230" end="3251" title="Higganum, Connecticut" label="Higganum, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q105941" start="3423" end="3432" title="Myrna Loy" label="Myrna Loy"/>
<link wikidata="Q167821" start="3434" end="3444" title="Gore Vidal" label="Gore Vidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q231178" start="3446" end="3460" title="Gloria Steinem" label="Gloria Steinem"/>
<link wikidata="Q576342" start="3520" end="3525" title="Salon (gathering)" label="salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q389336" start="4119" end="4152" title="American Academy of Dramatic Arts" label="American Academy of Dramatic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q379808" start="4186" end="4198" title="Elias Koteas" label="Elias Koteas"/>
<link wikidata="Q27277" start="4203" end="4215" title="Louis Mustillo" label="Lou Mustillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q267081" start="4356" end="4368" title="Steve Rubell" label="Steve Rubell"/>
<link wikidata="Q993267" start="4461" end="4505" title="Neighborhood Playhouse School of the Theatre" label="Neighborhood Playhouse School of the Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q84323682" start="4977" end="4989" title="Peggy Siegal" label="Peggy Siegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858232" start="5036" end="5044" title="headshot" label="headshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="5048" end="5063" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q646031" start="5163" end="5188" title="Last Temptation of Christ (film)" label="Last Temptation of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="5294" end="5308" title="Mary Magdalene" label="Mary Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q166887" start="5394" end="5412" title="Thelma Schoonmaker" label="Thelma Schoonmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q55234" start="5435" end="5449" title="Michael Powell" label="Michael Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="5469" end="5472" title="Additional dialog recording" label="ADR"/>
<link wikidata="Q977372" start="5734" end="5750" title="New York Stories" label="New York Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q229319" start="5776" end="5791" title="Lorraine Bracco" label="Lorraine Bracco"/>
<link wikidata="Q42047" start="5865" end="5875" title="Goodfellas" label="Goodfellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q501995" start="6016" end="6025" title="Cape Fear (1991 film)" label="Cape Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582667" start="6210" end="6226" title="Household Saints" label="Household Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234074" start="6240" end="6252" title="Jungle Fever" label="Jungle Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q651722" start="6270" end="6279" title="Quiz Show (film)" label="Quiz Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q57783685" start="6391" end="6396" title="Grief (film)" label="Grief"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="6426" end="6434" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838329" start="6470" end="6484" title="Allison Anders" label="Allison Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q590701" start="6559" end="6569" title="To Die For" label="To Die For"/>
<link wikidata="Q25186" start="6630" end="6642" title="Gus Van Sant" label="Gus Van Sant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810330" start="6818" end="6835" title="Meisner technique" label="Meisner technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q993267" start="6855" end="6877" title="Neighborhood Playhouse School of the Theatre" label="Neighborhood Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q270728" start="7000" end="7011" title="Anne Sexton" label="Anne Sexton"/>
<link wikidata="Q917034" start="7139" end="7153" title="Brill Building" label="Brill Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q584662" start="7282" end="7299" title="Grace of My Heart" label="Grace of My Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q139460" start="7349" end="7360" title="Ghost World (film)" label="Ghost World"/>
<link wikidata="Q189351" start="7411" end="7421" title="Sean Astin" label="Sean Astin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27959497" start="7461" end="7470" title="Unleashed (2016 film)" label="Unleashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374481" start="7565" end="7580" title="Garry Shandling" label="Garry Shandling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248938" start="7640" end="7662" title="The Larry Sanders Show" label="The Larry Sanders Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q492321" start="7721" end="7729" title="Jay Mohr" label="Jay Mohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823636" start="7750" end="7756" title="Action (TV series)" label="Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q23733" start="7894" end="7902" title="Seinfeld" label="Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q209282" start="7916" end="7923" title="Frasier" label="Frasier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258715" start="7940" end="7959" title="The Drew Carey Show" label="The Drew Carey Show"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8029" end="8066" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="8127" end="8130" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q216919" start="8147" end="8161" title="Six Feet Under (TV series)" label="Six Feet Under"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="8190" end="8194" title="Emmy" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q253205" start="8314" end="8323" title="Entourage (U.S. TV series)" label="Entourage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319610" start="8360" end="8371" title="Lifetime TV" label="Lifetime TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q656695" start="8383" end="8405" title="Not Like Everyone Else" label="Not Like Everyone Else"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199218" start="8440" end="8450" title="Pittsburgh (2006 film)" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q106706" start="8466" end="8479" title="Jeff Goldblum" label="Jeff Goldblum"/>
<link wikidata="Q276528" start="8529" end="8539" title="Ugly Betty" label="Ugly Betty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633730" start="8666" end="8683" title="Welcome to Sweden (2014 TV series)" label="Welcome to Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q230203" start="8713" end="8724" title="Amy Poehler" label="Amy Poehler"/>
<link wikidata="Q15992154" start="8742" end="8754" title="Greg Poehler" label="Greg Poehler"/>
<link wikidata="Q228862" start="8759" end="8768" title="Lena Olin" label="Lena Olin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="8857" end="8860" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503825" start="9304" end="9320" title="Sundance Channel (United States)" label="Sundance Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q54078" start="9387" end="9391" title="IKEA" label="IKEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331187" start="9405" end="9421" title="Easy to Assemble" label="Easy to Assemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q771690" start="9750" end="9762" title="Joey Soloway" label="Joey Soloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q22674221" start="9776" end="9787" title="The Skinny (TV series)" label="The Skinny."/>
<link wikidata="Q749719" start="9845" end="9866" title="Turner Classic Movies" label="Turner Classic Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10720015" start="10291" end="10304" title="Women in Film and Television International" label="Women in Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="10551" end="10574" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861780" start="10745" end="10761" title="gender imbalance" label="gender imbalance"/>
<link wikidata="Q447847" start="10829" end="10843" title="Dorothy Arzner" label="Dorothy Arzner"/>
<link wikidata="Q263367" start="10845" end="10861" title="Alice Guy-Blaché" label="Alice Guy-Blaché"/>
<link wikidata="Q229990" start="10863" end="10874" title="Agnès Varda" label="Agnès Varda"/>
<link wikidata="Q53039" start="10876" end="10891" title="Lina Wertmüller" label="Lina Wertmüller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838329" start="10920" end="10934" title="Allison Anders" label="Allison Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q442273" start="10936" end="10950" title="Amy Heckerling" label="Amy Heckerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189195" start="10952" end="10962" title="Julie Dash" label="Julie Dash"/>
<link wikidata="Q165192" start="11366" end="11373" title="Swedish people" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q206859" start="11563" end="11587" title="Walt Disney World Resort" label="Walt Disney World Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345090" start="11595" end="11626" title="Disney&amp;#x27;s Hollywood Studios" label="Disney&amp;#x27;s Hollywood Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="11653" end="11662" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502476" start="11707" end="11740" title="Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roller Coaster" label="Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roller Coaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q168763" start="11803" end="11812" title="Liv Tyler" label="Liv Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108217" start="12127" end="12141" title="Flatiron Books" label="Flatiron Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q312084" start="12278" end="12292" title="Melvyn Douglas" label="Melvyn Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="12462" end="12477" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q329193" start="12571" end="12585" title="George Axelrod" label="George Axelrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q993267" start="12826" end="12848" title="Neighborhood Playhouse School of the Theatre" label="Neighborhood Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q235595" start="12957" end="12983" title="Princess Ileana of Romania" label="Princess Ileana of Romania"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277008" wikidata="Q678259" url="?curid=277008" title="Nordisk familjebok">
<text> (, &#x27;Nordic Family Book&#x27;) is a Swedish encyclopedia that was published in print from between 1876 and 1993, and that is now fully available in digital form via Project Runeberg at Linköping University. The public domain editions of the encyclopedia remain important reference works in Finland, especially on Finnish Wikipedia.

== History ==
===First edition===
 began when Halmstad publisher hired an editor, linguist , in 1874 to publish a six-volume encyclopedia. Linder drew up a plan for the work, designed the editorial team and created a large circle of experts and literary figures, who submitted article proposals and wrote and reviewed them. Under Linder&#x27;s direction, the articles were then edited to make them as formal, consistent and accurate as possible. Much attention was paid to Nordic subjects, mainly Swedish and Finnish, where sources and models were often lacking, so extensive and time-consuming pioneering work had to be done. As a result, the earlier plan for the scope and publication period of the work was soon abandoned.

The first edition of was published in 20 volumes between 1876 and 1899, and is known as the &quot;Idun edition&quot; because it bears a picture of Idun, the Norse mythologic goddess of spring and rejuvenation, on its cover.&lt;ref name=&quot;https://runeberg.org/katalog.html&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;
This was published over almost a quarter of a century, and particularly the first ten volumes contain material which are not seen in later editions. A good example of this is found in the end of the Berlin article (which is included in the second volume, from 1878), where the author finishes his article by talking about the public decency and morality, which he finds to be very poor. The author continues by complaining about there being a very lazy interest in religious matters and concludes: &quot;to all these joint circumstances, one can hardly defend oneself against the thought of future threatening dangers&quot;.

Linder was editor until 1880, when he was succeeded by lexicographer , first archivist at the National Archives Theodor Westrin, and B. F. Olsson.

=== Second edition ===
The second edition, popularly known as &quot;Uggleupplagan&quot; () because of an owl image on its cover, was published between 1904 and 1926 in 38 volumes, and is the most comprehensive encyclopedia published in the Swedish language. A number of articles on Swedish Wikipedia, over 20,000, are based on this edition.

=== Third edition ===
The third edition had 17 volumes and was published between 1924 and 1937. Another three supplementary volumes were published in 1937, 1938 and in 1939. The supplement covers for instance the Spanish Civil War and a heavy update on Adolf Hitler, but nothing about Germany&#x27;s war on Poland nor are later events mentioned. A second printing of the entire third edition was published between 1941 and 1944. Nothing essential is changed in the second printing, but quite a lot of one side portraits (still in black and white), coloured maps of &quot;World cities&quot;, European countries, continents, Swedish provinces and cities are added together with a few topics, like a collection of national flags. All the added material are on unnumbered pages, presumably a technical printing solution (so already printed books did not require re-numbering). This edition is usually called &quot;the 1930s edition&quot; and are of brown colour when looking at them on a shelf.

=== Fourth edition ===
In 1942, Svensk uppslagsbok AB (later Förlagshuset Norden AB), the same publishing house that published the competing &quot;Svensk uppslagsbok&quot;, took over the rights to and published a fourth, highly concentrated edition in 22 volumes between 1951 and 1957.

=== Fifth edition ===
The fifth edition, &quot;Nordisk familijebook 1994&quot;, was published in 1993 by in both a hardcopy, consisting of only two volumes, and a CD-ROM edition. According to the preface, it was based on the second edition of the larger work &quot;&quot;.

Copyrights on the three first versions have expired, putting them in the public domain; while the fourth and fifth editions, from the 1950s and 1990s, respectively, are still under copyright. 

==See also==
* &quot;Nationalencyklopedin&quot;
* &quot;Nordisk familjeboks sportlexikon&quot;

==References==
==External links==

* Lars Aronsson&#x27;s preface to the 2003 Digital Edition, accessed 2 September 2023.
* Project Runeberg&#x27;s two digital editions of the &quot;Nordisk familjebok&quot; (45,000 pages), accessed 2 September 2023.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q678259" start="0" end="0" title="Nordisk familjebok" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="41" end="48" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292" start="49" end="61" title="encyclopedia" label="encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q933290" start="170" end="186" title="Project Runeberg" label="Project Runeberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q782600" start="190" end="210" title="Linköping University" label="Linköping University"/>
<link wikidata="Q175482" start="318" end="335" title="Finnish Wikipedia" label="Finnish Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26521" start="384" end="392" title="Halmstad" label="Halmstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q204691" start="1212" end="1216" title="Idun" label="Idun"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="1222" end="1238" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="1562" end="1568" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184524" start="2044" end="2057" title="Lexicography" label="lexicographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724971" start="2083" end="2100" title="National Archives of Sweden" label="National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238509" start="2101" end="2116" title="Theodor Westrin" label="Theodor Westrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q169514" start="2419" end="2436" title="Swedish Wikipedia" label="Swedish Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="2692" end="2709" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="2732" end="2744" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="2764" end="2792" title="German invasion of Poland" label="Germany&amp;#x27;s war on Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2801" end="2823" title="World War II" label="later events mentioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766280" start="3618" end="3636" title="Svensk uppslagsbok" label="Svensk uppslagsbok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="4032" end="4042" title="Copyrights" label="Copyrights"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="4105" end="4118" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165538" start="4247" end="4267" title="Nationalencyklopedin" label="Nationalencyklopedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q64500121" start="4282" end="4314" title="Nordisk familjeboks sportlexikon" label="Nordisk familjeboks sportlexikon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277010" wikidata="Q1053212" url="?curid=277010" title="Dock (macOS)">
<text>The Dock is a prominent feature of the graphical user interface of macOS. It is used to launch applications and to switch between running applications. The Dock is also a prominent feature of macOS&#x27;s predecessor NeXTSTEP and OPENSTEP operating systems. The earliest known implementations of a dock are found in operating systems such as RISC OS and NeXTSTEP. iOS has its own version of the Dock for the iPhone and iPod Touch, as does iPadOS for the iPad.

Apple applied for a US patent for the design of the Dock in 1999 and was granted the patent in October 2008, nearly a decade later. Any application can be dragged and dropped onto the Dock to add it to the dock, and any application can be dragged from the dock to remove it, except for Finder and Trash, which are permanent fixtures as the leftmost and rightmost items (or highest and lowest items if the Dock is vertically oriented), respectively. Part of the macOS Core Services, is located at .

== Overview ==
In NeXTSTEP and OPENSTEP, the Dock is an application launcher that holds icons for frequently used programs. The icon for the Workspace Manager and the Recycler are always visible. The Dock indicates if a program is not running by showing an ellipsis below its icon. If the program is running, there isn&#x27;t an ellipsis on the icon. In macOS, running applications have been variously identified by a small black triangle (Mac OS X 10.0-10.4) a blue-tinted luminous dot (Mac OS X 10.5-10.7), a horizontal light bar (OS X 10.8 and 10.9), and a simple black or white dot (OS X 10.10-present).

In macOS, however, the Dock is used as a repository for any program or file in the operating system. It can hold any number of items and resizes them dynamically to fit while using magnification to better view smaller items. By default, it appears on the bottom edge of the screen, but it can also instead be placed on the left or right edges of the screen if the user wishes. Applications that do not normally keep icons in the Dock will still appear there when running and remain until they are quit. These features are unlike those of the dock in the NeXT operating systems where the capacity of the Dock is dependent on display resolution. This may be an attempt to recover some Shelf functionality since macOS inherits no other such technology from NeXTSTEP. (Minimal Shelf functionality has been implemented in the Finder.)

The changes to the dock bring its functionality also close to that of Apple&#x27;s Newton OS &quot;Button Bar&quot;, as found in the MessagePad 2x00 series and the likes. Applications could be dragged in and out of the Extras Drawer, a Finder-like app, onto the bar. Also, when the screen was put into landscape mode, the user could choose to position the Button Bar at the right or left side of the screen, just like the Dock in macOS.

The macOS Dock also has extended menus that control applications without making them visible on screen. On most applications it has simple options such as Quit, Keep In Dock, Remove From Dock, and other options, though some applications use these menus for other purposes, such as iTunes, which uses this menu as a way for a user to control certain playback options. Other Applications include changing the status of an online alias (MSN, AIM/iChat etc.) or automatically saving the changes that have been made in a document (There is no current application with this feature made available for macOS). Docklings (in Mac OS X 10.4 or earlier) can also be opened by using the right-mouse button, if the mouse has one, but most of the time either clicking and holding or control-click will bring the menu up.

In Mac OS X Leopard, docklings were replaced by Stacks. Stacks &quot;stack&quot; files into a small organized folder on the Dock, and they can be opened by left-clicking.
Stacks could be shown in three ways: a &quot;fan&quot;, a &quot;grid&quot;, or a &quot;list&quot;, which is similar to docklings. In grid view, the folders in that stack can be opened directly in that stack without the need to open Finder.

In iOS, the dock is used to store applications and, since iOS 4, folders containing applications. Unlike the macOS dock, a maximum of 4 icons can be placed in the dock on the iPhone and the iPod Touch. The maximum for the iPad however is 16 icons (13 apps and 3 recently opened apps). The size of the dock on iOS cannot be changed.

When an application on the Dock is launched by clicking on it, it will jump until the software is finished loading. Additionally, when an application requires attention from a user, it will jump even higher until its icon is clicked and the user attends to its demands.

=== Design ===
The original version of the dock, found in Mac OS X Public Beta to 10.0, presents a flat white translucent interface with the Aqua styled pinstripes. The dock found in Mac OS X 10.1 to 10.4 removes the pinstripes, but otherwise is identical. Mac OS X 10.5 to 10.7 presents the applications on a three-dimensional glassy surface from a perspective instead of the traditional flat one, resembling Sun Microsystems&#x27; Project Looking Glass application dock. OS X 10.8 to 10.9 changes the look to resemble frosted glass with rounded corners. OS X 10.10 and later revert to a two-dimensional appearance, similar to Mac OS X 10.4, although more translucent and with a iOS 7 blur effect.

In iPhone OS 1 to 3, the dock used a metal look which looks similar to the front of the Power Mac G5 (2003-2005) and Mac Pro (2006-2012 or 2019-). iPhone OS 3.2 for iPad and iOS 4 to 6 adopted the dock design from Mac OS X 10.5 to 10.7 which was used until iOS 7, which uses a similar dock from Mac OS X Tiger but with iOS 7 styled blur effects. In iOS 11, the dock for the iPad and iPhone X is redesigned to more resemble the macOS dock.

==Related software==

The classic Mac OS does have a dock-like application called Launcher, which was first introduced with Macintosh Performa models in 1993 and later included as part of System 7.5.1. It performs the same basic function. Also, add-ons such as DragThing added a dock for users of earlier versions.

MacOS was not the first operating system to implement dock-like features. RISC OS contains a feature called the Icon bar, which is remarkably similar to the macOS Dock. The Icon Bar was first implemented in 1987 for the first version of RISC OS, named Arthur.

Microsoft implemented a simplified dock feature in the Windows Desktop Update that shipped with Internet Explorer 4. This Quick Launch toolbar feature remained until Windows 7, where it was replaced by the Superbar, which implements functionality similar to the macOS Dock.

Various &quot;docks&quot; are also used in Linux and BSD. Some examples are Window Maker (which emulates the look and feel of the NeXTstep GUI), Docky, and Avant Window Navigator, KXDocker (amongst others) for KDE and various others like gDesklets, , AfterStep&#x27;s Wharf (a derivation from the NeXTstep UI), (a module used with some Enlightenment-based Linux distributions such as gOS) and Blackbox&#x27;s Slit.

==Criticism==
Bruce Tognazzini, a usability consultant who worked for Apple in the 1980s and 1990s before Mac OS X was developed, wrote an article in 2001 listing ten problems he saw with the Dock. This article was updated in 2004, removing two of the original criticisms and adding a new one. One of his concerns was that the Dock uses too much screen space. Another was that icons only show their labels when the pointer hovers over them, so similar-looking folders, files, and windows are difficult to distinguish. Tognazzini also criticized the fact that when icons are dragged out of the Dock, they vanish with no easy way to get them back; he called this behavior &quot;object annihilation&quot;.

John Siracusa, writing for Ars Technica, also pointed out some issues with the Dock around the releases of Mac OS X Public Beta in 2000. He noted that because the Dock is centered, adding and removing icons changes the location of the other icons. In a review of Mac OS X v10.0 the following year, he also noted that the Dock does far too many tasks than it should for optimum ease-of-use, including launching apps, switching apps, opening files, and holding minimized windows. Siracusa further criticized the Dock after the release of Mac OS X v10.5, noting that it was made less usable for the sake of eye-candy. Siracusa criticized the 3D look and reflections, the faint blue indicator for open applications, and less distinguishable files and folders.

Thom Holwerda, a managing editor OSNews, stated some concerns with the Dock, including the facts that it grows in both directions, holds the Trash icon, and has no persistent labels. Holwerda also criticized the revised Dock appearance in Mac OS X v10.5.

== See also ==
* Taskbar

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1053212" start="4" end="8" title="Dock (macOS)" label="Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="39" end="63" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="67" end="72" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q831367" start="217" end="225" title="NeXTSTEP" label="NeXTSTEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193981" start="230" end="238" title="OPENSTEP" label="OPENSTEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202514" start="342" end="349" title="RISC OS" label="RISC OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="364" end="367" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="408" end="414" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q14094" start="419" end="429" title="iPod Touch" label="iPod Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q64350339" start="439" end="445" title="iPadOS" label="iPadOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796" start="454" end="458" title="iPad" label="iPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q558376" start="616" end="635" title="drag and drop" label="dragged and dropped"/>
<link wikidata="Q910951" start="747" end="753" title="Finder (software)" label="Finder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503178" start="758" end="763" title="trash (computing)" label="Trash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787169" start="928" end="941" title="Core Services" label="Core Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q138754" start="1048" end="1053" title="icon (computing)" label="icons"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="1074" end="1081" title="Computer program" label="program"/>
<link wikidata="Q32518" start="1217" end="1225" title="ellipsis" label="ellipsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12538706" start="2193" end="2211" title="display resolution" label="display resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493588" start="2252" end="2257" title="Shelf (computing)" label="Shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q910951" start="2390" end="2396" title="Finder (software)" label="Finder"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="2470" end="2475" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185591" start="2483" end="2492" title="Newton OS" label="Newton OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q910951" start="2636" end="2642" title="Finder (software)" label="Finder"/>
<link wikidata="Q222996" start="3649" end="3665" title="Mac OS X Leopard" label="Mac OS X Leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468014" start="3694" end="3700" title="Stacks (software)" label="Stacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="4061" end="4064" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q13471026" start="4116" end="4121" title="iOS 4" label="iOS 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q14094" start="4248" end="4258" title="iPod Touch" label="iPod Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="5072" end="5088" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q690751" start="5095" end="5116" title="Project Looking Glass" label="Project Looking Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512726" start="5450" end="5462" title="Power Mac G5" label="Power Mac G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q308869" start="5479" end="5486" title="Mac Pro" label="Mac Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q30136207" start="5711" end="5717" title="iOS 11" label="iOS 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796" start="5736" end="5740" title="iPad" label="iPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="5828" end="5842" title="classic Mac OS" label="classic Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882835" start="5926" end="5944" title="Macintosh Performa" label="Macintosh Performa"/>
<link wikidata="Q420384" start="5990" end="6002" title="System 7" label="System 7.5.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304790" start="6063" end="6072" title="DragThing" label="DragThing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202514" start="6192" end="6199" title="RISC OS" label="RISC OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994675" start="6230" end="6238" title="Icon bar" label="Icon bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866147" start="6370" end="6376" title="Arthur_(operating_system)" label="Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606535" start="6434" end="6456" title="Windows Desktop Update" label="Windows Desktop Update"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367622" start="6475" end="6494" title="Internet Explorer 4" label="Internet Explorer 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11215" start="6545" end="6554" title="Windows 7" label="Windows 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439693" start="6585" end="6593" title="Superbar" label="Superbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="6697" end="6702" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="6707" end="6710" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q181222" start="6730" end="6742" title="Window Maker" label="Window Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069823" start="6799" end="6804" title="Docky" label="Docky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282866" start="6810" end="6832" title="Avant Window Navigator" label="Avant Window Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341113" start="6834" end="6842" title="KXDocker" label="KXDocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431" start="6864" end="6867" title="KDE" label="KDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q287798" start="6892" end="6901" title="gDesklets" label="gDesklets"/>
<link wikidata="Q388890" start="6905" end="6914" title="AfterStep" label="AfterStep"/>
<link wikidata="Q692045" start="6990" end="7003" title="Enlightenment (window manager)" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q131669" start="7010" end="7028" title="Linux distribution" label="Linux distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q306004" start="7038" end="7041" title="gOS (operating system)" label="gOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q751991" start="7047" end="7055" title="Blackbox" label="Blackbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645502" start="7084" end="7100" title="Bruce Tognazzini" label="Bruce Tognazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="7176" end="7184" title="Mac OS X" label="Mac OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q584152" start="7801" end="7813" title="Ars Technica" label="Ars Technica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350156" start="7881" end="7901" title="Mac OS X Public Beta" label="Mac OS X Public Beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q912481" start="8037" end="8051" title="Mac OS X v10.0" label="Mac OS X v10.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q222996" start="8310" end="8324" title="Mac OS X v10.5" label="Mac OS X v10.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073036" start="8564" end="8570" title="OSNews" label="OSNews"/>
<link wikidata="Q222996" start="8770" end="8784" title="Mac OS X v10.5" label="Mac OS X v10.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q854840" start="8804" end="8811" title="Taskbar" label="Taskbar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277011" wikidata="Q105682" url="?curid=277011" title="Tom Felton">
<text>Thomas Andrew Felton (born 22 September 1987) is an English actor. Born in Surrey, Felton began appearing in commercials and made his screen debut in the role of Peagreen Clock in &quot;The Borrowers&quot; (1997). He portrayed Louis T. Leonowens in &quot;Anna and the King&quot; (1999) before being cast as Draco Malfoy in the film adaptations of the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; fantasy novels by J. K. Rowling, starting with &quot;Harry Potter and the Philosopher&#x27;s Stone&quot; (2001) and finishing with &quot;Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2&quot; (2011). Felton appeared in the sci-fi film &quot;Rise of the Planet of the Apes&quot; (2011). He was subsequently cast in indie films &quot;From the Rough&quot; (2011) and &quot;The Apparition&quot; (2012).

Felton starred as Viscount Trencavel in the historical miniseries &quot;Labyrinth&quot; (2012) and as James Ashford in the period drama &quot;Belle&quot; (2013), which released to critical acclaim. In 2015, he recurred as a murder suspect in TNT&#x27;s &quot;Murder in the First&quot;. He appeared in &quot;Message from the King&quot; and &quot;A United Kingdom&quot;, which premiered at the 2016 Toronto International Film Festival. He portrayed Doctor Alchemy on The CW&#x27;s &quot;The Flash&quot; (from 2014), based on the comic books &quot;Flash&quot;. Felton co-starred in the drama film &quot;Feed&quot; (2017), the action-thriller &quot;Stratton&quot; (2017), and the biographical film &quot;Megan Leavey&quot; (2017). He was a series regular on the 2018 sci-fi series &quot;Origin&quot; and appeared as Laertes in Claire McCarthy&#x27;s &quot;Ophelia&quot; (2018), both to critical praise. Felton portrayed the villain in family-horror &quot;A Babysitter&#x27;s Guide to Monster Hunting&quot; (2020).

==Early life==
Thomas Andrew Felton was born on 22 September 1987 in Epsom, Surrey, the youngest of four sons born to Peter Felton and Sharon Anstey. Felton was raised an Anglican. His parents divorced when he was a teenager. His maternal grandfather is geophysicist Nigel Anstey. Felton was educated West Horsley&#x27;s Cranmore School until age 13, after which time he attended the Howard of Effingham School for his secondary education. Felton developed an interest in singing during his childhood and subsequently joined school choirs; he was offered a place in the Guildford Cathedral Choir.

==Career==
===1997–2000: Beginnings===
Felton began acting in adverts for companies such as Commercial Union and Barclaycard. He landed his first feature film role in when he played the role of Peagreen Clock in Peter Hewitt&#x27;s &quot;The Borrowers&quot; (1997). In 1998, Felton voiced James in the television series &quot;Bugs&quot;. He played witness Thomas Ingham opposite Clive Owen in &quot;Second Sight&quot; in 1999 and portrayed Louis T. Leonowens in the film &quot;Anna and the King&quot; (1999), starring opposite Jodie Foster. In 2000, Felton made a guest appearance in &quot;Second Sight 2&quot; in the episode &quot;Hide and Seek&quot;.

===2001–2011: &quot;Harry Potter&quot; series and recognition===

In 1999, auditions were held for &quot;Harry Potter and the Philosopher&#x27;s Stone&quot;, the film adaptation of J. K. Rowling&#x27;s novel &quot;Harry Potter and the Philosopher&#x27;s Stone&quot;. Felton had not read the books at the time of the auditions, and originally read of the roles of Harry Potter and Ron Weasley before ultimately being cast as Draco Malfoy. &quot;Harry Potter and the Philosopher&#x27;s Stone&quot; was released in 2001 to critical and commercial success. The film was praised for its casting, including Felton&#x27;s; one critic called his performance &quot;the personification of upper-class insolence.&quot;

He reprised his role the following year in &quot;Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets&quot; (2002), which saw Felton winning a Disney Channel&#x27;s Kids Award. Felton started his Official Tom Felton Fan Club in 2004 and took part in autograph signing events. His fan club was reported to have attracted so many fans that Felton had to put a temporary stop to people signing up. When a fan asked Felton what kids should do if someone like his character is bullying them, he said: &quot;Tell someone. You do not want to keep it to yourself.&quot;

Felton appeared in &quot;Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban&quot; (2004) and &quot;Harry Potter and Goblet of Fire&quot;, both released to increasing global recognition. Felton made a guest appearance on &quot;Home Farm Twins&quot; in 2005, where he played Adam Baker in the short-lived series. On 11 November 2005, he and Rupert Grint presented Liz Carnell with the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot;&#x27;s Pride of Britain Award for her work in bullying awareness. &quot;Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix&quot; was filmed in 2006 and released in 2007, becoming the second-highest grossing film of the year. When asked whether he was looking forward to playing a good guy in the future he answered: &quot;No. Well, I don&#x27;t know. I suppose for now I&#x27;m happy with sticking to what he is. But after the Potter legacy is over I look forward to playing a good guy, or someone different anyway; someone not so spiteful.&quot;
In July 2007, Felton visited Children&#x27;s Hospital in Denver, Colorado, in a pre-screening, charitable event of &quot;Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix&quot;. On 18 March 2011, Felton appeared in a comedy sketch on Red Nose Day 2011 alongside James Corden, Rupert Grint, George Michael, Justin Bieber, Paul McCartney, Ringo Starr, Keira Knightley, Professor Robert Winston, and former UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown.

On 12 November 2008, Felton appeared alongside Jack Osbourne on &quot;Adrenaline Junkie&quot; as he participated in various challenges in South Africa, including a 200 ft bungee jump on Bloukrans Bridge, took a ride in a helicopter, followed by a parachute freefall and came face-to-face with great white sharks. Felton portrayed Simon in the 2009 horror/thriller movie &quot;The Disappeared&quot;. &quot;Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince&quot; was released in July of that year as a major commercial success; &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; described Felton&#x27;s role as &quot;perennially glowering&quot; while the plot of the film &quot;weighs on him, causing his smug veneer to all but melt away.&quot;

In 2010, Felton released his original song &quot;Hawaii&quot; on Six String Productions – an independent record label run by Felton, David Proffitt and Philip Haydn-Slater promoting creative independence and ownership of material. Felton portrayed the main character, Ray Marsden, in &quot;White Other&quot; (2010). was released. His character is a troubled youth in the &quot;ends&quot; of England and stars alongside &quot;Harry Potter&quot; co-star Imelda Staunton. Felton had a cameo role in &quot;Get Him to the Greek&quot; (2010) in June. He portrayed the character Dodge Landon in the 2011 science-fiction film &quot;Rise of the Planet of the Apes&quot;, and played a paranormal investigator in the thriller film &quot;The Apparition&quot; (2012). Felton reprised his role as Malfoy for the final time in &quot;Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1&quot; and &quot;Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2&quot;. His performances in &quot;Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince&quot; and &quot;Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1&quot; won him two consecutive MTV Movie Awards for Best Villain in 2010 and 2011. Screen Rant stated that Felton &quot;brought the complex, layered&quot; character to the films, calling Malfoy the series&#x27; &quot;true cult hero&quot;.

While filming the Harry Potter series, Felton and fellow actress Emma Watson (who played Hermione Granger in the films) both confessed to having crushes on each other during filming, albeit at different times. In the foreword to Felton&#x27;s memoir, Beyond the Wand: The Magic and Mayhem of Growing Up a Wizard, Watson called herself and Felton &quot;soulmates&quot;.

===2012–2021: Post-Harry Potter projects===
Felton posted three music videos on YouTube under the account &quot;Feltbeats&quot;, in which he performs fragments of original songs. Nine songs have been re-recorded and are now available on iTunes: &quot;Time Well Spent&quot;, &quot;Time Isn&#x27;t Healing&quot;, &quot;One of These Days&quot;, &quot;Under Stars&quot;, &quot;Right Place, Right Time&quot;, &quot;In My Arms&quot;, &quot;All I Need&quot;, and &quot;I Will Be There&quot; join the instrumental &quot;Silhouettes in Sunsets&quot;. He also recorded an album titled &quot;In Good Hands&quot;. It includes the six songs &quot;If You Could Be Anywhere&quot;, &quot;We Belong&quot;, &quot;When Angels Come&quot;, &quot;Convinced&quot;, &quot;Father of Mine&quot;, and &quot;If That&#x27;s Alright with You&quot;.
In 2012, Felton appeared in the supernatural horror film &quot;The Apparition&quot; alongside an ensemble cast and indie drama &quot;From the Rough&quot; opposite Taraji P. Henson. Felton portrayed James Ashford, an arrogant member of nobility, in &quot;Belle&quot; (2013), which was released at the Toronto International Film Festival to critical praise. He starred opposite Elizabeth Olsen as Camille Raquin in &quot;Thérèse&quot; (2013). The film received mixed reviews; Roger Ebert referred to his performance as &quot;suitably foppish and dopey&quot; for the role. Felton starred in &quot;Labyrinth&quot; as Viscount Trencavel, which aired on Channel 4 in March 2013.
Felton portrayed a US Navy airman in survival drama &quot;Against the Sun&quot; (2014), which faced mixed reception.
In 2015, Felton recurred in &quot;Murder in the First&quot; on TNT as Erich Blunt:, as a Silicon Valley worker and murder suspect. Felton held supporting roles in films &quot;Risen&quot; (2016), a box office success, as well as Message from the King and &quot;A United Kingdom&quot;, both of which premiered at the 2016 Toronto International Film Festival. He also lent his voice to the English version of &quot;Sheep and Wolves&quot; (2016), a fantasy-comedy film. From 2016 to 2017, He appeared as Doctor Alchemy in the third season of The CW&#x27;s &quot;The Flash&quot;. Felton&#x27;s character was a CSI lab partner to the titular character and love interest of Killer Frost. Felton portrayed a dog handler for the US Army in Gabriela Cowperthwaite&#x27;s &quot;Megan Leavey&quot; (2017), a biographical indie drama based on the life of Corporal Megan Leavey. That year, Felton also appeared in drama film &quot;Feed&quot; and action-thriller &quot;Stratton&quot;.

On 26 April 2018, it was announced that Felton was cast in the science fiction series &quot;Origin&quot;. He stars in the role of Logan Maine opposite actress Natalia Tena. It premiered on YouTube Premium in November 2018. The series opened to mixed reviews; &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; stated that Felton portrayed &quot;explosive whiner ... unrecognizable from his days as bad boi fa lyfe Malfoy.&quot; Felton portrayed Laertes in &quot;Ophelia&quot;, Claire McCarthy&#x27;s film adaptation of &quot;Hamlet&quot; centering around the character of Laertes. The film premiered at the 2018 Sundance Film Festival; one critic remarked his performance as &quot;lithe&quot; and &quot;done nicely&quot;. Felton appeared in the comedy-drama &quot;Braking for Whales&quot; in 2019 and the Netflix family-horror &quot;A Babysitter&#x27;s Guide to Monster Hunting&quot; in 2020. He played a British soldier in the Dutch World War II film &quot;The Forgotten Battle&quot;, which had a red carpet premiere in 2020 followed by a Netflix release in 2021.

In June 2020, he was planned to star in war thriller &quot;Burial&quot;, which is set in the last days of World War II. In October, it was announced that Felton will star in &quot;Canyon Del Muerto&quot;, a biopic about archaeologist Ann Axtell Morris. He portrays her husband, Earl H. Morris, an American archeologist known for his contributions to Southwest archaeology. Two months later, Felton was confirmed in &quot;Lead Heads&quot; alongside Rupert Everett, Derek Jacobi, Luke Newberry and Mark Williams. The film is described as a “drama about greed and the repercussions it has on the soul.”

In January 2021, Felton was confirmed for the lead role in Sara Sugarman&#x27;s &quot;Save The Cinema&quot; which began filming in the month in Wales. He joined Jonathan Pryce and Samantha Morton. The movie tells the true story of Liz Evans, a hairdresser and leader of a youth theatre in Carmarthen, Wales, who began a campaign in 1993 to save the Lyric theatre from closure.

===2022: West End theatre debut, &quot;Beyond the Wand&quot;, and further acting career===
In early 2022, Felton attended the &quot;Harry Potter 20th Anniversary: Return to Hogwarts&quot; film as himself, alongside other cast members including Daniel Radcliffe, Emma Watson, and Rupert Grint.

In May 2022, Felton made his West End theatre debut in London, in the play &quot;2:22 A Ghost Story&quot;.

In October 2022, Felton published a memoir, &quot;Beyond the Wand: The Magic and Mayhem of Growing Up a Wizard&quot;, which covers his acting career within the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; franchise. The book debuted at number one on &quot;The New York Times&quot; nonfiction best-seller list for the week ending 22 October 2022. Watson wrote the foreword, referring to herself and Felton as &quot;soulmates.&quot;

Felton appeared in the 2023 thriller &quot;Some Other Woman&quot;. He is attached to star as Leon in the upcoming sci-fi/action film &quot;Altered&quot; alongside Igor Jijikine, Richard Brake, and more.

Felton is set to appear as Josiah Oldfield in the upcoming Indian television series &quot;Gandhi&quot;, directed by Hansal Mehta.

==Personal life==
Felton was in a relationship with stunt assistant Jade Olivia Gordon from April 2008 until early 2016. Gordon played Felton&#x27;s character&#x27;s wife, Astoria Greengrass, in &quot;Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2&quot;. Despite speculation from fans, he and Emma Watson, his childhood crush, have never dated. Felton has been in a relationship with South African jewelry designer, Roxanne Danya, reportedly since around 2020.
Felton owned a Labrador Retriever named Timber until she died of cancer in 2014. He adopted another black Labrador Retriever named Willow in 2018. For Halloween in 2021, Felton dressed up as Gryffindor student Harry Potter, and dressed up Willow as a Gryffindor, too. Along with Willow, Felton owns a yellow lab named Forrest, purchased in 2022.

Felton fell ill while participating in a celebrity golf exhibition on 23 September 2021 as part of the 2021 Ryder Cup festivities near Sheboygan, Wisconsin. He was removed from the golf course on a stretcher and taken to a nearby hospital for treatment. Felton told CinemaBlend that the illness was caused by jet lag and exhaustion.

Felton is an agnostic.

==Filmography==
===Film===

===Television===
===Theatre===
===Video games===
===Music videos===
=== Theme park attractions ===
==Discography==
===EPs===
* &quot;Time Well Spent&quot; (2008)
* &quot;All I Need&quot; (2008)
* &quot;In Good Hands&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Hawaii&quot; (2011)
* &quot;YoOHoO&quot; (2021)
* &quot;ReD&quot; (2024)
* &quot;ORaNgE&quot; (2024)
* &quot;YelLoW&quot; (2024)

===Singles===
* &quot;Silhouettes in Sunsets&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Time Isn&#x27;t Healing&quot; (2008)
* &quot;If You Could Be Anywhere&quot; (2010)
* &quot;hOLDing on&quot; (2021)

==Awards and nominations==
==Bibliography==

==See also==
* List of &quot;Harry Potter&quot; films cast members

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Six String Productions
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q105682" start="0" end="20" title="Tom Felton" label="Thomas Andrew Felton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="75" end="81" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304483" start="180" end="205" title="The Borrowers (1997 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Borrowers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871822" start="227" end="245" title="Louis T. Leonowens" label="Louis T. Leonowens"/>
<link wikidata="Q563743" start="255" end="272" title="Anna and the King" label="Anna and the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q179641" start="307" end="319" title="Draco Malfoy" label="Draco Malfoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216930" start="327" end="343" title="Harry Potter (film series)" label="film adaptations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="357" end="369" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="394" end="407" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q102438" start="429" end="474" title="Harry Potter and the Philosopher&amp;#x27;s Stone (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Philosopher&amp;#x27;s Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q232009" start="513" end="558" title="Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2" label="Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q243983" start="614" end="644" title="Rise of the Planet of the Apes" label="Rise of the Planet of the Apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="687" end="698" title="indie films" label="indie films"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088298" start="705" end="719" title="From the Rough" label="From the Rough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4536024" start="743" end="757" title="The Apparition (2012 film)" label="The Apparition"/>
<link wikidata="Q561524" start="791" end="809" title="Raymond Roger Trencavel" label="Viscount Trencavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25393783" start="845" end="854" title="Labyrinth (miniseries)" label="Labyrinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027251" start="875" end="888" title="Dido Elizabeth Belle" label="James Ashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q14953063" start="909" end="926" title="Belle (2013 film)" label="&amp;quot;Belle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q688333" start="1015" end="1018" title="TNT (American TV network)" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q14931565" start="1032" end="1051" title="Murder in the First (TV series)" label="Murder in the First"/>
<link wikidata="Q26761678" start="1080" end="1101" title="Message from the King (film)" label="Message from the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q21528200" start="1118" end="1134" title="A United Kingdom" label="A United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905775" start="1165" end="1205" title="2016 Toronto International Film Festival" label="2016 Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771356" start="1220" end="1234" title="Doctor Alchemy" label="Doctor Alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="1238" end="1244" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711398" start="1258" end="1267" title="The Flash (2014 TV series)" label="The Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q180784" start="1312" end="1329" title="Flash (DC Comics character)" label="&amp;quot;Flash&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q39073791" start="1373" end="1377" title="Feed (2017 film)" label="Feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713364" start="1418" end="1426" title="Stratton (film)" label="Stratton"/>
<link wikidata="Q21527861" start="1473" end="1485" title="Megan Leavey (film)" label="Megan Leavey"/>
<link wikidata="Q48817189" start="1556" end="1562" title="Origin (TV series)" label="Origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471533" start="1585" end="1592" title="Laertes (Hamlet)" label="Laertes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125261" start="1596" end="1611" title="Claire McCarthy" label="Claire McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30597804" start="1625" end="1632" title="Ophelia (2018 film)" label="Ophelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q99982067" start="1724" end="1768" title="A Babysitter&amp;#x27;s Guide to Monster Hunting" label="A Babysitter&amp;#x27;s Guide to Monster Hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q993164" start="1853" end="1858" title="Epsom" label="Epsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="1860" end="1866" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="1955" end="1963" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032213" start="2051" end="2063" title="Nigel Anstey" label="Nigel Anstey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540047" start="2085" end="2097" title="West Horsley" label="West Horsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921335" start="2168" end="2194" title="Howard of Effingham School" label="Howard of Effingham School"/>
<link wikidata="Q13006147" start="2203" end="2222" title="secondary education" label="secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q687799" start="2354" end="2373" title="Guildford Cathedral" label="Guildford Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q96375344" start="2474" end="2490" title="Commercial Union" label="Commercial Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q145053" start="2495" end="2506" title="Barclaycard" label="Barclaycard"/>
<link wikidata="Q713032" start="2594" end="2606" title="Peter Hewitt (director)" label="Peter Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304483" start="2620" end="2633" title="The Borrowers (1997 film)" label="The Borrowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655213" start="2708" end="2712" title="Bugs (TV series)" label="Bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q183178" start="2761" end="2771" title="Clive Owen" label="Clive Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248090" start="2781" end="2793" title="Second Sight (TV series)" label="Second Sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871822" start="2822" end="2840" title="Louis T. Leonowens" label="Louis T. Leonowens"/>
<link wikidata="Q563743" start="2859" end="2876" title="Anna and the King" label="Anna and the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="2909" end="2921" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q102438" start="3141" end="3186" title="Harry Potter and the Philosopher&amp;#x27;s Stone (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Philosopher&amp;#x27;s Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="3217" end="3230" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q43361" start="3250" end="3295" title="Harry Potter and the Philosopher&amp;#x27;s Stone" label="Harry Potter and the Philosopher&amp;#x27;s Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244512" start="3399" end="3411" title="Harry Potter (character)" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q173998" start="3416" end="3427" title="Ron Weasley" label="Ron Weasley"/>
<link wikidata="Q179641" start="3460" end="3472" title="Draco Malfoy" label="Draco Malfoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q102244" start="3794" end="3833" title="Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="3875" end="3889" title="Disney Channel" label="Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q102448" start="4320" end="4360" title="Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban"/>
<link wikidata="Q102225" start="4384" end="4415" title="Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire (film)" label="Harry Potter and Goblet of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888369" start="4511" end="4526" title="Home Farm Twins" label="Home Farm Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q19190" start="4624" end="4636" title="Rupert Grint" label="Rupert Grint"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="4674" end="4686" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q102235" start="4765" end="4806" title="Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098125" start="5260" end="5284" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital (Aurora, Colorado)" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="5288" end="5294" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304668" start="5457" end="5474" title="Red Nose Day 2011" label="Red Nose Day 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q767499" start="5485" end="5497" title="James Corden" label="James Corden"/>
<link wikidata="Q19190" start="5499" end="5511" title="Rupert Grint" label="Rupert Grint"/>
<link wikidata="Q130311" start="5513" end="5527" title="George Michael" label="George Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q34086" start="5529" end="5542" title="Justin Bieber" label="Justin Bieber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="5544" end="5558" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="5560" end="5571" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q42581" start="5573" end="5588" title="Keira Knightley" label="Keira Knightley"/>
<link wikidata="Q335760" start="5590" end="5614" title="Robert Winston" label="Professor Robert Winston"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="5627" end="5644" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="UK Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="5645" end="5657" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q724791" start="5707" end="5720" title="Jack Osbourne" label="Jack Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114469" start="5730" end="5747" title="Adrenaline Junkie" label="Adrenaline Junkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q885469" start="5846" end="5862" title="Bloukrans Bridge" label="Bloukrans Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q129026" start="5953" end="5970" title="great white shark" label="great white shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730300" start="6036" end="6051" title="The Disappeared (2009 film)" label="The Disappeared"/>
<link wikidata="Q161687" start="6065" end="6103" title="Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="6181" end="6203" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q234798" start="6829" end="6844" title="Imelda Staunton" label="Imelda Staunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q940139" start="6879" end="6899" title="Get Him to the Greek" label="Get Him to the Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="6974" end="6989" title="science fiction" label="science-fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q243983" start="7001" end="7031" title="Rise of the Planet of the Apes" label="Rise of the Planet of the Apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4536024" start="7103" end="7117" title="The Apparition (2012 film)" label="The Apparition"/>
<link wikidata="Q161678" start="7195" end="7240" title="Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1" label="Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q232009" start="7257" end="7302" title="Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2" label="Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062026" start="7467" end="7500" title="MTV Movie Award for Best Villain" label="MTV Movie Awards for Best Villain"/>
<link wikidata="Q27559777" start="7519" end="7530" title="Screen Rant" label="Screen Rant"/>
<link wikidata="Q39476" start="7741" end="7752" title="Emma Watson" label="Emma Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q174009" start="7765" end="7781" title="Hermione Granger" label="Hermione Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="8283" end="8289" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="8897" end="8916" title="supernatural horror" label="supernatural horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q4536024" start="8928" end="8942" title="The Apparition (2012 film)" label="The Apparition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154757" start="8962" end="8975" title="ensemble cast" label="ensemble cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="8980" end="8985" title="Independent film" label="indie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088298" start="8998" end="9012" title="From the Rough" label="From the Rough"/>
<link wikidata="Q235511" start="9028" end="9044" title="Taraji P. Henson" label="Taraji P. Henson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14953063" start="9119" end="9124" title="Belle (2013 film)" label="Belle"/>
<link wikidata="Q390018" start="9165" end="9200" title="Toronto International Film Festival" label="Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q234644" start="9241" end="9256" title="Elizabeth Olsen" label="Elizabeth Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q268545" start="9260" end="9274" title="Camille Raquin" label="Camille Raquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527366" start="9284" end="9291" title="In Secret (film)" label="Thérèse"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="9339" end="9350" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q25393783" start="9459" end="9468" title="Labyrinth (miniseries)" label="Labyrinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q561524" start="9478" end="9496" title="Raymond Roger Trencavel" label="Viscount Trencavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="9513" end="9522" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="9557" end="9564" title="US Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18914843" start="9596" end="9611" title="Against the Sun" label="Against the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q14931565" start="9689" end="9708" title="Murder in the First (TV series)" label="Murder in the First"/>
<link wikidata="Q688333" start="9718" end="9721" title="TNT (American TV network)" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q18202491" start="9830" end="9835" title="Risen (2016 film)" label="Risen"/>
<link wikidata="Q26761678" start="9883" end="9904" title="Message from the King (film)" label="Message from the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q21528200" start="9915" end="9931" title="A United Kingdom" label="A United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905775" start="9970" end="10010" title="2016 Toronto International Film Festival" label="2016 Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q24175118" start="10067" end="10083" title="Sheep and Wolves" label="Sheep and Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771356" start="10155" end="10169" title="Doctor Alchemy" label="Doctor Alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="10193" end="10199" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711398" start="10213" end="10222" title="The Flash (2014 TV series)" label="The Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624358" start="10322" end="10334" title="Killer Frost" label="Killer Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="10375" end="10382" title="US Army" label="US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q21882760" start="10386" end="10408" title="Gabriela Cowperthwaite" label="Gabriela Cowperthwaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q21527861" start="10422" end="10434" title="Megan Leavey (film)" label="Megan Leavey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17378201" start="10497" end="10505" title="Corporal" label="Corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q24005139" start="10506" end="10518" title="Megan Leavey" label="Megan Leavey"/>
<link wikidata="Q39073791" start="10572" end="10576" title="Feed (2017 film)" label="Feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713364" start="10609" end="10617" title="Stratton (film)" label="Stratton"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="10689" end="10704" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q48817189" start="10718" end="10724" title="Origin (TV series)" label="Origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q232163" start="10785" end="10797" title="Natalia Tena" label="Natalia Tena"/>
<link wikidata="Q18643737" start="10815" end="10830" title="YouTube Premium" label="YouTube Premium"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="10891" end="10913" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471533" start="11055" end="11062" title="Laertes (Hamlet)" label="Laertes"/>
<link wikidata="Q30597804" start="11072" end="11079" title="Ophelia (2018 film)" label="Ophelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125261" start="11087" end="11102" title="Claire McCarthy" label="Claire McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="11135" end="11141" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q44478761" start="11217" end="11244" title="2018 Sundance Film Festival" label="2018 Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q104872530" start="11374" end="11392" title="Braking for Whales" label="Braking for Whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="11415" end="11422" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q99982067" start="11443" end="11487" title="A Babysitter&amp;#x27;s Guide to Monster Hunting" label="A Babysitter&amp;#x27;s Guide to Monster Hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11544" end="11556" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q95630703" start="11568" end="11588" title="The Forgotten Battle" label="The Forgotten Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="11650" end="11657" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11782" end="11794" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q59229428" start="11910" end="11927" title="Ann Axtell Morris" label="Ann Axtell Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q52148649" start="11954" end="11968" title="Earl H. Morris" label="Earl H. Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q208685" start="12124" end="12138" title="Rupert Everett" label="Rupert Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q256164" start="12140" end="12152" title="Derek Jacobi" label="Derek Jacobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8498824" start="12154" end="12167" title="Luke Newberry" label="Luke Newberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q343463" start="12172" end="12185" title="Mark Williams (actor)" label="Mark Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403718" start="12336" end="12349" title="Sara Sugarman" label="Sara Sugarman"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="12421" end="12426" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q312702" start="12438" end="12452" title="Jonathan Pryce" label="Jonathan Pryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q230190" start="12457" end="12472" title="Samantha Morton" label="Samantha Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q835835" start="12566" end="12576" title="Carmarthen" label="Carmarthen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12787" end="12836" title="Harry Potter 20th Anniversary: Return to Hogwarts" label="Harry Potter 20th Anniversary: Return to Hogwarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="12978" end="12986" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13030" end="13048" title="2:22 A Ghost Story" label="2:22 A Ghost Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="13287" end="13345" title="The New York Times Best Seller list" label="&amp;quot;The New York Times&amp;quot; nonfiction best-seller list"/>
<link wikidata="Q123762520" start="13512" end="13528" title="Some Other Woman" label="Some Other Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383160" start="13632" end="13645" title="Igor Jijikine" label="Igor Jijikine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859256" start="13647" end="13660" title="Richard Brake" label="Richard Brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q18576603" start="13700" end="13715" title="Josiah Oldfield" label="Josiah Oldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q124013977" start="13757" end="13775" title="Gandhi (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Gandhi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q179641" start="13939" end="13962" title="Draco Malfoy" label="Felton&amp;#x27;s character"/>
<link wikidata="Q208255" start="13976" end="13994" title="Astoria Greengrass" label="Astoria Greengrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q39476" start="14096" end="14107" title="Emma Watson" label="Emma Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185967" start="14187" end="14200" title="South African people" label="South African"/>
<link wikidata="Q38726" start="14279" end="14297" title="Labrador Retriever" label="Labrador Retriever"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="14329" end="14335" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="14415" end="14424" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q174097" start="14455" end="14465" title="Gryffindor" label="Gryffindor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244512" start="14474" end="14486" title="Harry Potter (character)" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25384648" start="14714" end="14728" title="2021 Ryder Cup" label="2021 Ryder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q984834" start="14746" end="14755" title="Sheboygan, Wisconsin" label="Sheboygan"/>
<link wikidata="Q685018" start="14877" end="14888" title="CinemaBlend" label="CinemaBlend"/>
<link wikidata="Q192579" start="14920" end="14927" title="jet lag" label="jet lag"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="14958" end="14966" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q669100" start="15606" end="15657" title="List of Harry Potter films cast members" label="List of &amp;quot;Harry Potter&amp;quot; films cast members"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277014" wikidata="Q168058" url="?curid=277014" title="Campanology">
<text>Campanology (/kæmpəˈnɒlədʒi/) is both the scientific and artistic study of bells, encompassing their design, tuning, and the methods by which they are rung. It delves into the technology behind bell casting and tuning, as well as the rich history, traditions, and techniques of bellringing as an art form. This field often involves the study of large, tuned bell collections, such as Flemish carillons, Russian zvons, or English &quot;rings of bells&quot; used for change ringing. These unique assemblages come with distinct practices and challenges, and campanology also explores the composition and performance of music written specifically for them.

While campanology primarily refers to larger bells typically housed in towers, it is not usually applied to smaller bell collections, such as glockenspiels, tubular bells, or Indonesian gamelans. Instead, the term is most commonly associated with the use of large bells, their musical and historical significance, and the ongoing efforts to perfect these instruments.

==Etymology and definition==
&quot;Campanology&quot; is a hybrid word. The first half is derived from the Late Latin , meaning &#x27;bell&#x27;; the second half is derived from the Ancient Greek () meaning &#x27;the study of&#x27;.

A campanologist is one who studies campanology, though it is popularly misused to refer to a bell ringer.

==Forms of bellringing==
===Full circle ringing===

In English style (see below) full circle ringing, the bells in a church tower are hung so that on each stroke the bell swings through a complete circle; actually a little more than 360 degrees. Between strokes, it briefly sits poised &#x27;upside-down&#x27;, with the mouth pointed upwards; pulling on a rope connected to a large diameter wheel attached to the bell swings it down and the assembly&#x27;s own momentum propels the bell back up again on the other side of the swing. Each alternate pull or stroke is identified as either &quot;handstroke&quot; or &quot;backstroke&quot;—handstroke where the &quot;sally&quot; (the fluffy area covered with wool) is pulled followed by a pull on the plain &quot;tail&quot;. At East Bergholt in the English county of Suffolk, there is a unique set of bells that are not in a tower and are rung full circle by hand. They are the heaviest ring of five bells listed in &quot;Dove&#x27;s Guide for Church Bell Ringers&quot;. The heaviest bell is and the bells have a combined weight of .

These rings of bells have relatively few bells, compared with a carillon; six or eight-bell towers are common, with the largest rings numbering up to sixteen bells. The bells are usually tuned to a diatonic scale without chromatic notes; they are traditionally numbered from the top downwards so that the highest bell (called the &quot;treble&quot;) is numbered 1 and the lowest bell (the &quot;tenor&quot;) has the highest number; it is usually the tonic note of the bells&#x27; scale.

To swing the heavy bells requires a ringer for each bell. Furthermore, the great inertias involved mean that a ringer has only a limited ability to retard or accelerate their bell&#x27;s cycle. Along with the relatively limited palette of notes available, the upshot is that such rings of bells do not easily lend themselves to ringing melodies.

Instead, a system of &quot;change ringing&quot; evolved, particularly in the early seventeenth century, which centres on mathematical permutations. The ringers begin with &quot;rounds&quot;, which is simply ringing down the scale in numerical order. (On six bells this would be &quot;123456&quot;.) The ringing then proceeds in a series of &quot;rows&quot; or &quot;changes&quot;, each of which is some permutation of rounds (for example &quot;214365&quot;) where no bell changes by more than one position from the preceding row (this is also known as the Steinhaus–Johnson–Trotter algorithm).

In &quot;call change ringing&quot;, one of the ringers (known as the &quot;Conductor&quot;) calls out to tell the other ringers how to vary their order. The timing of the calls and changes of pattern accompanying them are made at the discretion of the Conductor and so do not necessarily involve a change of ringing sequence at each successive stroke as is characteristic of &quot;method ringing&quot;. Some ringers, notably in the West of England where there is a strong call-change tradition, ring call changes exclusively but for others, the essence of change ringing is the substantially different method ringing. As of 2025 there are 7,255 English style rings. Wales having 230, Scotland 25, and the island of Ireland 61. The Channel Islands has 13 and the Isle of Man 2. 7 in Mainland Europe, 60 in North America, 2 in the Caribbean, 13 in Africa. Australia 72 and New Zealand 11. The remaining 6759 (93%) are in England (including several mobile rings).

====Veronese bell ringing====
====Bolognese bell ringing====
====Change ringing====
=====Method ringing=====
In &quot;method&quot; or &quot;scientific ringing&quot; each ringer has memorized a pattern describing his or her bell&#x27;s course from row to row; taken together, these patterns (along with only occasional &quot;calls&quot; made by a conductor) form an algorithm which cycles through the various available permutations dictated by the number of bells available. There are hundreds of these methods which have been composed over the centuries and all have names, some being very fanciful. Better-known examples such as Plain Bob, Reverse Canterbury, Grandsire and Double Oxford are familiar to most ringers.

Serious ringing always starts and ends with rounds; and it must always be &quot;true&quot;—each row must be unique, never repeated. A performance of a few hundred rows or so is called a &quot;touch&quot;. A performance of all the possible permutations possible on a set of bells is called an &quot;extent&quot;, with formula_1 bells there are formula_1! possible permutations. With five bells 5! = 120 which takes about 5 minutes. With seven bells 7! = 5,040 which takes about three hours to ring. This is the definition of a full peal on 7 (5,000 or more for other numbers of bells.) Less demanding is the quarter peal of 1,260 changes. When ringing peals and quarter peals on fewer bells several complete extents are rung consecutively. When ringing on higher numbers of bells less than a complete extent is rung. On eight bells the extent is 8!=40,320 which has only been accomplished once, taking nearly nineteen hours.

Ringing in English belltowers became a popular hobby in the late 17th century, in the Restoration era; the scientific approach which led to modern method ringing can be traced to two books of that era, &quot;Tintinnalogia or the Art of Ringing&quot; (published in 1668 by Richard Duckworth and Fabian Stedman) and &quot;Campanalogia&quot; (also by Stedman; first released 1677; see Bibliography). Today change ringing remains most popular in England but is practiced worldwide; over four thousand peals are rung each year.

Dorothy L. Sayers&#x27;s mystery novel &quot;The Nine Tailors&quot; (1934) centres around change ringing of bells in a Fenland church; her father was a clergyman.

===Russian Orthodox bellringing===

The bells in Russian tradition are sounded by their clappers, attached to ropes; a special system of ropes is developed individually for every belltower. All the ropes are gathered in one place, where the bell-ringer stands. The ropes (usually all ropes) are not pulled, but rather pressed with hands or legs. Since one end of every rope is fixed, and the ropes are kept in tension, a press or even a punch on a rope makes a clapper move.

The Russian Tsar Bell is the largest extant bell in the world.

===Carillons===
===Chimes===
===Ellacombe apparatus===

The Ellacombe apparatus is an English mechanism devised for chiming by striking stationary bells with external hammers. However it does not have the same sound as full circle ringing due to the absence of the doppler effect derived from bell rotation and the lack of a damping effect of the clapper after each strike.

It requires only one person to operate. Each hammer is connected by a rope to a fixed frame in the bell-ringing room. When in use the ropes are taut, and pulling one of the ropes towards the player will strike the hammer against the bell. To enable normal full circle ringing on the same bells, the ropes are slackened to allow the hammers to drop away from the moving bells.

The system was devised in 1821 by Reverend Henry Thomas Ellacombe of Gloucestershire, who first had such a system installed in Bitton in 1822. He created the system to make conventional bell-ringers redundant, so churches did not have to tolerate the behaviour of what he thought were unruly bell-ringers.

However, in reality, it required very rare expertise for one person to ring changes. The sound of a chime was a poor substitute for the rich sound of swinging bells, and the apparatus fell out of fashion. Consequently, the Ellacombe apparatus has been disconnected or removed from many towers in the UK. In towers where the apparatus remains intact, it is generally used like a carillon, but to play simple tunes, or if expertise exists, to play changes.

==Bellfounding==
==Bell tuning==

The tuning of a bell is completely dependent on its shape. When first cast it is approximately correct, but it is then machined on a tuning lathe to remove metal until it is in tune. This is a very complex exercise which took centuries of empirical practice, and latterly modern acoustic science, to understand.

If a bell is part of a set to be rung or played together, then the initial dominant perceived sound, called the strike note, must be tuned to a designated note of a common scale. In addition each bell will emit harmonics, or partials, which must also be tuned so that these are not discordant with the bell&#x27;s strike note. This is what Fuller-Maitland writing in &quot;Grove&#x27;s dictionary of music and musicians&quot; meant when he said : &quot;Good tone means that a bell must be in tune with itself.&quot;

The principal partials are;

* hum note: an octave below the strike note, 
* strike note
* tierce: minor third above the strike note 
* quint: perfect fifth above the strike note
* nominal: octave above the strike note

Further, less dominant, partials include the major, third and perfect fifth in the octave above these.

&quot;Whether a founder tunes the nominal or the strike note makes little difference, however, because the nominal is one of the main partials that determines the tuning of the strike note.&quot; A heavy clapper brings out lower partials (clappers often being about 3% of a bell&#x27;s mass), while a higher clapper velocity strengthens higher partials (0.4 m/s being moderate). The relative depth of the &quot;bowl&quot; or &quot;cup&quot; part of the bell also determines the number and strength of the partials in order to achieve a desired timbre.

Bells are generally around 80% copper and 20% tin (bell metal), with the tone varying according to material.

Tone and pitch is also affected by the method in which a bell is struck. Asian large bells are often bowl shaped but lack the lip and are often not free-swinging. Also note the special shape of Bianzhong bells, allowing two tones. The scaling or size of most bells to each other may be approximated by the equation for circular cylinders:

&quot;f=Ch/D2&quot;

where &quot;h&quot; is thickness, &quot;D&quot; is diameter, and &quot;C&quot; is a constant determined by the material and the profile.

===The major third bell===
On the theory that pieces in major keys may better be accommodated, after many unsatisfactory attempts, in the 1980s, using computer modeling for assistance in design by scientists at the Technical University in Eindhoven, bells with a major-third profile were created by the Royal Eijsbouts bell foundry in the Netherlands, being described as resembling old Coke bottles in that they have a bulge around the middle; and in 1999 a design without the bulge was announced.

==Bell organizations==
The following organizations promote the study, music, collection and/or preservation and restoration of bells. Nation(s) covered are given in parentheses.

* The American Bell Association International (United States with foreign chapters)
* Association Campanaire Wallonne asbl (Belgium)
* Associazione Italiana di Campanologia (Italy)
* Associazione Suonatori di Campane a Sistema Veronese (Italy)
* The Australian and New Zealand Association of Bellringers (Australia, New Zealand)
* Beratungsausschuss für das Deutsche Glockenwesen (Germany)
* British Carillon Society (United Kingdom)
* The Central Council of Church Bell Ringers (UK)
* Gruppo Campanari Padre Stanislao Mattei (Bologna, Italy) 
* Handbell Musicians of America (United States, chapter of English Handbell Ringers Association)
* Handbell Ringers of Great Britain (United Kingdom)
* Société Française de Campanologie (France)
* Unione Campanari Bolognesi (Emilia and Romagna, Italy)
* Unione Campanari Modenesi &quot;Alberto Corni&quot; (Modena, Italy)
* Verband Deutscher Glockengießereien e.V. (Germany)
* (multinational)

==See also==
* Index of campanology articles

== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
* 
* &quot;Dove&#x27;s Guide for Church Bell Ringers to the Ringing Bells of Britain and of the World&quot; (2000).
* Duckworth, Richard and Stedman, Fabian (1970) [1668]. &quot;Tintinnalogia; or, The Art of Ringing&quot;, 1st ed. reprinted. Bath: Kingsmead Reprints. .
* Ingram, Tom (1954). &quot;Bells of England&quot;. London: F. Muller.
* Stedman, F. (1990) [1677]. &quot;Campanalogia: or The Art of Ringing Improved ...&quot;, facsimile of 1st ed. Kettering: C. Groome. .
* Walters, H. B. (1908). &quot;Church Bells&quot;. London: Mowbray.
* Wilson, Wilfrid G. (1965). &quot;Change Ringing: The Art and Science of Change Ringing on Church and Hand Bells&quot;. London: Faber.

==External links==
* General
** Bell Facts: Tools of Communication—Instruments of Music—Objects of Art
** Gallery of medieval depictions of bells (&quot;Musiconis database, Université Paris-Sorbonne&quot;)
** Video of tuning a bell
** Video explaining bell tuning
* Carillons
** The Carillon as a Musical Instrument, on the Web site of The Guild of Carillonneurs in North America (GCNA)
* Chimes
** Chimes and knells rung in traditional music from County of Nice, France
** List of chimes in North America
* Russian Orthodox bells
** A collection of MP3 recordings of Russian Orthodox bells
* British bells
** Discover Bell Ringing—An introduction for non-ringers
** Dove&#x27;s Guide online
** &quot;Tintinnalogia, or, the Art of Ringing&quot; by Richard Duckworth, Fabian Stedman (1671), from Project Gutenberg
** Change Ringing Resources by Roger Bailey
** Central Council of Church Bell Ringers
** &quot;The Ringing World&quot; magazine
* Indian Bells
** &quot;Campanology in India: Bell Ringing, An Aid to Worship&quot; (in Hinduism) by S. Srikanta Sastri (1935)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1377255" start="1081" end="1092" title="hybrid word" label="hybrid word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503113" start="1129" end="1139" title="Late Latin" label="Late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1204" end="1217" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q587524" start="1349" end="1360" title="bell ringer" label="bell ringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003256" start="1444" end="1463" title="full circle ringing" label="full circle ringing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185491" start="2137" end="2150" title="East Bergholt" label="East Bergholt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="2176" end="2183" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302383" start="2331" end="2372" title="Dove&amp;#x27;s Guide for Church Bell Ringers" label="Dove&amp;#x27;s Guide for Church Bell Ringers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334807" start="2450" end="2464" title="ring of bells" label="rings of bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q23702413" start="2642" end="2656" title="diatonic scale" label="diatonic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q202021" start="2665" end="2674" title="chromatic scale" label="chromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q210411" start="2894" end="2899" title="tonic (music)" label="tonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q122508" start="3013" end="3020" title="inertia" label="inertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="3268" end="3276" title="melody" label="melodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3400" end="3412" title="mathematics" label="mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q161519" start="3413" end="3425" title="permutations" label="permutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925248" start="3835" end="3870" title="Steinhaus–Johnson–Trotter algorithm" label="Steinhaus–Johnson–Trotter algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="5201" end="5210" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="5908" end="5909" title="factorial" label="!"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="6567" end="6578" title="English Restoration" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427680" start="6775" end="6789" title="Fabian Stedman" label="Fabian Stedman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6863" end="6875" title="#Bibliography" label="Bibliography"/>
<link wikidata="Q106740" start="7005" end="7022" title="Dorothy L. Sayers" label="Dorothy L. Sayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815880" start="7050" end="7066" title="The Nine Tailors" label="The Nine Tailors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404827" start="7124" end="7131" title="The Fens" label="Fenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q147875" start="7657" end="7666" title="Tsar Bell" label="Tsar Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003256" start="7928" end="7947" title="full circle ringing" label="full circle ringing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729129" start="8504" end="8526" title="Henry Thomas Ellacombe" label="Henry Thomas Ellacombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919142" start="8588" end="8594" title="Bitton" label="Bitton"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="9068" end="9070" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q505174" start="9146" end="9154" title="carillon" label="carillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660564" start="11016" end="11026" title="bell metal" label="bell metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q133722" start="11269" end="11278" title="Bianzhong" label="Bianzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196631" start="11877" end="11905" title="Royal Eijsbouts bell foundry" label="Royal Eijsbouts bell foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002832" start="12258" end="12297" title="American Bell Association International" label="American Bell Association International"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052696" start="12498" end="12555" title="The Australian and New Zealand Association of Bellringers" label="The Australian and New Zealand Association of Bellringers"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905917" start="12692" end="12730" title="Central Council of Church Bell Ringers" label="Central Council of Church Bell Ringers"/>
<link wikidata="Q113288905" start="13205" end="13234" title="Index of campanology articles" label="Index of campanology articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302383" start="13298" end="13388" title="Dove&amp;#x27;s Guide for Church Bell Ringers" label="Dove&amp;#x27;s Guide for Church Bell Ringers to the Ringing Bells of Britain and of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q111982681" start="14305" end="14348" title="The Guild of Carillonneurs in North America" label="The Guild of Carillonneurs in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="14764" end="14781" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Project Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387907" start="15011" end="15029" title="S. Srikanta Sastri" label="S. Srikanta Sastri"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277017" wikidata="Q7493588" url="?curid=277017" title="Shelf (computing)">
<text>The Shelf is an interface feature in NeXTSTEP and OPENSTEP, and is used as a repository to store links to commonly used files, directories and programs, and as a temporary &quot;holding&quot; place to move/copy files and directories around in the file system hierarchy. In macOS, items may be dragged onto the sidebar area of the Finder, but these do not behave as placeholders and cannot be manipulated in the below manner.

The dynamics of the Shelf in file system operations can be illustrated by comparison with the metaphor used in the Microsoft Windows operating systems. In order to move a file the following steps may be taken:
* the window containing the source folder is opened
* the window containing the destination folder is opened
* the desired file in the source directory is dragged to the destination folder

With the NeXT operating systems, in addition to moving files by dragging them from window to window, the following method can be used:
* the user navigates to the source directory
* the file is dragged to the Shelf 
* the user navigates to the destination directory
* the file is dragged from the Shelf to the destination directory

Note that the file, when dragged to the Shelf, has not moved anywhere and is not changed in any way. The Shelf icon is merely a for the file. In moving the placeholder &quot;off&quot; the shelf, the actual action occurs.

The NeXT functionality builds upon this concept by allowing the destination directory to be put on the Shelf as well, and the file can be merely dragged to the destination directory icon.

The process is similar to the Microsoft Windows functionality of copying or cutting file system objects (a file or files, a folder or folders, or a combination of both) to the clipboard; the objects are not copied or removed from their original location until the paste operation to the new location is completed. The Shelf concept, though older, is more powerful in that the file system objects, their sources and destinations are persistent and available as long as they are on the Shelf (in the Windows cut, copy, and paste metaphor the objects and locations persist until one copy/move operation is complete or until something else is placed in the clipboard).

Since Shelf icons are &#x27;placeholders&#x27; of sorts, icons can be put on the Shelf representing commonly used directories, and commonly used programs can be put on the Shelf as well.

The NeXTSTEP and OPENSTEP file management application (called FileViewer and run by the Workspace Manager) also allowed users to have different shelves associated with particular directories. Users simply opened a new browser rooted in a particular subdirectory, and that browser window would show the corresponding shelf, allowing users to have many different shelves based on whatever folder hierarchy they happened to be using to organize their files.

==See also==
*Miller columns
*Clipboard (computing)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7493588" start="4" end="9" title="Shelf (computing)" label="Shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q831367" start="37" end="45" title="NeXTSTEP" label="NeXTSTEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193981" start="50" end="58" title="OpenStep" label="OPENSTEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="273" end="278" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q910951" start="330" end="336" title="Finder (software)" label="Finder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="541" end="558" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q308993" start="835" end="839" title="NeXT" label="NeXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q244909" start="1635" end="1653" title="Clipboard (software)" label="copying or cutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058748" start="2076" end="2096" title="cut, copy, and paste" label="cut, copy, and paste"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859292" start="2894" end="2908" title="Miller columns" label="Miller columns"/>
<link wikidata="Q244909" start="2910" end="2931" title="Clipboard (computing)" label="Clipboard (computing)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277019" wikidata="Q869595" url="?curid=277019" title="Horse (zodiac)">
<text>The [[Horse]] () is the seventh of the 12-year cycle of animals which appear in the Chinese zodiac related to the Chinese calendar. There is a long tradition of the Horse in Chinese mythology. Certain characteristics of the Horse nature are supposed to be typical of or to be associated with either a year of the Horse and its events, or in regard to the personality of someone born in such a year. Horse aspects can also enter by other factors or measures, such as hourly. The year of the horse is associated with the Earthly Branch symbol .

== History ==
The lunar calendar paved the sequence of the Chinese zodiac animals. This calendar can be traced back to the 14th century B.C. Myths say that Emperor Huangdi, the first Chinese emperor, in 2637 B.C. invented the Chinese lunar calendar, which follows the cycles of the moon. In a folklore story that explains the origins of the cycle, the animals hold a race to determine their order. The custom of pairing an animal with a year in a 12-year cycle can be traced back to at least the Han dynasty (201 BC – 220 AD), and there are many legends and folktales surrounding the 12 zodiac animals, which are often depicted in East Asian art and design. A group of Chinese figures in the Victoria and Albert Museum&#x27;s collection shows the zodiac animals with human bodies but animal heads. This way of portraying them became popular in the Tang dynasty (8th century).

==Years and the Five Elements==

People born within these date ranges can be said to have been born in the &quot;Year of the Horse&quot;, while also bearing the following elemental sign:
==Basic astrology elements==
==See also==
* Burmese zodiac
* Chinese astrology
* Chinese New Year
* Horse
* Horse worship
* Horses in Chinese culture
* Fire Horse

==Notes==
==References==
*Hale, Gill (2002). &quot;The Practical Encyclopedia of Feng Shui&quot;. New York: Barnes and Noble Books. 
* “V&amp;A · The Lunar Zodiac.” &quot;Victoria and Albert Museum&quot;, https://www.vam.ac.uk/articles/the-lunar-zodiac#slideshow=8683334511&amp;slide=0.
* “Chinese Zodiac: Cultural Significance.” &quot;Chinese Zodiac | Cultural Significance&quot;, https://depts.washington.edu/triolive/quest/2007/TTQ07030/culture.html.
* Chiao, Fefe Ho &amp; Chloe, et al. “Year of the Horse: Fortune and Personality – Chinese Zodiac.” &quot;Chinese New Year&quot;, https://chinesenewyear.net/zodiac/horse/.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q869595" start="4" end="13" title="Horse (zodiac)" label="[[Horse]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q869595" start="15" end="15" title="Horse (zodiac)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1976204" start="84" end="98" title="Chinese zodiac" label="Chinese zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q134032" start="114" end="130" title="Chinese calendar" label="Chinese calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="148" end="157" title="Chinese culture" label="tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005007" start="165" end="191" title="Horse in Chinese mythology" label="Horse in Chinese mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="201" end="216" title="Chinese characters" label="characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="230" end="236" title="nature" label="nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="490" end="495" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072961" start="519" end="533" title="Earthly Branches" label="Earthly Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="534" end="540" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q869595" start="541" end="541" title="Horse (zodiac)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1976204" start="603" end="617" title="Chinese zodiac" label="Chinese zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q134032" start="770" end="792" title="Chinese calendar" label="Chinese lunar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="1040" end="1051" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="1236" end="1262" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="1392" end="1404" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q218652" start="1592" end="1601" title="Wuxing (Chinese philosophy)" label="elemental"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999462" start="1652" end="1666" title="Burmese zodiac" label="Burmese zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q724950" start="1669" end="1686" title="Chinese astrology" label="Chinese astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="1689" end="1705" title="Chinese New Year" label="Chinese New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="1708" end="1713" title="Horse" label="Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4246592" start="1716" end="1729" title="Horse worship" label="Horse worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q21511124" start="1732" end="1757" title="Horses in Chinese culture" label="Horses in Chinese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062045" start="1760" end="1770" title="Fire Horse" label="Fire Horse"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="277020" wikidata="Q2320705" url="?curid=277020" title="List of rivers of Bulgaria">
<text>This is a list of [[river]]s in [[Bulgaria]], organised geographically, taken clockwise from the westernmost tributaries of the Danube drainage. Tributaries are listed down the page in an downstream direction, i.e. the first tributary listed is closest to the source, and tributaries of tributaries are treated similarly. The main stem (or principal) river of a catchment is labelled as (MS), right-bank tributaries are indicated by (R), left-bank tributaries by (L). Note that in general usage, the &#x27;right or left bank of a river&#x27; refers to the right or left hand bank, as seen when looking downstream. The list encompasses most of the main rivers of Bulgaria. It includes rivers shared with other countries. There is also a list of rivers over 50 km. The Bulgarian word for river, &quot;река&quot; (transliteration &quot;reka&quot;) is often a part of the river names in the country.

==Overview==
There are 540 rivers in Bulgaria. The longest river in Bulgaria is the Danube (2,888 km), which spans most of the country&#x27;s northern border for a length of 470 km. The longest one to run through the country (and also the deepest) is the Maritsa (480 km), while the longest river that runs solely in Bulgaria is the Iskar (368 km).

The density of rivers is highest in the mountain areas and lowest in Dobrudzha, the Danubian Plain and the Upper Thracian Plain. There are two catchment basins: the Black Sea (57% of the territory and 42% of the rivers) and the Aegean Sea (43% of the territory and 58% of the rivers) basins. The territory of Bulgaria is 110,994 km2, of which 63,270 km2 fall within the Black Sea catchment bason, divided between the Danube (49,950 km2) and Black Sea Coast drainage (13,320 km2), and 47,730 km2 fall within the Aegean Sea basin, divided between the Maritsa (34,166 km2), Mesta (2,767 km2) and Struma (10,797 km2) drainage. 

The Balkan Mountains divide Bulgaria into two nearly equal drainage systems. The larger system drains northward to the Black Sea, mainly by way of the Danube. This system includes the entire Danubian Plain and a stretch of land running 48–80 km inland from the coastline in the south. The Danube gets slightly more than 4% of its total volume from its Bulgarian tributaries. As it flows along the northern border, the Danube averages 1.6 to 2.4 km in width. The river&#x27;s highest water levels usually occur during the May floods; it is frozen over an average of 40 days per year. The longest river located entirely in Bulgarian territory, the Iskar, with a length of 368 km and a catchment area of 8,640 km2, is the only Bulgarian Danubian tributary that does not rise in the Balkan Mountains. Instead, the Iskar has its origin in the Rila Mountains. It passes through Sofia&#x27;s eastern suburbs and crosses the Balkan Mountains through a spectacular 65 km–long gorge. Other important tributaries of the Danube include the rivers Lom, Ogosta, Vit, Osam and Yantra. The longest river flowing directly to the Black Sea is the Kamchiya (254 km), while other rivers from north to south include the Batova, Dvoynitsa, Aheloy, Sredetska reka, Ropotamo, Veleka, Rezovo, etc.

The Aegean Sea catchment basin drains the Thracian Plain and most of the higher lands to the south and southwest. Several major rivers flow directly to the Aegean Sea. Many of their tributaries fall swiftly from the mountains and have cut deep, scenic gorges. The 480 km–long Maritsa (of them 321 km in Bulgaria) and its tributaries drain all of the western Thracian Plain, most of Sredna Gora, the southern slopes of the Balkan Mountains, and the northern slopes of the eastern Rhodopes. After it leaves Bulgaria, the Maritsa forms most of the Greco-Turkish border. Maritsa&#x27;s major tributaries are the Tundzha, Arda, Topolnitsa, Vacha, Stryama, etc. The other Bulgarian rivers flowing directly to the Aegean are the Struma and the Mesta.

==Black Sea Drainage==

===Danube Drainage===
* Danube (MS)
** (outside Bulgaria) Great Morava (R)
*** (outside Bulgaria) South Morava (L)
**** Nišava (R) 
***** Gaberska reka (L)
***** Erma (L)
***** (outside Bulgaria) Temštica (R)
****** Visochitsa (R)
** Timok (R)
** Topolovets (R)
*** Rabrovska reka (L)
*** Deleynska reka (L)
** Voynishka reka (R)
** Vidbol (R)
** Archar (R)
*** Salashka reka (R)
** Skomlya (R)
** Lom (R)
*** Stakevska reka (L)
**** Chuprenska reka (R)
*** Nechinska bara (L)
** Tsibritsa (R)
*** Tsibar (L)
*** Dushilnitsa (L)
** Ogosta (R)
*** Prevalska reka (L)
*** Dalgodelska Ogosta (R)
*** Zlatitsa (R)
*** Barzia (R)
*** Shugavitsa (R)
*** Botunya (R)
*** Ribine (R)
*** Skat (R)
**** Barzina (L)
** Iskar (R)
*** Cherni Iskar (L)
*** Beli Iskar (R)
*** Musalenska Bistritsa (R)
*** Palakaria (L)
*** Shipochanitsa (R)
*** Zheleznishka reka (L)
*** Vitoshka Bistritsa (L)
*** Perlovska (L)
**** Boyanska reka (L)
**** Vladaya (L)
*** Lesnovska reka (R)
*** Kakach (L)
*** Blato (L)
*** Batuliyska reka (R)
*** Iskretska reka (L)
*** Gabrovnitsa (R)
*** Malki Iskar (R)
**** Bebresh (L)
*** Zlatna Panega (R)
*** Gostilya (L)
** Vit (R)
*** Cherni Vit (L)
*** Beli Vit (R)
*** Kalnik (R)
*** Kamenitsa (R)
*** Chernyalka (R)
*** Tuchenitsa (R)
** Osam (R)
*** Beli Osam (L)
*** Cherni Osam (R)
*** Komanska reka (L)
*** Suha reka (L)
*** Shavarna (L)
*** Lomya (R)
** Barata (R)
** Yantra (R)
*** Belitsa (R)
**** Dryanovska reka (L)
*** Stara reka (R)
**** Golyama reka (R)
**** Veselina (L)
***** Zlatarishka reka (R)
*** Rositsa (L)
**** Vidima (L)
**** Negovanka (R)
**** Bohot (R)
*** Eliyska reka (L)
*** Studena (L)
** Rusenski Lom (R)
*** Cherni Lom (L)
**** Baniski Lom (L)
*** Beli Lom (R)
**** Hlebarovska reka (R)
**** Malki Lom (R)
** Topchiyska reka (R)
** Tsaratsar (R)
** Senkovets (R)
** Kanagyol (R)
*** Harsovska reka (R)
** Suha reka (R)
*** Karamandere (L)
*** Dobrichka reka (R)

===Black Sea Coast===
* Shablenska reka (Ms)
* Batova (Ms)
* Provadiya (Ms)
** Matnishka reka (R)
** Kriva reka (L)
** Devnya (L)
* Kamchiya (Ms)
** Golyama Kamchiya (L)
*** Eleshnitsa (R)
*** Vrana (L)
*** Poroyna (L)
*** Stara reka (L)
*** Brestova reka (R)
** Luda Kamchiya (R)
*** Kotlenska reka (L)
*** Medvenska reka (L)
** Eleshnitsa (R)
* Dvoynitsa (Ms)
* Hadzhiyska reka (Ms)
* Aheloy (Ms)
* Aytoska reka (Ms)
* Chukarska reka (Ms)
* Rusokastrenska reka (Ms)
* Sredetska reka (Ms)
** Gospodarevska reka (L)
* Fakiyska reka (Ms)
* Izvorska reka (Ms)
* Ropotamo (Ms)
* Dyavolska reka (Ms)
* Karaagach (Ms)
* Veleka (Ms)
** Mladezhka reka (L)
* Rezovo (Ms)

==Aegean Sea Drainage==
* Maritsa (Ms)
** Ibar (R)
** Yadenitsa (R)
** Chepinska reka (R)
*** Matnitsa (R)
** Topolnitsa (L)
*** Bunovska reka (R)
*** Mativir (R)
** Luda Yana (L)
** Stara reka (R)
** Vacha (R)
*** Shirokolashka (R)
*** Devinska reka (L)
*** Gashnya (L)
** Potoka (L)
** Parvenetska reka (R)
** Pyasachnik (L)
** Chepelare (R)
*** Yugovska reka (R)
**** Sushitsa (R)
** Stryama (R)
*** Byala reka (L)
** Srebra (L)
** Cherkezitsa (R)
** Brezovska reka (L)
** Omurovska reka (L)
** Mechka (R)
** Tekirska reka (L)
** Kayaliyka (R)
** Starata reka (L)
** Banska (R)
** Merichlerska reka (L)
** Martinka (L)
** Arpadere (L)
** Sazliyka (L)
*** Blatnitsa (L)
*** Ovcharitsa (L)
*** Sokolitsa (L)
** Harmanliyska reka (R)
*** Haskovska reka (L)
** Biserska reka (R)
** Golyama reka (L)
** Levchenska reka (L)
** Arda (R)
*** Cherna (L)
*** Malka Arda (L)
*** Borovitsa (L)
*** Varbitsa (R)
*** Perperek (L)
*** Krumovitsa (R)
*** Aterenska reka (R)
** Tundzha (L)
*** Tazha (L)
*** Maglizhka reka (L)
*** Asenovska reka (L)
*** Mochuritsa (L)
*** Popovska reka (L)
**** Krushevska reka (R)
**** Arapliyska reka (L)
***** Boyalashka reka (R)
*** Sinapovska reka (R)
**** Kalnitsa (L)
** Luda reka (R)
*** Byala Reka (L)

* Mesta (Ms)
** Cherna Mesta (L)
** Byala Mesta (R)
** Iztok (R)
*** Glazne (R)
**** Banderitsa (L)
**** Demyanitsa (R)
** Disilitsa (R)
** Retizhe (R)
** Kanina (L)
*** Vishteritsa (R)
** Chechka Bistritsa (L)
** Dospat (L)

* Struma (Ms)
** Konska reka (R)
** Arkata (L)
** Treklyanska reka (R)
** Dragovishtitsa (R)
** Sovolyanska Bistritsa (R)
** Eleshnitsa (R)
** Dzherman (L)
** Rilska River (L)
** Blagoevgradska Bistritsa (L)
** Gradevska reka (L)
** Vlahina reka (L)
** Lebnitsa (R)
** Sandanska Bistritsa (L)
** Strumeshnitsa (R)
** Melnishka reka (L)
** Pirinska Bistritsa (L)

== List of rivers over 50 km ==
==See also==
* Geography of Bulgaria
* Reservoirs and dams in Bulgaria

==Citations==
== References ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2320705" start="10" end="44" title="List of rivers of Bulgaria" label="list of [[river]]s in [[Bulgaria]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="128" end="134" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="981" end="987" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q204347" start="1152" end="1159" title="Maritsa" label="Maritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q217805" start="1230" end="1235" title="Iskar (river)" label="Iskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="1316" end="1325" title="Dobruja" label="Dobrudzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241026" start="1331" end="1345" title="Danubian Plain (Bulgaria)" label="Danubian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091567" start="1354" end="1374" title="Upper Thracian Plain" label="Upper Thracian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="1412" end="1421" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="1475" end="1485" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q170427" start="1876" end="1892" title="Balkan Mountains" label="Balkan Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q285451" start="1931" end="1947" title="Drainage system (geomorphology)" label="drainage systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q191795" start="2710" end="2714" title="Rila" label="Rila"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="2744" end="2749" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970210" start="2828" end="2844" title="Iskar Gorge" label="65 km–long gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995554" start="2907" end="2910" title="Lom (river)" label="Lom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355194" start="2912" end="2918" title="Ogosta" label="Ogosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773449" start="2920" end="2923" title="Vit (river)" label="Vit"/>
<link wikidata="Q845988" start="2925" end="2929" title="Osam" label="Osam"/>
<link wikidata="Q217126" start="2934" end="2940" title="Yantra (river)" label="Yantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461510" start="3001" end="3009" title="Kamchiya" label="Kamchiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079182" start="3071" end="3077" title="Batova" label="Batova"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277747" start="3079" end="3088" title="Dvoynitsa" label="Dvoynitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623138" start="3090" end="3096" title="Aheloy (river)" label="Aheloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582431" start="3098" end="3112" title="Sredetska reka" label="Sredetska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119511" start="3114" end="3122" title="Ropotamo" label="Ropotamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455311" start="3124" end="3130" title="Veleka" label="Veleka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890912" start="3132" end="3138" title="Rezovo River" label="Rezovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q204347" start="3422" end="3429" title="Maritsa" label="Maritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q525263" start="3528" end="3539" title="Sredna Gora" label="Sredna Gora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489" start="3625" end="3633" title="Rhodopes" label="Rhodopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q731777" start="3754" end="3761" title="Tundzha" label="Tundzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q500954" start="3763" end="3767" title="Arda (Maritsa)" label="Arda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953026" start="3769" end="3779" title="Topolnitsa River" label="Topolnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448969" start="3781" end="3786" title="Vacha (river)" label="Vacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817769" start="3788" end="3795" title="Stryama" label="Stryama"/>
<link wikidata="Q204127" start="3868" end="3874" title="Struma (river)" label="Struma"/>
<link wikidata="Q193904" start="3883" end="3888" title="Nestos (river)" label="Mesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="3939" end="3945" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q211328" start="3973" end="3985" title="Great Morava" label="Great Morava"/>
<link wikidata="Q591974" start="4013" end="4025" title="South Morava" label="South Morava"/>
<link wikidata="Q583062" start="4035" end="4041" title="Nišava" label="Nišava"/>
<link wikidata="Q12275890" start="4053" end="4066" title="Gaberska reka" label="Gaberska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279831" start="4077" end="4081" title="Jerma (river)" label="Erma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670544" start="4111" end="4119" title="Temštica" label="Temštica"/>
<link wikidata="Q16083400" start="4131" end="4141" title="Visočica (river)" label="Visochitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q753919" start="4149" end="4154" title="Timok River" label="Timok"/>
<link wikidata="Q9360112" start="4162" end="4172" title="Topolovets (river)" label="Topolovets"/>
<link wikidata="Q12291911" start="4181" end="4195" title="Rabrovska reka" label="Rabrovska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277805" start="4204" end="4218" title="Deleynska reka" label="Deleynska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377355" start="4226" end="4240" title="Voynishka reka" label="Voynishka reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q667522" start="4248" end="4254" title="Vidbol" label="Vidbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079200" start="4262" end="4268" title="Archar (river)" label="Archar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12292891" start="4277" end="4290" title="Salashka reka" label="Salashka reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12293889" start="4298" end="4305" title="Skomlya" label="Skomlya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995554" start="4313" end="4316" title="Lom (river)" label="Lom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467407" start="4325" end="4339" title="Stakevska reka" label="Stakevska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11692350" start="4349" end="4364" title="Chuprenska reka" label="Chuprenska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12288207" start="4373" end="4387" title="Nechinska bara" label="Nechinska bara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655543" start="4395" end="4404" title="Tsibritsa" label="Tsibritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12298901" start="4413" end="4419" title="Tsibar" label="Tsibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12279249" start="4428" end="4439" title="Dushilnitsa" label="Dushilnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355194" start="4447" end="4453" title="Ogosta" label="Ogosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273831" start="4563" end="4570" title="Botunya (river)" label="Botunya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534096" start="4594" end="4598" title="Skat (river)" label="Skat"/>
<link wikidata="Q217805" start="4623" end="4628" title="Iskar (river)" label="Iskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273259" start="4677" end="4697" title="Musalenska Bistritsa" label="Musalenska Bistritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815100" start="4706" end="4715" title="Palakaria" label="Palakaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12299620" start="4746" end="4763" title="Zheleznishka reka" label="Zheleznishka reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937212" start="4772" end="4790" title="Vitoshka Bistritsa" label="Vitoshka Bistritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169173" start="4799" end="4808" title="Perlovska" label="Perlovska"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952232" start="4818" end="4831" title="Boyanska reka" label="Boyanska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657979" start="4841" end="4848" title="Vladaya (river)" label="Vladaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284821" start="4857" end="4871" title="Lesnovska reka" label="Lesnovska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334792" start="4895" end="4900" title="Blato (river)" label="Blato"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273006" start="4909" end="4924" title="Batuliyska reka" label="Batuliyska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12285741" start="4976" end="4987" title="Malki Iskar" label="Malki Iskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273039" start="4997" end="5004" title="Bebresh" label="Bebresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388770" start="5013" end="5026" title="Zlatna Panega (river)" label="Zlatna Panega"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277245" start="5035" end="5043" title="Gostilya (river)" label="Gostilya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773449" start="5051" end="5054" title="Vit (river)" label="Vit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12282430" start="5099" end="5105" title="Kalnik (river)" label="Kalnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q11733953" start="5114" end="5123" title="Kamenitsa (Vit)" label="Kamenitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12299147" start="5132" end="5142" title="Chernyalka" label="Chernyalka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12297087" start="5151" end="5161" title="Tuchenitsa" label="Tuchenitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q845988" start="5169" end="5173" title="Osam" label="Osam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12272960" start="5290" end="5296" title="Barata (river)" label="Barata"/>
<link wikidata="Q217126" start="5304" end="5310" title="Yantra (river)" label="Yantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615429" start="5319" end="5326" title="Belitsa (Yantra)" label="Belitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309642" start="5336" end="5351" title="Dryanovo (river)" label="Dryanovska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9343983" start="5360" end="5370" title="Stara reka (Yantra)" label="Stara reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277144" start="5380" end="5392" title="Golyama reka" label="Golyama reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12275167" start="5402" end="5410" title="Veselina (river)" label="Veselina"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280508" start="5421" end="5437" title="Zlatarishka reka" label="Zlatarishka reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167795" start="5446" end="5453" title="Rositsa (river)" label="Rositsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12275227" start="5463" end="5469" title="Vidima (river)" label="Vidima"/>
<link wikidata="Q11790481" start="5479" end="5488" title="Negovanka" label="Negovanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273838" start="5498" end="5503" title="Bohot (river)" label="Bohot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494200" start="5548" end="5560" title="Rusenski Lom" label="Rusenski Lom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12299114" start="5569" end="5579" title="Cherni Lom" label="Cherni Lom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12272929" start="5589" end="5600" title="Baniski Lom" label="Baniski Lom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9170682" start="5609" end="5617" title="Beli Lom (river)" label="Beli Lom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12285743" start="5653" end="5662" title="Malki Lom" label="Malki Lom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12296745" start="5670" end="5685" title="Topchiyska reka" label="Topchiyska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184514" start="5693" end="5702" title="Tsaratsar" label="Tsaratsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12293574" start="5710" end="5719" title="Senkovets" label="Senkovets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979252" start="5727" end="5735" title="Kanagyol" label="Kanagyol"/>
<link wikidata="Q12298634" start="5744" end="5758" title="Harsovska reka" label="Harsovska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9347789" start="5766" end="5775" title="Suha reka (river)" label="Suha reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12282606" start="5784" end="5795" title="Karamandere (river)" label="Karamandere"/>
<link wikidata="Q12278884" start="5804" end="5818" title="Dobrichka reka" label="Dobrichka reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12299282" start="5848" end="5863" title="Shablenska reka" label="Shablenska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079182" start="5871" end="5877" title="Batova" label="Batova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983221" start="5885" end="5894" title="Provadiya (river)" label="Provadiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277788" start="5943" end="5949" title="Devnya (river)" label="Devnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461510" start="5956" end="5964" title="Kamchiya" label="Kamchiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q12275653" start="6017" end="6022" title="Vrana (river)" label="Vrana"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273942" start="6066" end="6079" title="Brestova reka" label="Brestova reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492893" start="6087" end="6100" title="Luda Kamchiya" label="Luda Kamchiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277747" start="6171" end="6180" title="Dvoynitsa" label="Dvoynitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12297863" start="6188" end="6203" title="Hadzhiyska reka" label="Hadzhiyska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623138" start="6211" end="6217" title="Aheloy (river)" label="Aheloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142972" start="6225" end="6237" title="Aytoska reka" label="Aytoska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12299253" start="6245" end="6259" title="Chukarska reka" label="Chukarska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12292730" start="6267" end="6286" title="Rusokastrenska reka" label="Rusokastrenska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582431" start="6294" end="6308" title="Sredetska reka" label="Sredetska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277233" start="6317" end="6335" title="Gospodarevska reka" label="Gospodarevska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q21782078" start="6342" end="6355" title="Fakiyska reka" label="Fakiyska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12281438" start="6363" end="6376" title="Izvorska reka" label="Izvorska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119511" start="6384" end="6392" title="Ropotamo" label="Ropotamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621886" start="6400" end="6414" title="Dyavolska reka" label="Dyavolska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087154" start="6422" end="6431" title="Karaagach (river)" label="Karaagach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455311" start="6439" end="6445" title="Veleka" label="Veleka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12287227" start="6454" end="6468" title="Mladezhka reka" label="Mladezhka reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890912" start="6475" end="6481" title="Rezovo (river)" label="Rezovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q204347" start="6514" end="6521" title="Maritsa" label="Maritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046554" start="6542" end="6551" title="Yadenitsa" label="Yadenitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q693664" start="6559" end="6573" title="Chepinska reka" label="Chepinska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12287549" start="6582" end="6590" title="Matnitsa" label="Matnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953026" start="6598" end="6608" title="Topolnitsa (river)" label="Topolnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12287544" start="6639" end="6646" title="Mativir" label="Mativir"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014553" start="6654" end="6663" title="Luda Yana" label="Luda Yana"/>
<link wikidata="Q12295049" start="6671" end="6681" title="Stara reka (Maritsa)" label="Stara reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448969" start="6689" end="6694" title="Vacha (river)" label="Vacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q12299373" start="6703" end="6716" title="Shirokolashka" label="Shirokolashka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367383" start="6725" end="6738" title="Devinska reka" label="Devinska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12276155" start="6747" end="6754" title="Gashnya" label="Gashnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q12291135" start="6762" end="6768" title="Potoka (river)" label="Potoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12291822" start="6776" end="6792" title="Parvenetska reka" label="Parvenetska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11818990" start="6800" end="6810" title="Pyasachnik" label="Pyasachnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166135" start="6818" end="6827" title="Chepelare (river)" label="Chepelare"/>
<link wikidata="Q125749" start="6836" end="6849" title="Yugovska reka" label="Yugovska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12295792" start="6859" end="6867" title="Sushitsa (river)" label="Sushitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817769" start="6875" end="6882" title="Stryama" label="Stryama"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174025" start="6891" end="6901" title="Byala reka (Stryama tributary)" label="Byala reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271252" start="6909" end="6915" title="Srebra" label="Srebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273939" start="6942" end="6956" title="Brezovska reka" label="Brezovska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12289238" start="6964" end="6978" title="Omurovska reka" label="Omurovska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580265" start="7058" end="7064" title="Banska" label="Banska"/>
<link wikidata="Q12286267" start="7097" end="7105" title="Martinka (river)" label="Martinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623029" start="7129" end="7137" title="Sazliyka" label="Sazliyka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389639" start="7146" end="7155" title="Blatnitsa (river)" label="Blatnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12289132" start="7164" end="7174" title="Ovcharitsa" label="Ovcharitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12294130" start="7183" end="7192" title="Sokolitsa" label="Sokolitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12297971" start="7200" end="7217" title="Harmanliyska reka" label="Harmanliyska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q500954" start="7312" end="7316" title="Arda (Maritsa tributary)" label="Arda"/>
<link wikidata="Q12299100" start="7325" end="7331" title="Cherna (Arda)" label="Cherna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525266" start="7340" end="7350" title="Malka Arda (river)" label="Malka Arda"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273809" start="7359" end="7368" title="Borovitsa (river)" label="Borovitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087121" start="7377" end="7385" title="Varbitsa (river)" label="Varbitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12290193" start="7394" end="7402" title="Perperek (river)" label="Perperek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622808" start="7411" end="7421" title="Krumovitsa" label="Krumovitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12272726" start="7430" end="7444" title="Aterenska reka" label="Aterenska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q731777" start="7452" end="7459" title="Tundzha" label="Tundzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q12297099" start="7468" end="7473" title="Tazha (river)" label="Tazha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11784370" start="7528" end="7538" title="Mochuritsa" label="Mochuritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21779381" start="7547" end="7560" title="Popovska reka" label="Popovska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12272279" start="7595" end="7610" title="Arapliyska reka" label="Arapliyska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273843" start="7621" end="7636" title="Boyalashka reka" label="Boyalashka reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12293802" start="7645" end="7660" title="Sinapovska reka" label="Sinapovska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12282431" start="7670" end="7678" title="Kalnitsa" label="Kalnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130114" start="7686" end="7695" title="Erythropotamos" label="Luda reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003920" start="7704" end="7714" title="Byala Reka (Luda Reka tributary)" label="Byala Reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q193904" start="7722" end="7727" title="Nestos (river)" label="Mesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q20500147" start="7775" end="7780" title="Iztok (river)" label="Iztok"/>
<link wikidata="Q9284124" start="7789" end="7795" title="Glazne" label="Glazne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12274394" start="7805" end="7815" title="Banderitsa" label="Banderitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4157820" start="7825" end="7835" title="Demyanitsa" label="Demyanitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q20498588" start="7843" end="7852" title="Disilitsa (river)" label="Disilitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11834422" start="7860" end="7867" title="Retizhe" label="Retizhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12282535" start="7875" end="7881" title="Kanina (river)" label="Kanina"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991272" start="7890" end="7901" title="Vishteritsa" label="Vishteritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9172265" start="7909" end="7926" title="Chechka Bistritsa" label="Chechka Bistritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358068" start="7934" end="7940" title="Dospat (river)" label="Dospat"/>
<link wikidata="Q204127" start="7948" end="7954" title="Struma (river)" label="Struma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12296894" start="7996" end="8012" title="Treklyanska reka" label="Treklyanska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639354" start="8020" end="8034" title="Dragovištica" label="Dragovishtitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087260" start="8042" end="8063" title="Sovolyanska Bistritsa" label="Sovolyanska Bistritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q20499217" start="8071" end="8081" title="Eleshnica river" label="Eleshnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277998" start="8089" end="8097" title="Dzherman (river)" label="Dzherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11834927" start="8105" end="8117" title="Rilska River" label="Rilska River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000419" start="8125" end="8149" title="Blagoevgradska Bistritsa" label="Blagoevgradska Bistritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q20497515" start="8157" end="8171" title="Gradevska reka" label="Gradevska reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12275538" start="8179" end="8191" title="Vlahina reka" label="Vlahina reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405369" start="8199" end="8207" title="Lebnitsa (river)" label="Lebnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014834" start="8215" end="8234" title="Sandanska Bistritsa" label="Sandanska Bistritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q149214" start="8242" end="8255" title="Strumica (river)" label="Strumeshnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12286458" start="8263" end="8277" title="Melnishka reka" label="Melnishka reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11818446" start="8285" end="8303" title="Pirinska Bistritsa" label="Pirinska Bistritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q695835" start="8356" end="8377" title="Geography of Bulgaria" label="Geography of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6615489" start="8380" end="8411" title="Reservoirs and dams in Bulgaria" label="Reservoirs and dams in Bulgaria"/>
</links>
</doc>
