<doc id="291924" wikidata="Q449996" url="?curid=291924" title="Ontario Highway 401">
<text>King&#x27;s Highway 401, commonly referred to as Highway 401 and also known by its official name as the Macdonald–Cartier Freeway or colloquially referred to as the four-oh-one, is a controlled-access 400-series highway in the Canadian province of Ontario. It stretches from Windsor in the west to the Ontario–Quebec border in the east. The part of Highway 401 that passes through Toronto is North America&#x27;s busiest highway, and one of the widest. Together with Quebec Autoroute 20, it forms the road transportation backbone of the Quebec City–Windsor Corridor, along which over half of Canada&#x27;s population resides. It is also a &quot;Core Route&quot; in the National Highway System of Canada.
The route is maintained by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario (MTO) and patrolled by the Ontario Provincial Police. The speed limit is throughout the majority of its length, with the remaining exceptions being the posted limit westbound in Windsor, in most construction zones, and the speed limit on the stretch between Windsor and Tilbury that was raised on April 22, 2022, the extension east of the aforementioned, the stretch between Highway 35 / 115 and Cobourg, the stretch between Colborne and Belleville, the stretch between Belleville and Kingston, and the stretch between Highway 16 and the east end of the highway that were raised on July 12, 2024.

By the end of 1952, three individual highways were numbered &quot;Highway 401&quot;: the partially completed Toronto Bypass between Weston Road and Highway 11 (Yonge Street); Highway 2A between West Hill and Newcastle; and the Scenic Highway between Gananoque and Brockville, now known as the Thousand Islands Parkway. These three sections of highway were , respectively. In 1964, the route became fully navigable from Windsor to the Ontario–Quebec border. In 1965 it was given a second designation, the Macdonald–Cartier Freeway, in honour of two Fathers of Confederation. At the end of 1968, the Gananoque–Brockville section was bypassed and the final intersection grade-separated near Kingston, making Highway 401 a freeway for its entire length. Since 2007, a portion of the highway between Trenton and Toronto has been designated the Highway of Heroes, as the route is travelled by funeral convoys for fallen Canadian Forces personnel from CFB Trenton to the coroner&#x27;s office.

Highway 401 previously ended at Highway 3 (Talbot Road) upon entering Windsor. In 2011, construction began on a westward extension called the &quot;Rt. Hon. Herb Gray Parkway&quot; (formerly &quot;Windsor-Essex Parkway&quot;). This extension runs parallel to Highway 3 (Talbot Road and Huron Church Road) between the former end of the freeway and the E. C. Row Expressway, at which point the extension turns and runs alongside the E.C. Row towards the future Gordie Howe International Bridge. An section of the parkway, east of the E. C. Row interchange, opened on June 28, 2015, with the remaining section completed and opened on November 21. The widening of the highway between Highway/Regional Road 8 in Kitchener to Townline Road in Cambridge to at least ten lanes was completed by December 22, 2023. There are plans underway to widen the remaining four-lane sections between Windsor and London to six lanes and to widen the route between Cambridge and Milton as well as through Oshawa. The expansive twelve-plus-lane collector–express system through Toronto and Pickering, and partially across Mississauga, was extended west to Milton in December 2022.

== Route description ==

Highway 401 extends across Southwestern, Central and Eastern Ontario. In anticipation of the future expansion of the highway, the transportation ministry purchased a right-of-way along the entire length. Generally, the highway occupies only a portion of this allotment.
It is one of the world&#x27;s busiest highways; a 2019 analysis stated the annual average daily traffic (AADT) count between Renforth Drive and Highway 427 in Toronto was at 450,300,
while a second study estimates that over 500,000 vehicles travel that section on some days. This makes it North America&#x27;s busiest roadway, surpassing the Santa Monica Freeway in Los Angeles and I-75 in Atlanta. The just-in-time auto parts delivery systems of the highly integrated automotive industry of Michigan and Ontario have contributed to the highway&#x27;s status as the world&#x27;s busiest truck route, carrying 60 percent of vehicular trade between Canada and the US.

Highway 401 also features North America&#x27;s busiest multi-structure bridge at Hogg&#x27;s Hollow in Toronto.
The four bridges, two for each direction with the collector and express lanes, carried an average of 360,300 vehicles daily in 2019.
The highway is one of the major backbones of a network in the Great Lakes region, connecting the populous Quebec City–Windsor corridor with Michigan, New York and central Ontario&#x27;s cottage country.
It is the principal connection between Toronto and Montreal, becoming Autoroute 20 at the Ontario–Quebec border.

=== Southwestern Ontario ===
Highway 401 does not yet extend across the Detroit River into Detroit. , the Gordie Howe International Bridge will extend Highway 401 across the Canada–United States border to a connection through Delray to Interstate 75 in Michigan.
At present, Highway 401 begins as a six-lane freeway in Brighton Beach (at the Canada–US border in Windsor) at the west end of the E. C. Row Expressway, sandwiched between the E. C. Row&#x27;s opposing carriageways for a short distance. Highway 401 then changes to a southeast direction as it descends into a trench and runs alongside Highway 3 (Huron Church Road and Talbot Road). This below-grade section of the highway has 11 tunnels to cross underneath surface streets (including those carrying the Highway 3 routing). After passing under Howard Avenue and the ramps to Talbot Road, the highway then curves northeast and ascends back to the surface. At the split with Dougall Parkway (former Highway 3B) which links to the Detroit–Windsor tunnel, the highway turns east and exits Windsor. From here, Highway 401 mostly parallels the former route of Highway 98 from Windsor to Tilbury.
Southwestern Ontario is flat, primarily agricultural land, that takes advantage of the fertile clay soil deposited throughout the region.
The main river through the region is the Thames River, which drains the second largest watershed in southern Ontario and largely influences the land use surrounding the highway.
It parallels the route to the north between Tilbury and Woodstock.

Near Tilbury, Highway 401 loses its tall wall median barrier and narrows to four lanes, following lot lines laid between concession roads in a plan designed to limit damage to the sensitive agricultural lands through which the highway runs.
Here the highway&#x27;s flat and straight route is notorious for leading to driver inattention.
The section from Windsor to London (especially west of Tilbury) has become known for deadly car accidents and pile-ups, earning it the nickname &quot;Carnage Alley&quot;.
As the highway approaches London, Highway 402 merges in, resulting in a six-lane cross-section.
Within London, it intersects the city&#x27;s two municipal expressways, Highbury Avenue and the Veterans Memorial Parkway.

The section between London and Woodstock generally parallels the former Highway 2 but lies on the south side of the Thames River. This area is not as flat but the highway is generally straight. This part of Highway 401 often experiences heavy snowsqualls in early winter, sometimes extending as far east as Toronto. To the south of Woodstock, Highway 401 curves northeast as Highway 403 splits off. The freeway then meets the former Highway 2 at an interchange, reconfigured from a cloverleaf to a five-ramp parclo in the late 2000s, near the Toyota West Plant. From here the highway heads towards Kitchener and Cambridge, substantially north of the route of the former Highway 2 which has been bypassed by Highway 403&#x27;s western leg.

Heading towards Kitchener, the highway ascends as it crosses the Grand River followed by interchanges with King Street (Waterloo Regional Road 8) and Highway 8 before returning to its eastward orientation. Between Highway/Regional Road 8 and Highway/Regional Road 24 in Cambridge, the highway was widened in 2020 to twelve lanes to accommodate the growing traffic using that segment.
Beyond Highway/Regional Road 24, the highway returns to a six-lane cross section and meanders towards Milton, passing through hills and rock cuts along the way.

=== Greater Toronto Area ===

As Highway 401 approaches the Greater Toronto Area (GTA) from the west, it rounds Rattlesnake Point (part of the ecologically protected Niagara Escarpment) to the west of Milton.
Upon entering the town, it enters the first urbanized section of the GTA, passing through two rural areas between there and Oshawa. Part of this rural gap is the western side of Toronto&#x27;s Greenbelt, a zone around Toronto protected from development. After this gap, the highway interchanges with the Highway 407 Express Toll Route. Within the GTA, the highway passes several major shopping malls including Toronto Premium Outlets, Yorkdale Shopping Centre, Scarborough Town Centre and Pickering Town Centre.
Within the GTA, three separate segments of Highway 401 employ a collector-express system, a concept inspired by the Dan Ryan Expressway in Chicago. The system divides each direction of travel into segregated collector and express lanes,
giving the highway a wide span and four carriageways. Unlike the collector lanes, which provide access to every interchange, the express lanes only provide direct access to a select few interchanges. Access between the two is provided by &quot;transfers&quot;, which are strategically placed to prevent disruptions caused by closely spaced interchanges. To avoid confusion between carriageways, blue signs are used for the collector lanes and green signs for the express lanes. The overall purpose of the collector-express system is to maximize traffic flow for both local and long-distance traffic.

From the west, the first collector-express section through the GTA is long and runs from James Snow Parkway to Highway 407.

Beyond Highway 407, the freeway briefly narrows to 10 lanes east to Winston Churchill Boulevard, where the second section begins and runs to Highway 427. The west end of this section initially terminated just west of Highway 410 in the early 1990s. It was extended westward in stages during the 2010s to include the interchanges with Hurontario Street, Mavis Road, and Mississauga Road; with the final extension to Winston Churchill being completed in 2022. The east end of this section, running south of Toronto Pearson International Airport, reaches the Highway&#x27;s widest point, at 18 lanes.

Approaching the City of Toronto&#x27;s western border, a final transfer allows eastbound traffic in the collector lanes to transfer to the 401 express lanes which continue past Highway 427 as the single 401 carriageway. The 401 collector lanes then become ramps to Highway 427 after a final exit at Renforth Drive. For westbound traffic, the 401&#x27;s single westbound carriageway becomes the highway&#x27;s express lanes. The exit ramps from Highway 427 merge to form the start of Highway 401&#x27;s westbound collectors lanes in this section. This system was originally designed to accommodate and organize various traffic movements from the Highway 403 / 410 and Highway 427 interchanges along Highway 401, replacing an earlier plan that would have run Highway 403 directly to Eglinton Avenue and the never-built Richview Expressway.

East of Highway 427, the single carriageway of Highway 401 curves northeast and follows a power transmission corridor to the east end of Highway 409 where the highways merge and the 401 returns to its east–west route through Toronto. This is also the west end of the third and longest express-collector segment () which crosses the rest of the city to Brock Road in Pickering in the east.

The gap with no express/collector split between Highways 427 and 409 is a traffic bottleneck, since the space constraints of the existing flyovers of the at the 401-427 interchange also limit the width of the 401 in this section to eight lanes (widened from the original six). Highway 401 is often congested in this section, with an average of 442,900 vehicles passing between Weston Road and Highway 400 per day as of 2008 (just east of the 401-409 merger). In spite of this congestion, it is the primary commuting route in Toronto, and over 50 percent of vehicles bound for downtown Toronto use the highway.

East of Highway 400 is a set of transfer ramps between the express and collectors lanes nicknamed &quot;The Basketweave&quot;, as each direction has a pair of ramps that cross over and under each other. Near Yorkdale Shopping Centre, twelve lanes pass beneath a complicated interchange with Allen Road. Further east, the highway crosses Hogg&#x27;s Hollow over the West Don River on what is the busiest multi-span bridge crossing in North America, followed immediately by an interchange with Yonge Street which is also the centre of Toronto. Eastward the highway descends as it crosses Oriole GO Station, Leslie Street, and the East Don River in succession. It then climbs toward an interchange with the Don Valley Parkway and Highway 404, which provides access to downtown Toronto and the suburbs to the north, respectively.

Between Birchmount Road and Midland Avenue, the freeway is elevated on a berm as it crosses three surface streets and two railway lines. Progressing eastward in Scarborough, the Highway 401 continues through mostly residential areas and Scarborough City Centre including the shopping mall. The highway eventually reaching the city&#x27;s eastern edge where at Meadowvale Road it turns southeast briefly before it swings northeast as Highway 2A (downloaded from the province to the municipality in 1998) merges into it, followed immediately by an interchange with Kingston Road and Port Union Road/Sheppard Avenue, then crossing the Rouge Valley into Pickering.

West of Pickering, Highway 401 again meets former Highway 2, which thereafter parallels it to the Ontario–Quebec border. As the highway approaches Brock Road in Pickering, the collector and express lanes converge, narrowing the 14-lane cross-section to 10, divided only at the centre.
It remains this width as it passes into Ajax,
before narrowing to six lanes at Salem Road.
Planned expansions east of Salem to improve flow leading into the Highway 412 and Lakeridge Road interchanges will see the highway widened to ten lanes as far as Brock Street in Whitby, where the existing interchange will be reconfigured.

East of Ajax, the highway passes through the second rural gap, and enters Whitby. The stretch of Highway 401 through Whitby and Oshawa features several structures completed during the initial construction of the highway in the 1940s. Several of these structures are to be demolished, either due to their age, or to prepare for the planned widening of Highway 401 through this area.
A former Canadian National Railway overpass, which was fenced off but commonly used by pedestrians during Highway of Heroes repatriations, was demolished on the night of June 11, 2011. A second structure in Bowmanville was demolished during two overnight closures on July 9 and 16.
At Harmony Road, the suburban surroundings quickly transition to agricultural land. The highway curves around the south side of Bowmanville and travels towards Highway 35 and Highway 115.

=== Eastern Ontario ===

From east of Highway 35 and Highway 115 to Cobourg, Highway 401 passes through a mix of agricultural land and forests, maintaining a straight course.
Highway 401 passes through the north end of the towns of Port Hope and Cobourg with two interchanges each. Just east of Cobourg, the highway narrows to four lanes and the terrain becomes undulating, with the highway routed around hills and through valleys along the shores of Lake Ontario.
At Trenton, the highway crosses the Trent Canal and returns to an agricultural setting. It then crosses the Moira River as it goes through Belleville before heading eastward to Kingston. The Kingston portion of the highway, originally named the &quot;Kingston-Bypass&quot;, was one of the first sections of the highway to be completed; it is now mostly three lanes each way.
East of Kingston, the highway continues through a predominantly agricultural area alongside the St. Lawrence River to Gananoque, where it splits with the Thousand Islands Parkway, one of the original sections of the highway designated in 1952. The highway runs parallel to the parkway several kilometres inland from the river. The Canadian Shield, an ancient geological formation, appears through this heavily forested section of the highway. Highway 401 rejoins the Thousand Islands Parkway immediately southwest of Brockville, now heading northeast.

The remainder of the highway runs parallel to the former Highway 2 along the shore of the St. Lawrence River within the St. Lawrence Valley. Northeast of Brockville is the interchange with Highway 416, which heads north to Ottawa. At the Ontario–Quebec border, Highway 401 becomes Autoroute 20 and continues to Montreal.

=== Traffic volume ===
The MTO publishes yearly traffic volume data for provincial highways, expressed as an average daily vehicle count over the span of a year (AADT).
The table below compares the AADT at several locations along Highway 401 using data from 1969, 1988, 2008, 2016, and 2021.

== History ==

=== Predecessors ===
Highway 401&#x27;s history predates its designation by over two decades. As automobile use in southern Ontario grew in the early 20th century, road design and construction advanced significantly. Following frequent erosion of Lake Shore Road, then macadamized,
a concrete road known as the &quot;Toronto–Hamilton Highway&quot; was proposed in January 1914. Construction began on November 8 of that year, following the onset of .
The highway was designed to run along the lake shore, instead of Dundas Street to the north, because the numerous hills encountered along Dundas would have increased costs without improving accessibility. Middle Road, a dirt lane named because of its position between the two, was not considered since Lake Shore and Dundas were both overcrowded and in need of serious repairs.
The road was formally opened on November 24, 1917, wide and nearly long. It was the first concrete road in Ontario, as well as one of the longest stretches of concrete road between two cities in the world.

Over the next decade, vehicle usage increased substantially, and by 1920, Lakeshore Road was again congested, particularly during weekends.
In response, the Department of Highways examined improving another road between Toronto and Hamilton. The road was to be more than twice the width of Lakeshore Road at and would carry two lanes of traffic in either direction.
Construction on what was then known as the &quot;Queen Street Extension&quot; west of Toronto began in early 1931.

Before the highway could be completed, Thomas McQuesten was appointed the new minister of the Department of Highways, with Robert Melville Smith as deputy minister, following the 1934 provincial elections.
Smith, inspired by the German autobahns—new &quot;dual-lane divided highways&quot;—modified the design for Ontario roads,
and McQuesten ordered the Middle Road be converted into this new form of highway.
A right-of-way was purchased along the Middle Road and construction began to convert the existing sections to a divided highway. Work also began on Canada&#x27;s first interchange at Highway 10.
Beginning in 1935, McQuesten applied the concept of a dual-highway to several projects along Highway 2, including along Kingston Road in Scarborough Township.
When widening in Scarborough reached the Highland Creek ravine in 1936, the Department of Highways began construction on a new bridge over the large valley, bypassing the former alignment around West Hill.
From here the highway was constructed on a new alignment to Oshawa, avoiding construction on the congested Highway 2. As grading and bridge construction neared completion on the new highway between West Hill and Oshawa in September 1939, World War II broke out and gradually tax revenues were re-allocated from highway construction to the war effort.

At the same time, between September 6 and 8, 1939, the Ontario Good Roads Association Conference was held at Bigwin Inn, near Huntsville,
drawing highway engineers from across North America to discuss the new concept of &quot;Dual Highways&quot;. On the first day of the convention, McQuesten announced his vision of the freeway: an uninterrupted drive through the scenic regions of Ontario, discouraging local business and local traffic from accessing the highway except at infrequent controlled-access points.
It was announced in the days thereafter this concept would be applied to a new &quot;trans-provincial expressway&quot;, running from Windsor to the Ontario–Quebec border.

Highway engineers evaluated factors such as grading, curve radius, and the narrow median used along the Middle Road—which was inaugurated on August 23, 1940, as the Queen Elizabeth Way (QEW)—and began to plan the course of a new dual highway mostly parallel to Highway 2, with precedence given to areas most hampered by congestion. Unlike the QEW, this highway would not be built along an existing road, but rather on a new right-of-way, avoiding the need to provide access to properties.
Along with immense improvements to machinery and construction techniques over its six-year course, the war provided planners an opportunity to conduct a survey of 375,000 drivers, asking them about their preferred route to travel to their destination. Using this information, a course was plotted from Windsor to Quebec, bypassing all towns along the way.

Highway 2S (S for &quot;Scenic&quot;) was the first completed section of new roadway. Built to connect with the Thousand Islands Bridge at Ivy Lea and opened as a gravel road in late 1941 or early 1942,
the road followed the shore of the Saint Lawrence River and connected with the western end of the twinned Highway 2 near Brockville.
In addition, the highway between Highland Creek and Oshawa was opened as a gravel-surfaced road in May 1942.

Following the war, construction resumed on roadways throughout Ontario. The expressway between Highland Creek and Oshawa was completed in December 1947 and designated as Highway 2A, while other sections languished. The Toronto–Barrie Highway was the primary focus of the Department of Highways at the time, and the onset of the Korean War in 1950 stalled construction again. Despite the delays, highway minister George Doucett officially announced the plans for construction of the new trans-provincial expressway that year, with the Toronto to Oshawa expressway serving as a model for the design. Work on the most important link, the &quot;Toronto Bypass&quot;, began in 1951, but it would not open with that name.
=== Assumption ===
In July 1952 (possibly July 1, the same day Highway 400 was numbered),
the Highland Creek to Oshawa expressway (Highway 2A) and Highway 2S were designated &quot;Controlled-Access Highway No 401&quot;, a move scorned by one critic because of the lack of thought given to the numbered name.
Construction was completed for several sections of the Toronto Bypass: between Highway 400 and Dufferin Street in August, west to Weston Road in September, east to Bathurst Street in October and finally to Yonge Street in December. A stub of Highway 2A which was not incorporated into Highway 401 remained a provincial route as a connector to Kingston Road.

Extensions east and west began in 1953; the eastern extension to Bayview Avenue opened in April 1955, but the western extension was delayed by the damage caused by Hurricane Hazel on October 15, 1954, which nearly destroyed the new bridge over the Humber River. The reconstruction would take until July 8, 1955,
and the highway was opened between Weston and Highway 27 in September 1955.
The entire bypass, including the widening of Highway 27 into an expressway south of Highway 401,
was completed in August 1956.
Upon its opening, the bypass was described by one reporter as &quot;a motorist&#x27;s dream&quot; providing &quot;some of the most soothing scenery in the Metropolitan area&quot;. The reporter continued, with regard to the eastern section through Scarborough, that it &quot;winds smoothly through pastures across streams and rivers, and beside green thickets. It seems a long way from the big city.&quot;
By 1959 however, the bypass was a lineup of cars, as 85,000 drivers crowded the roadway, designed to handle a maximum of 48,000 vehicles, on a daily basis.
Motorists found the new road to be a convenient way of travelling across Toronto; this convenience helped influence the suburban shift in the city and continues to be a driving force of urban sprawl today.

Meanwhile, beyond Toronto, the highway was being built in a patchwork fashion, focusing on congested areas first. Construction west from Highway 27 began in late 1954,
as did the &quot;Kingston Bypass&quot; in Eastern Ontario.
Work began to connect the latter with the &quot;Scenic Highway&quot; in 1955.
After the 1954 New York State Thruway opened from Buffalo to New York City, Michigan officials encouraged Ontario to bypass Highway 3 as the most direct path from Detroit to Buffalo.
By 1956, construction had begun on a segment between Highway 4 in London and Highway 2 in Woodstock, as well as on the section between Windsor and Tilbury.
In 1958, a section bypassing Morrisburg was opened to accommodate traffic displaced from a portion of Highway 2 through The Lost Villages of the Saint Lawrence Seaway.

By the end of 1960, the Toronto section of the highway was extended both eastwards and westwards: first east from Newcastle to Port Hope on June 30; then later west from Highway 25 in Milton to Highway 8 south of Kitchener on November 17.
By mid-1961, the section between Brighton and Marysville had opened. The gap to the east, from Highway 28 in Port Hope to Highway 30 in Brighton was opened on July 20 of that year.

The gap between Woodstock and Kitchener was completed on November 9, 1961, while the gap between Tilbury and London was completed two lanes at a time; the westbound lanes on October 22, 1963, the eastbound on July 20, 1965. The gap between Marysville and Kingston was opened by 1962.
The final sections, from west of Cornwall to Lancaster, were opened between 1962 and 1964;
two lanes opened to Lancaster on September 11, 1962, but the other two were not completed until July 31, 1964. The last segment, to the Ontario–Quebec border, was opened on November 10, 1964.

As originally envisioned by McQuesten, Highway 401 had been routed along the Thousand Islands Parkway since 1952.
However, by then numerous properties and a tourist industry were established, which had not been present when the parkway originally opened in 1938. James Auld, MPP for Leeds and the Minister of Tourism and Information, joined local residents to persuade the DHO to construct an inland bypass. The DHO agreed, stating that it would cost less to build a new freeway than to upgrade the parkway. Construction of the &quot;Thousand Islands Bypass&quot; began in 1965, with work proceeding east from Gananoque. The Thousand Islands Parkway was the final two-lane segment of Highway 401. 
A portion was opened on September 1, 1967, from Gananoque to Highway 137, which was itself built south to the parkway at the same time. The Highway 401 designation was applied along this new route, while the bypassed portion of the parkway was redesignated as Highway 2S.
Despite the expected influx of traffic from the United States for Expo 67 in Montreal, the DHO opted to build the portion east of Ivy Lea after the centennial celebrations.
The remainder of the bypass was opened to traffic on October 11, 1968
Finally, on October 11, 1968, the &quot;Thousand Islands Bypass&quot; opened. This final piece was commemorated with a plaque to signify the completion of Highway 401.
=== Expansion ===

In Toronto, engineers and surveyors were examining the four-lane bypass, while planners set about designing a way to handle the commuter highway. In 1963, transportation minister Charles MacNaughton announced the widening of Highway 401 in Toronto from four to a minimum of 12 lanes between Islington Avenue and Markham Road. The design was taken from the Dan Ryan Expressway in Chicago, which was widened into a similar configuration around the same time. Construction began immediately. While the plan initially called for construction to end in 1967, it continued for nearly a decade. At least four lanes were always open during the large reconstruction project, which included complex new interchanges at Highway 27, Highway 400, the planned Spadina Expressway and the Don Valley Parkway. The system was completed in 1972, along with the Highway 27 (renamed Highway 427) bypass between the QEW and Pearson Airport. Most of the interchanges in Toronto were reconstructed as partial cloverleafs and a continuous lighting system was installed.

On January 11, 1965, at the dinner celebration of Sir John A. Macdonald&#x27;s 150th birthday, the Premier of Ontario John Robarts designated Highway 401 the &quot;Macdonald–Cartier Freeway&quot; to honour Macdonald and George-Étienne Cartier, two of Canada&#x27;s Fathers of Confederation.
Unlike other names later applied to the highway, the Macdonald–Cartier Freeway designation covers the entire length of Highway 401. Signs designating the freeway and shields with the letters &#x27;M-C&#x27; were installed, but these had been removed by 1997.
In 2003, 38 years after Robarts&#x27; naming of the highway, a Member of Provincial Parliament attempted to get the Macdonald-Cartier Freeway highway name enshrined into law; the bill only passed first reading and was not enacted.

In the 1970s, Highway 401 was widened to six lanes in Durham. Between 1977 and 1982, Highway 401 was widened from four to six lanes between Hurontario Street (Highway 10) to Highway 25, with the Jersey median barrier making its debut in Ontario in that segment.

Plans had been completely modified to connect the under-construction Mississauga leg of Highway 403 from QEW to Highway 401 at the new Highway 410 interchange.
For Highway 403, the Highway 410 interchange was a better connection point than the original suggested terminus at the Highway 401-427 interchange, but would also require the widening of Highway 401 from six lanes to twelve. Plans were submitted and approved in December 1977 by Mississauga city council, and construction began. The first section of Highway 403 between Cawthra Road and Highway 401 was opened August 18, 1980; the original connecting ramps were built on the outer perimeter of the interchange to serve what would later be designated as the collector lanes of both routes, leaving sufficient right-of-way between for future ramps linking the express lanes of both routes.

The 1980s saw more sections of Highway 401 widened. Most significant was the new collector-express system between Highway 403 / 410 and Highway 427, including a new set of flyover ramps from the express lanes to Highway 403 which opened in 1984, while a basketweave transfer between the eastbound collector and express lanes near Pearson Airport was completed in mid-1985. At this time, the Highway 401 express lanes merged into the collector lanes east of Tomken Road which resulted in a temporary left-handed exit/entry for the ramps to/from the Highway 403 express lanes.

After the Kennedy Road overpass was replaced, cast-in-place post-tensioned concrete flyover ramps were constructed from 1988 to late 1990 to link up Highway 401 and Highway 410, notably the 11-span flyover ramp from Highway 401 eastbound to Highway 410 northbound which remains the longest in the Greater Toronto Area, while the Highway 410 southbound to Highway 401 eastbound flyover replaced a loop ramp. In the fall of 1991, alongside the widening of Highway 410 into a full freeway, construction began on the connecting ramps between Highway 403 and Highway 410, which pass under the existing bridge structures carrying Highway 401 (which would soon be designated as the collector lanes), while new overpasses were constructed for the Highway 401 express lanes which were extended from east of Tomken Road to just east of Kennedy Road.
Plans were made to extend the eastern system from Neilson Road to Brock Road in Pickering in the late 1980s,
but took over a decade to reach fruition by 1997.
This was followed shortly thereafter by the widening of the highway through Ajax and a new interchange at Pickering Beach Road (renamed Salem Road) and Stevenson Road.

The 1990s also saw the first step in widening the highway from Toronto to London, by replacing the grass median with the addition of a third traffic lane per direction separated by a tall-wall concrete median barrier. The segment from London to Woodstock received this upgrade first, with the expansion shortly east of the split for Highway 403&#x27;s newly constructed western segment.
A project in the mid-1990s brought the highway up to a minimum of six lanes between Highway 8 in Kitchener and Highway 35 / 115 in Newcastle.
Other projects prepared sections for eventual widening.
In its 2007 plan for southern Ontario, the MTO announced long-term plans to create high-occupancy vehicle (HOV) lanes from Mississauga Road west to Milton;
by 2011 these plans had been expanded in scope to as far west as Hespeler Road in Cambridge. 
From the mid-1990s onward, several prerequisite projects were undertaken for the future widening of Highway 401 throughout Milton and Mississauga, although that section of the freeway would retain its six-lane cross section for at least the next decade. This included the new interchange with the upcoming Highway 407 ETR (with a temporary diversion for the eastbound lanes to facilitate construction of the post-tensioned flyovers), a new underpass structure to accommodate Derry Road which was widened from two to six lanes (1996–97), the addition of an interchange with the Mavis Road extension in 1999 whose overpass was designed to be lengthened with two outer spans, and replacing the Mississauga Road overpass which began on February 15, 2002 (in a cost-sharing agreement between the province and Peel Region) and completed in 2003. More recent work included the replacement of the McLaughlin Road overpass in 2008.

Starting on August 19, 2009, Highway 401&#x27;s collector-express lanes in Mississauga have been extended westward beyond its initial terminus at Highway 410. The widening of this 7 km segment to the Credit River necessitated the replacement of several existing overpasses, including those of Hurontario Street (2013) and Second Line West (2016), with the Second Line West crossing rebuilt as a pedestrian/cyclist bridge since most vehicular traffic was already rerouted to the Mavis Road extension. Tying into this extension of Highway 401&#x27;s collector-express system, the missing ramps from Highway 401 eastbound to Highway 403 westbound and the opposite movement were completed in 2018 which also provided direct access to Cawthra Road, making the Highway 401-403-410 junction a full four-way interchange.
The first phase of this expansion to west of Hurontario Street, a distance of , opened in 2013,
while the second phase to the Credit River was completed in 2020.

In 2019, an announcement was made for expanding the freeway from the Credit River to Regional Road 25 in Milton to a minimum of 10 lanes, including HOV lanes. This project included extending the existing 12-lane collector–express system from the Credit River to just east of Winston Churchill Boulevard, while another 12-lane collector–express system was built from just west of the Highway 407 interchange to just east of James Snow Parkway, due to the overpasses for the 407 and the adjacent Winston Churchill Boulevard not being constructed wide enough to accommodate a continuous collector–express system underneath.

Sections of the new expansion were opened overnight throughout the second half of 2022. On August 13 and 14, 2022, the westbound express lanes opened between Highway 407 and James Snow Parkway. The remainder of the westbound lanes, between the Credit River and Winston Churchill Boulevard, were opened several months later on November 13 and 14. The eastbound express lanes between James Snow Parkway and Winston Churchill Boulevard were opened a week later on November 18 and 19, and from Winston Churchill Boulevard to the Credit River on November 29 and 30. The HOV lanes in both directions were opened on December 9, 2022. The remaining works of this project, including final layers of paving, culvert works, and carpool lots were completed on October 19, 2023, thus completing a 14-year project that expands the highway from Highway 410 to Regional Road 25 that started back on August 19, 2009.

===COMPASS cameras===
In early 1991, Highway 401 was equipped with a traffic camera system called COMPASS.
Using closed-circuit television cameras, vehicle detection loops and LED changeable-message signs, COMPASS enables the MTO Traffic Operations Centre to obtain a real-time assessment of traffic conditions and alert drivers of collisions, congestion and construction.
The system stretches from the Highway 403 / 410 interchange in Mississauga to Harwood Avenue in Ajax.

=== Advantage I-75 ===
Between June 1990 and 1998, Highway 401 and Interstate 75 were used for a pilot project named &quot;Advantage I-75&quot; to test the reliability and versatility of an automated tracking system for transport trucks. Termed &quot;MACS&quot; (Mainline Automated Clearance System), it allows a truck to travel from Florida to Ontario without a second inspection.
MACS was initially tested at two truck inspection stations in Kentucky, with transponders installed in 220 trucks. Exact time, date, location, weight and axle data were logged as a truck approached an equipped station.
Following initial tests, MACS was deployed at every inspection station along I-75 from Miami to Detroit, and along Highway 401 from Windsor to Belleville in 1994. The project demonstrated the effectiveness of electronic systems in enforcing freight restrictions without delaying vehicles, while alleviating security fears such systems could be compromised. The concept has since been applied to many parts of Canada, including Highway 407&#x27;s electronic tolling system.

=== &quot;Carnage Alley&quot; ===

The section of Highway 401 between Windsor and London has often been referred to as &quot;Carnage Alley&quot;, in reference to the numerous crashes that have occurred throughout its history. The term became more commonplace following several deadly pileups during the 1990s. The narrow and open grass median was an ineffective obstacle in preventing cross-median collisions. The soft shoulders consisted of gravel, with sharp slopes which were blamed for facilitating vehicle rollovers.
The nature of that section of highway, described as a mainly straight road with a featureless agricultural landscape, was said to make drivers feel less involved and lose focus on the road. In winter, the area between Woodstock and Chatham is also subject to sudden snow squalls from lake-effect snow.
Several collisions have resulted from motorists deviating from their lane and losing control of their vehicles.

Various other names, including &quot;The Killer Highway&quot; circulated for a time,
but &quot;Carnage Alley&quot; became predominant following an 87-vehicle pile-up on September 3, 1999 (the start of Labour Day weekend), the worst in Canadian history, that resulted in eight deaths and 45 injured individuals.
Only a few days prior, then-Transportation Minister David Turnbull had deemed the highway &quot;pleasant&quot; to drive.
On the morning of September 3, the local weather station reported clear conditions due to a malfunction, while a thick layer of fog rolled onto the highway. Dozens of vehicles, including several semi-trailers, quickly crashed into each other shortly after 8 a.m., one following another in the dense fog, with collisions in both directions at that segment of Highway 401, although no vehicles crossed the highway&#x27;s median.
Immediately following the crash, the MTO installed paved shoulders with rumble strips
and funded additional police to patrol the highway, a move criticized as being insufficient.

Beginning in 2004, of the highway was widened from four asphalt lanes to six concrete lanes, paved shoulders were added, and a concrete Ontario Tall Wall median was installed,
which was the solution the Canadian Automobile Association promoted in 1999. Interchanges were improved and signage was upgraded as part of a five-phase project to improve Highway 401 from Highway 3 in Windsor to Essex County Road 42 (formerly Highway 2) on the western edge of Tilbury.

From 2008 to 2010, with joint funding from the provincial and federal governments, the section of Highway 401 from Dougall Parkway (former Highway 3B) to Provincial Road (former Highway 98) was widened to six lanes, necessitating the replacement of several underpasses including those of Walker Road and Provincial Road. As part of that project, the Dougall Parkway split with Highway 401 was reconfigured, replacing a one-lane 1950s-era underpass tunnel with a modern high-speed flyover ramp. The old interchange had reduced eastbound Highway 401 traffic to one lane as it merged with Dougall Parkway, whereas the new interchange allows three lanes per direction of Highway 401 to pass through. West of the reconstructed Dougall Parkway onramp, Highway 401&#x27;s grass median was replaced with a concrete barrier but continued to be striped for two lanes per direction until the North Talbot Road overpass was replaced and Phase One of the Highway 401 extension (&quot;Rt. Hon. Herb Gray Parkway&quot;, formerly &quot;Windsor-Essex Parkway&quot;) (see below) opened in 2015, allowing for a continuous six lane freeway cross-section.

=== Highway of Heroes ===
On August 24, 2007, the MTO announced the stretch of Highway 401 between Miller Road in Trenton and the intersection of the Don Valley Parkway and Highway 404 in Toronto would bear the additional name &quot;Highway of Heroes (French: Autoroute des héros)&quot;, in honour of Canadian soldiers who have died,
though Highway 401 in its entirety remains designated as the &quot;Macdonald–Cartier Freeway&quot;.
This length of the highway is often travelled by a convoy of vehicles carrying a fallen soldier&#x27;s body, with his or her family, from the military airport at CFB Trenton to the coroner&#x27;s office at the Centre of Forensic Sciences in Toronto. Since 2002, when the first fallen Canadian soldiers were repatriated from Afghanistan, crowds have lined the overpasses to as convoys pass.
The origin of the name can be traced to an article in the &quot;Toronto Sun&quot; on June 23, 2007, by columnist Joe Warmington, in which he interviewed Northumberland photographer Pete Fisher. Cobourg resident Ron Flindall was responsible for organizing the first bridge salutes following the loss of four soldiers on April 18, 2002.

Warmington described the gathering of crowds on overpasses to welcome fallen soldiers as a &quot;highway of heroes phenomena&quot;.
This led a Cramahe Township volunteer firefighter to contact Fisher on July 10 about starting a petition, leading Fisher to publish an article which was posted to the &quot;Northumberland Today&quot; website.
The online article eventually caught the attention of London resident Jay Forbes. Forbes began a petition, which received over 20,000 signatures before being brought to the Minister of Transportation on August 22.
Following the announcement on August 24, the provincial government and MTO set out to design new signs. The signs were erected and unveiled on September 7, and include a smaller reassurance marker (shield), as well as a larger billboard version.

On September 27, 2013, the Highway of Heroes designation was extended west to Keele Street in Toronto, to coincide with the move of the coroner&#x27;s office to the new Forensic Services and Coroner&#x27;s Complex located at Highway 401 and Keele Street.

=== Highway improvements and safety concerns ===
==== London and Kitchener ====
Between 2006 and 2008, Highway 401 was widened from four to six lanes between Highway 402 and Wellington Road in London. This included reconfiguring the Wellington Road interchange from a cloverleaf to a Parclo A4 while replacing the original 1956 overpass with a longer and wider structure.

In November 2010, the widening of Highway 401 from four to six lanes between Woodstock and Kitchener was completed after many years of planning and construction.
The project included the installation of a tall-wall median barrier, straightening curves and adding additional interchanges on the freeway, allowing it to be easily vacated in an emergency event.

==== Greater Toronto Area ====

Beginning in 1998, several projects were initiated on Highway 401 within Toronto. The freeway&#x27;s pavement through the city was resurfaced. The most significant construction work was widening the route from six to eight lanes though the Highway 427 interchange in 2005, which necessitated the replacement of the Highway 27 underpass, although the rest of the junction&#x27;s flyovers could accommodate the expansion. Some projects have been completed during overnight construction projects, including the widening and rehabilitation of the Hogg&#x27;s Hollow bridge,
the replacement of the original gantries throughout the collector-express system, and rehabilitating the flyover ramps of the Highway 401 / 400 interchange.
On August 10, 2008, following a series of explosions at a propane facility in Toronto, Highway 401 was closed between Highway 400 and Highway 404 as a precautionary measure, the largest closure of the highway in its history.
The highway remained closed until 8 p.m., though several exits near the blast remained closed thereafter.

In Oshawa, exit 416 (Park Road) was replaced by a new interchange at exit 415 (Stevenson Road). The contract, which began September 7, 2005, included the interchange and the resurfacing of of the highway between Oshawa and .
The westbound ramps were opened in mid-September 2007
and the eastbound ramps in mid-2009. The resurfacing was completed mid-2010.

In 2013, as a prerequisite to construction of the West Durham Link which was eventually numbered as Highway 412, the section of Highway 401 near the Lake Ridge Road overpass was shifted northward on a new alignment away from the parallel railway lines to allow sufficient right-of-way for the interchange to the new route. The existing Lake Ridge Road overpass was also replaced by a new longer structure that would span both the existing and new alignments of Highway 401 as well as the railways. Once the new alignment of Highway 401 was opened for both directions, the old Highway 401 right-of-way was used for the semi-directional onramp from Highway 401 eastbound to Highway 412 as well as an offramp to Lake Ridge Road. The interchange to Highway 412 opened on June 20, 2016.

=== Rt. Hon. Herb Gray Parkway ===

Highway 401 as originally completed did not have direct access to the Canada–United States border, as upon entering the Windsor city limits the route terminated at a split interchange with Highway 3 where the freeway defaulted into Talbot Road. Traffic continuing to the border had to follow the non-express Highway 3 routing along Talbot Road and Huron Church Road which had a dozen traffic lights. The approach to the Ambassador Bridge was heavily built up making it impractical to twin the existing crossing and reconstruct the approach as a freeway to meet growing demand for cross-border traffic, even though Ambassador Bridge owner Matty Moroun had long lobbied for this.

In 2004, a joint announcement by the federal government of the United States and Government of Canada confirmed a new border crossing would be constructed between Detroit and Windsor. The Detroit River International Crossing (DRIC) was formed as a bi-national committee to manage the project.
The MTO took advantage of this opportunity to extend Highway 401 to the Canada–US border and began an environmental impact assessment on the entire project in late 2005.
The City of Windsor also hired New York traffic consultant Sam Schwartz to design a parkway to the border. Schwartz&#x27;s proposal would eventually inspire the DRIC&#x27;s own design, but his route was not chosen, with the DRIC opting instead to take a northern route.
On February 8, 2008, the MTO announced it had begun purchasing property south of the E. C. Row Expressway, upsetting many area residents who had purchased properties in the years prior.

On March 3, 2008, the Michigan Department of Transportation and the MTO (in partnership with Transport Canada, the Federal Highway Administration of the United States and the Detroit River International Crossing group) completed a joint assessment on the soils along the Detroit River and determined they could indeed support the weight of a new bridge; the stability of the underlying soil and clay and the impact of the nearby Windsor Salt Mine had caused concern for all parties involved in the project.

Despite protest from area residents,
as well as a dismissed lawsuit from Ambassador Bridge owner Matty Moroun, it was announced on May 1, 2008, that a preferred route had been selected for the Highway 401 extension which would be named the &quot;Windsor–Essex Parkway&quot;. On November 28, 2012, the Ministry of Transportation announced a Federal Order in Council was passed to change the name of the parkway to the &quot;Rt. Hon. Herb Gray Parkway&quot;, in honour of the Right Honourable Herb Gray, a Member of Parliament from Windsor.

The Highway 401 extension (&quot;Rt. Hon. Herb Gray Parkway&quot;, formerly &quot;Windsor-Essex Parkway&quot;, MTO internal designation of Highway 7901) would first run parallel to the realigned Highway 3 (Talbot Road and Huron Church Road) from a new interchange at the former end of Highway 401 to the E. C. Row Expressway. The Highway 401 extension would then turn westward and continue between the opposing carriageways of the E. C. Row Expressway for (requiring that the E. C. Row&#x27;s eastbound carriageway between Matchette Road and Huron Church Road be shifted so the median can accommodate the Highway 401 extension), with slip ramps linking the E. C. Row to the bridge-bound Highway 401. At the Ojibway Parkway, the Highway 401 extension would turn northwest and follows a new alignment to the border. The Highway 401 extension would have six through-lanes, and the section parallel to Highway 3 is below-grade with 11 covered tunnels ranging from in length. The Highway 401 extension features of green space and over of recreational trails, with seven bridges and two tunnels separating the trails from roads. Interpretive signage includes information about First Nations in Canada, Tallgrass prairie and the Carolinian landscape.

Initial construction of a noise barrier from North Talbot Road to Howard Avenue began in March 2010; full construction began on August 19, 2011. The original North Talbot Road overpass was demolished on August 20, 2011, to make way for the widening of the existing freeway from four through-lanes, however the replacement bridge was closed in December 2013 due to faulty concrete girders and rebuilt by May 2014. Progress on the freeway extension was delayed as the construction consortium disposed of over 500 concrete girders (including the 320 girders already installed), after a Ministry of Transport investigation found that these girders manufactured from a partnership of Freyssinet and Tierra Armada did not meet standard, and replaced by those from Prestressed Systems Inc. at no cost to the public.
In early 2015, it was announced the first phase of the Highway 401 extension would open to traffic between Highway 3 and Labelle Street (near the E. C. Row Expressway) in the spring;
an section was opened to traffic on June 28, 2015, extending Highway 401 as far west as the E. C. Row Expressway, the first new segment of Highway 401 to be opened since the Thousand Islands Parkway bypass in 1968. The first phase of the Highway 401 extension provides an express bypass to much of (but not all of) Highway 3 en route to the Ambassador Bridge. The E. C. Row still lacked direct access to the London-bound portion of Highway 401, however, the indirect connection using Huron Church Road was reduced to a short distance (with one traffic light) between the Parclo A4 interchange with the E. C. Row and the slip ramps to Highway 401. 
The second phase to Ojibway Parkway was opened on November 21, 2015
completing the Highway 401 extension as far as the planned bridge approach and border plaza.

Construction on projects related to the Gordie Howe International Bridge began in 2015 with an initial completion date in 2019–20.
The &quot;Bridging North America&quot; consortium was selected to build the bridge in July 2018, with construction beginning immediately.
The Gordie Howe International Bridge was originally expected to be completed by the end of 2024, but has since been delayed .
=== Major projects 2006–2024 ===
==== Southwestern Ontario ====

In Southwestern Ontario, several improvements are under way to provide six lanes on Highway 401 from Windsor to Toronto,
in response to the higher-than-average accidents occurring on the &quot;Carnage Alley&quot; stretch including the 1999 Labour Day weekend pileup.
West of Essex County Road 42 on the west of Tilbury, the highway has been widened to six lanes with a concrete divider in anticipation of the Rt. Hon. Herb Gray Parkway. As of 2022 the MTO has initiated studies on widening 118 km of the freeway from four to six lanes between Tilbury and London through four contracts.
Around London the traffic volumes are expected to increase considerably, so the province established an extensive plan to widen and reconstruct the London corridor between 2006 and 2021. This included building a new interchange with Wonderland Road which opened in November 2015 to help improve access to Highway 401 westbound from the city&#x27;s southwest end and involved replacing the Westminster Drive overpass to allow the highway to be widened. A reconstruction of the outdated cloverleaf interchange at Colonel Talbot Road and widening Highway 401 from four to six lanes between Highway 4 and Highway 402 is also proposed. The MTO is also planning on widening Highway 401 from six to eight lanes through part of the London corridor. Alongside the extension of the Veterans Memorial Parkway (formerly Airport Road) south of the freeway to Wilton Grove Road in 2017, the Parkway&#x27;s trumpet interchange was reconfigured from a trumpet to a Parclo with the replacement overpass able to accommodate future freeway expansion.

In the Kitchener/Cambridge area, the widening of Highway 401 from six to twelve lanes from Highway 8 (King Street) to Highway/Regional Road 24 (Hespeler Road) commenced on June 8, 2015, and concluded in summer 2019. The second phase of expansion scheduled for 2019-21 saw Highway 401 widened from six to ten lanes between Highway/Regional Road 24 and Townline Road. At the interchange with Highway 24 (Hespeler Road), the span carrying northbound traffic which opened in 1989 was torn down on May 1, 2021, with both directions of Highway 24 traffic temporarily relocated to the overpass originally built in 1960 and designated for southbound drivers since 1989, as a new overpass was constructed to accommodate Highway 401&#x27;s expanded cross-section. The new HOV lanes from Highway 8 to Townline Road opened on December 22, 2023. Just west of the Highway 8 interchange, the freeway&#x27;s existing six-span Grand River Bridges (opened in 1960, restriped in the early 1990s from two to three lanes per direction) are being replaced with two new four-span structures, a project scheduled for completion in 2025. The new Grand River bridges are a prerequisite to the planned expansion of the Y-junction between Highway 401 and Highway 8 Expressway from a partial to an all-directional interchange, with proposed flyover ramps linking eastbound Highway 401 to Waterloo-bound Highway 8 and the opposite movement to bypass the existing non-express connection using King Street.

==== Greater Toronto Area ====

Expansion in Durham includes widening the highway to 12 lanes, and extending the collector-express system from its end at Brock Road in Pickering to Lake Ridge Road in Whitby.
A Transportation Environmental Study Report was completed on widening highway 401, extending the collector-express system easterly through to the Highway 412 interchange in Whitby, then ten lanes easterly to Liberty Street in the Municipality of Clarington. The assessment was completed in March 2015. From Liberty Street in Clarington to Highway 35/115, Highway 401 was widened from six to eight lanes.

To support this widening, all of the original overpasses dating back in the 1940s and 1950s built through Whitby and Oshawa were replaced with new overpasses as part of contemporary highway safety standards and to allow for a future highway widening.

==== Eastern Ontario ====
East of Durham, the MTO widened parts of Highway 401 to six lanes. Two bridges have been widened in advance of an eventual widening to six lanes of the highway including the bridges over the Trent River in Trenton, as well as the Salmon River bridge between Belleville and Napanee.
By 2020, the highway was widened to six lanes for through Kingston between exits 611 and 623, 16 years after it started back in 2004. Construction began in 2014 to expand the highway to six lanes approximately east of exit 474 in Cobourg.

=== Proposed tunnel ===
On September 25, 2024, Premier Doug Ford announced that the Ontario government has launched the technical evaluation for the proposed construction of a new driver and transit tunnel expressway under Highway 401.

== Services ==

Highway 401 features 19 ONroute service centres operated under contract from the Ministry of Transportation. They provide a place to park, rest, eat and refuel 24 hours a day.

Service centres along Highway 401 were first announced in 1961 following public outcry over the lack of rest stops. The centres were originally leased to and operated by several major gasoline distributors; however, those companies chose not to renew their leases as the terms ended. The centres were also of an outdated design that could not keep up with growing traffic, despite limited renovations in the early 1990s such as at the Woodstock and Cambridge North/South sites. In response, the MTO put the operation of the full network of service centres out for tender, resulting in a 50-year lease agreement in 2010 with Host Kilmer Service Centres, a joint venture between hospitality company HMSHost (a subsidiary of Autogrill) and investment company Kilmer van Nostrand.

Seventeen of the centres along Highway 401 have been entirely redeveloped. Prior to the deal with Host Kilmer Service Centres, the centres at Newcastle and Ingersoll were rebuilt in the late 1990s and did not require further reconstruction since their design is modern enough. In Mississauga (just east of Winston Churchill Boulevard), a centre with a unique layout opened in 1991 but closed in 2006, being demolished in 2010 to accommodate the freeway&#x27;s widening to a collector-express system as well as making way for an OPP station. Work on rebuilding 15 of the 17 service centres began in late 2009 or early 2010. The new service centres, opened in phases beginning in July 2010, feature a Canadian Tire gas station, an HMSHost-operated convenience store known as &quot;The Market&quot;, as well as fast food brands such as Tim Hortons, A&amp;W, Pizza Pizza, Extreme Pita, KFC, Taco Bell, Big Smoke Burger and Burger King.

== Exit list ==






































































== See also ==

* &quot;Heavy Rescue: 401&quot;—a documentary/reality series on Discovery Channel in Canada and The Weather Channel in the United States highlighting the operations of heavy rescue and recovery towing businesses along the highway and nearby roads.
* Southern Ontario Transportation

== Explanatory notes ==
== Citations ==
== General bibliography ==
=== Books ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
=== Maps ===
* 
* 
== External links ==

=== Photos and additional information ===
* Highway 401 at thekingshighway.ca
* Highway 401 at OntHighways
* Highway 401 at vintagekingshighways.com (archived December 30, 2009)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q449996" start="0" end="23" title="Ontario Highway 401" label="King&amp;#x27;s Highway 401"/>
<link wikidata="Q449996" start="49" end="60" title="Ontario Highway 401" label="Highway 401"/>
<link wikidata="Q449996" start="104" end="129" title="Ontario Highway 401" label="Macdonald–Cartier Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q449996" start="161" end="176" title="Ontario Highway 401" label="the four-oh-one"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="183" end="200" title="Controlled-access highway" label="controlled-access"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873019" start="201" end="219" title="400-series highways" label="400-series highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="227" end="244" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="Canadian province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="248" end="255" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q182625" start="275" end="282" title="Windsor, Ontario" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="310" end="316" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="381" end="388" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q788622" start="467" end="486" title="Quebec Autoroute 20" label="Quebec Autoroute 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419251" start="537" end="565" title="Quebec City–Windsor Corridor" label="Quebec City–Windsor Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18167807" start="669" end="692" title="National Highway System (Canada)" label="National Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315416" start="735" end="772" title="Ministry of Transportation of Ontario" label="Ministry of Transportation of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046157" start="800" end="825" title="Ontario Provincial Police" label="Ontario Provincial Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241055" start="831" end="842" title="Speed limits in Canada" label="speed limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802072" start="1043" end="1050" title="Tilbury, Ontario" label="Tilbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754179" start="1148" end="1164" title="Ontario Highway 115" label="Highway 35 / 115"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007418" start="1169" end="1176" title="Cobourg" label="Cobourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002087" start="1198" end="1206" title="Cramahe, Ontario" label="Colborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q34227" start="1211" end="1221" title="Belleville, Ontario" label="Belleville"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="1258" end="1266" title="Kingston, Ontario" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443611" start="1292" end="1302" title="Ontario Highway 16" label="Highway 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989475" start="1503" end="1514" title="Weston Road" label="Weston Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q993404" start="1519" end="1529" title="Ontario Highway 11" label="Highway 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094706" start="1546" end="1556" title="Ontario Highway 2A" label="Highway 2A"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985375" start="1565" end="1574" title="West Hill, Toronto" label="West Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q555690" start="1579" end="1588" title="Newcastle, Ontario" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208051" start="1621" end="1630" title="Gananoque" label="Gananoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q34047" start="1635" end="1645" title="Brockville" label="Brockville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797046" start="1664" end="1688" title="Thousand Islands Parkway" label="Thousand Islands Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q585016" start="1919" end="1943" title="Fathers of Confederation" label="Fathers of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643599" start="2038" end="2053" title="grade separation" label="grade-separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739754" start="2166" end="2173" title="Trenton, Ontario" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q449996" start="2210" end="2227" title="Ontario Highway 401" label="Highway of Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="2285" end="2310" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="Canadian Forces personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032133" start="2316" end="2327" title="CFB Trenton" label="CFB Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443889" start="2391" end="2400" title="Ontario Highway 3" label="Highway 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321784" start="2710" end="2730" title="E. C. Row Expressway" label="E. C. Row Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266001" start="2818" end="2850" title="Gordie Howe International Bridge" label="Gordie Howe International Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q92561" start="3251" end="3257" title="London, Ontario" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028279" start="3302" end="3311" title="Cambridge, Ontario" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q425057" start="3316" end="3322" title="Milton, Ontario" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q211867" start="3342" end="3348" title="Oshawa" label="Oshawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648502" start="3381" end="3405" title="local-express lanes" label="collector–express system"/>
<link wikidata="Q386626" start="3426" end="3435" title="Pickering, Ontario" label="Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q50816" start="3458" end="3469" title="Mississauga" label="Mississauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502890" start="3570" end="3582" title="Southwestern Ontario" label="Southwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945361" start="3584" end="3591" title="Central Ontario" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058779" start="3596" end="3611" title="Eastern Ontario" label="Eastern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932823" start="3888" end="3916" title="annual average daily traffic" label="annual average daily traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925855" start="3938" end="3952" title="Renforth Drive" label="Renforth Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872864" start="3957" end="3968" title="Ontario Highway 427" label="Highway 427"/>
<link wikidata="Q270378" start="4155" end="4175" title="Santa Monica Freeway" label="Santa Monica Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428609" start="4195" end="4199" title="Interstate 75 in Georgia" label="I-75"/>
<link wikidata="Q380772" start="4216" end="4228" title="Just-in-time manufacturing" label="just-in-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="4282" end="4301" title="automotive industry" label="automotive industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="4305" end="4313" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5877233" start="4561" end="4579" title="Hogg&amp;#x27;s Hollow Bridge" label="Hogg&amp;#x27;s Hollow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548416" start="4787" end="4805" title="Great Lakes region" label="Great Lakes region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="4831" end="4842" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="4875" end="4883" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175541" start="4911" end="4926" title="cottage country" label="cottage country"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="4979" end="4987" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q788622" start="4998" end="5010" title="Quebec Autoroute 20" label="Autoroute 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q318435" start="5114" end="5127" title="Detroit River" label="Detroit River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266001" start="5148" end="5180" title="Gordie Howe International Bridge" label="Gordie Howe International Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="5216" end="5243" title="Canada–United States border" label="Canada–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351623" start="5278" end="5303" title="Interstate 75 in Michigan" label="Interstate 75 in Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094712" start="5977" end="6012" title="Ontario Highway 3B" label="Dougall Parkway (former Highway 3B)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129573" start="6032" end="6054" title="Detroit–Windsor tunnel" label="Detroit–Windsor tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094786" start="6158" end="6168" title="Ontario Highway 98" label="Highway 98"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408930" start="6373" end="6385" title="Thames River (Ontario)" label="Thames River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240053" start="6699" end="6714" title="concession road" label="concession road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802072" start="6970" end="6977" title="Tilbury, Ontario" label="Tilbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q20988179" start="7025" end="7033" title="1999 Highway 401 crash" label="pile-ups"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872843" start="7120" end="7131" title="Ontario Highway 402" label="Highway 402"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875255" start="7241" end="7252" title="Limited-access road" label="expressways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757878" start="7254" end="7269" title="Highbury Avenue" label="Highbury Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923653" start="7278" end="7303" title="Veterans Memorial Parkway" label="Veterans Memorial Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642364" start="7337" end="7346" title="Woodstock, Ontario" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443771" start="7378" end="7387" title="Ontario Highway 2" label="Highway 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q14633867" start="7549" end="7559" title="snowsquall" label="snowsquall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872845" start="7681" end="7692" title="Ontario Highway 403" label="Highway 403"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464318" start="7849" end="7866" title="Toyota Motor Manufacturing Canada" label="Toyota West Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q200166" start="7904" end="7913" title="Kitchener, Ontario" label="Kitchener"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028279" start="7918" end="7927" title="Cambridge, Ontario" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443968" start="8196" end="8205" title="Freeport Diversion" label="Highway 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q425057" start="8532" end="8538" title="Milton, Ontario" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024624" start="8652" end="8672" title="Greater Toronto Area" label="Greater Toronto Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875399" start="8704" end="8721" title="Rattlesnake Point (Canada)" label="Rattlesnake Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q826965" start="8758" end="8776" title="Niagara Escarpment" label="Niagara Escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603687" start="8994" end="9003" title="Greenbelt (Golden Horseshoe)" label="Greenbelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872859" start="9105" end="9135" title="Ontario Highway 407" label="Highway 407 Express Toll Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="9186" end="9199" title="shopping mall" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145502" start="9211" end="9234" title="Toronto Premium Outlets" label="Toronto Premium Outlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055633" start="9236" end="9260" title="Yorkdale Shopping Centre" label="Yorkdale Shopping Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535124" start="9262" end="9285" title="Scarborough Town Centre" label="Scarborough Town Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190826" start="9290" end="9311" title="Pickering Town Centre" label="Pickering Town Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648502" start="9377" end="9401" title="Local-express lanes" label="collector-express system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034860" start="9429" end="9448" title="Dan Ryan Expressway" label="Dan Ryan Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645474" start="9590" end="9601" title="carriageway" label="carriageway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872859" start="10262" end="10273" title="Ontario Highway 407" label="Highway 407"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026055" start="10344" end="10371" title="Winston Churchill Boulevard" label="Winston Churchill Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872864" start="10417" end="10428" title="Ontario Highway 427" label="Highway 427"/>
<link wikidata="Q242066" start="10781" end="10818" title="Toronto Pearson International Airport" label="Toronto Pearson International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348068" start="11656" end="11671" title="Eglinton Avenue" label="Eglinton Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031376" start="11692" end="11711" title="Richview Expressway" label="Richview Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872855" start="11851" end="11862" title="Ontario Highway 409" label="Highway 409"/>
<link wikidata="Q386626" start="12080" end="12089" title="Pickering, Ontario" label="Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q244156" start="12402" end="12411" title="traffic congestion" label="congested"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872844" start="12497" end="12508" title="Ontario Highway 400" label="Highway 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120061" start="13006" end="13016" title="Allen Road" label="Allen Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q954870" start="13080" end="13094" title="West Don River" label="West Don River"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725" start="13207" end="13219" title="Yonge Street" label="Yonge Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268442" start="13301" end="13318" title="Oriole GO Station" label="Oriole GO Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q954870" start="13343" end="13357" title="East Don River" label="East Don River"/>
<link wikidata="Q449995" start="13419" end="13437" title="Don Valley Parkway" label="Don Valley Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872847" start="13442" end="13453" title="Ontario Highway 404" label="Highway 404"/>
<link wikidata="Q81957" start="13615" end="13619" title="berm" label="berm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430271" start="13779" end="13802" title="Scarborough City Centre" label="Scarborough City Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535124" start="13817" end="13830" title="Scarborough Town Centre" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13975" end="13985" title="Ontario Highway 2A#Toronto–Newcastle" label="Highway 2A"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413596" start="14105" end="14118" title="Kingston Road (Toronto)" label="Kingston Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494532" start="14139" end="14154" title="Sheppard Avenue" label="Sheppard Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169206" start="14174" end="14186" title="Rouge River (Ontario)" label="Rouge Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q386567" start="14529" end="14533" title="Ajax, Ontario" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985004" start="14646" end="14657" title="Ontario Highway 412" label="Highway 412"/>
<link wikidata="Q386338" start="14894" end="14900" title="Whitby, Ontario" label="Whitby"/>
<link wikidata="Q624798" start="15211" end="15236" title="Canadian National Railway" label="Canadian National Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922719" start="15612" end="15623" title="Bowmanville" label="Bowmanville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443830" start="15644" end="15654" title="Ontario Highway 35" label="Highway 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754179" start="15659" end="15670" title="Ontario Highway 115" label="Highway 115"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007418" start="15741" end="15748" title="Cobourg" label="Cobourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q613870" start="15905" end="15914" title="Port Hope, Ontario" label="Port Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007418" start="15919" end="15926" title="Cobourg" label="Cobourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739754" start="16141" end="16148" title="Trenton, Ontario" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q290738" start="16174" end="16185" title="Trent Canal" label="Trent Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379758" start="16246" end="16257" title="Moira River" label="Moira River"/>
<link wikidata="Q34227" start="16277" end="16287" title="Belleville, Ontario" label="Belleville"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="16315" end="16323" title="Kingston, Ontario" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="16521" end="16529" title="Kingston, Ontario" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="16609" end="16627" title="St. Lawrence River" label="St. Lawrence River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208051" start="16631" end="16640" title="Gananoque" label="Gananoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797046" start="16667" end="16691" title="Thousand Islands Parkway" label="Thousand Islands Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q76034" start="16844" end="16859" title="Canadian Shield" label="Canadian Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q34047" start="17030" end="17040" title="Brockville" label="Brockville"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="17186" end="17205" title="St. Lawrence Valley" label="St. Lawrence Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="17289" end="17295" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315416" start="17415" end="17418" title="Ministry of Transportation of Ontario" label="MTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q301766" start="17965" end="17972" title="macadam" label="macadam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314778" start="18211" end="18224" title="Dundas Street" label="Dundas Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522383" start="19140" end="19174" title="The Queensway" label="&amp;quot;Queen Street Extension&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792356" start="19252" end="19268" title="Thomas McQuesten" label="Thomas McQuesten"/>
<link wikidata="Q23761885" start="19336" end="19357" title="Robert Melville Smith" label="Robert Melville Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586379" start="19392" end="19417" title="1934 Ontario general election" label="1934 provincial elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q313301" start="19449" end="19457" title="autobahn" label="autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302778" start="19479" end="19494" title="divided highway" label="divided highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128254" start="19625" end="19637" title="right-of-way (transportation)" label="right-of-way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376564" start="19791" end="19802" title="interchange (road)" label="interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q11027760" start="20018" end="20032" title="Highland Creek (Toronto)" label="Highland Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985375" start="20172" end="20181" title="West Hill, Toronto" label="West Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591926" start="20304" end="20311" title="grading (engineering)" label="grading"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="20421" end="20433" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20590" end="20620" title="Ontario Good Roads Association" label="Ontario Good Roads Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024091" start="20661" end="20671" title="Huntsville, Ontario" label="Huntsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133822" start="21384" end="21403" title="Queen Elizabeth Way" label="Queen Elizabeth Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429399" start="22177" end="22200" title="Thousand Islands Bridge" label="Thousand Islands Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116600" start="22204" end="22211" title="Ivy Lea, Ontario" label="Ivy Lea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="22839" end="22849" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540441" start="22923" end="22937" title="George Doucett" label="George Doucett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413596" start="23878" end="23891" title="Kingston Road (Toronto)" label="Kingston Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744086" start="24058" end="24073" title="Hurricane Hazel" label="Hurricane Hazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546192" start="24142" end="24154" title="Humber River (Ontario)" label="Humber River"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="25156" end="25168" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q736574" start="25497" end="25519" title="New York State Thruway" label="New York State Thruway"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="25532" end="25539" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="25543" end="25556" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443889" start="25606" end="25615" title="Ontario Highway 3" label="Highway 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="25645" end="25652" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11883244" start="25850" end="25860" title="Morrisburg, Ontario" label="Morrisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748773" start="25941" end="25958" title="The Lost Villages" label="The Lost Villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q753288" start="25966" end="25987" title="Saint Lawrence Seaway" label="Saint Lawrence Seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925383" start="26262" end="26270" title="Brighton, Ontario" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859812" start="26275" end="26285" title="Marysville, Hastings County, Ontario" label="Marysville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191178" start="26324" end="26334" title="Ontario Highway 28" label="Highway 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q15108879" start="26351" end="26361" title="Ontario Highway 30" label="Highway 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797046" start="27056" end="27080" title="Thousand Islands Parkway" label="Thousand Islands Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128519" start="27242" end="27252" title="James Auld (politician)" label="James Auld"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867585" start="27276" end="27311" title="Minister of Tourism and Information" label="Minister of Tourism and Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344988" start="28015" end="28022" title="Expo 67" label="Expo 67"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28670" end="28686" title="List of north–south roads in Toronto#Islington Avenue" label="Islington Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588976" start="28691" end="28703" title="Ontario Highway 48" label="Markham Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338869" start="29356" end="29375" title="Partial cloverleaf interchange" label="partial cloverleafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q128702" start="29479" end="29496" title="John A. Macdonald" label="John A. Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q787456" start="29543" end="29555" title="John Robarts" label="John Robarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q669955" start="29645" end="29667" title="George-Étienne Cartier" label="George-Étienne Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="29690" end="29714" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Fathers of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q96392575" start="30038" end="30069" title="Member of Provincial Parliament (Ontario)" label="Member of Provincial Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425560" start="32093" end="32100" title="flyover (overpass)" label="flyover"/>
<link wikidata="Q285496" start="33731" end="33765" title="high-occupancy vehicle lane" label="high-occupancy vehicle (HOV) lanes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34475" end="34485" title="List of roads in Mississauga#Mavis Road" label="Mavis Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q50811" start="34702" end="34713" title="Regional Municipality of Peel" label="Peel Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872854" start="34968" end="34979" title="Ontario Highway 410" label="Highway 410"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35144" end="35160" title="List of roads in Mississauga#Terry Fox Way" label="Second Line West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253909" start="35608" end="35633" title="stack interchange" label="full four-way interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501249" start="37419" end="37426" title="Freeway Management System - COMPASS" label="COMPASS"/>
<link wikidata="Q242256" start="37434" end="37459" title="closed-circuit television" label="closed-circuit television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500964" start="37501" end="37525" title="Variable-message sign" label="changeable-message signs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37864" end="37877" title="Interstate 75" label="Interstate 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="38241" end="38249" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339582" start="39156" end="39163" title="Multiple-vehicle collision" label="pileups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408712" start="39286" end="39300" title="Shoulder (road)" label="soft shoulders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351126" start="39560" end="39582" title="highway hypnosis" label="lose focus on the road"/>
<link wikidata="Q20988179" start="39956" end="39974" title="1999 Highway 401 crash" label="87-vehicle pile-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q10901070" start="40010" end="40020" title="Labour Day" label="Labour Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240524" start="40172" end="40186" title="David Turnbull (politician)" label="David Turnbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275574" start="40740" end="40752" title="rumble strip" label="rumble strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046157" start="40776" end="40782" title="Ontario Provincial Police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q429274" start="41051" end="41082" title="Canadian Automobile Association" label="Canadian Automobile Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41237" end="41257" title="Essex County Road 42" label="Essex County Road 42"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094712" start="41427" end="41462" title="Ontario Highway 3B" label="Dougall Parkway (former Highway 3B)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094786" start="41466" end="41501" title="Ontario Highway 98" label="Provincial Road (former Highway 98)"/>
<link wikidata="Q370330" start="42933" end="42939" title="convoy" label="convoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032133" start="43044" end="43055" title="CFB Trenton" label="CFB Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094616" start="43092" end="43119" title="Ontario Centre of Forensic Sciences" label="Centre of Forensic Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="43206" end="43217" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425560" start="43241" end="43249" title="overpass" label="overpass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301245" start="43336" end="43347" title="Toronto Sun" label="Toronto Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002087" start="43751" end="43767" title="Cramahe, Ontario" label="Cramahe Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301551" start="44341" end="44359" title="reassurance marker" label="reassurance marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338762" start="44488" end="44500" title="Keele Street" label="Keele Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636829" start="44840" end="44855" title="Wellington Road (London, Ontario)" label="Wellington Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235510" start="46033" end="46041" title="gantry (road sign)" label="gantries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149895" start="46200" end="46243" title="2008 Toronto Propane Explosion" label="explosions at a propane facility in Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985004" start="46947" end="46958" title="Ontario Highway 412" label="Highway 412"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="47736" end="47763" title="Canada–United States border" label="Canada–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q12575" start="48086" end="48103" title="Ambassador Bridge" label="Ambassador Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752755" start="48304" end="48316" title="Manuel Moroun" label="Matty Moroun"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="48382" end="48421" title="federal government of the United States" label="federal government of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="48426" end="48446" title="Government of Canada" label="Government of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q320389" start="48740" end="48771" title="environmental impact assessment" label="environmental impact assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408125" start="48867" end="48879" title="Sam Schwartz" label="Sam Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350930" start="49287" end="49324" title="Michigan Department of Transportation" label="Michigan Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035496" start="49358" end="49374" title="Transport Canada" label="Transport Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q800112" start="49380" end="49410" title="Federal Highway Administration" label="Federal Highway Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q318435" start="49536" end="49549" title="Detroit River" label="Detroit River"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024694" start="49694" end="49711" title="Windsor Salt Mine" label="Windsor Salt Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12575" start="49846" end="49863" title="Ambassador Bridge" label="Ambassador Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752755" start="49870" end="49882" title="Manuel Moroun" label="Matty Moroun"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="50121" end="50137" title="Order in Council" label="Order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480896" start="50243" end="50263" title="the Right Honourable" label="the Right Honourable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548798" start="50264" end="50273" title="Herb Gray" label="Herb Gray"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50277" end="50297" title="Member of parliament#Canada" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="51484" end="51507" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680132" start="51509" end="51526" title="Tallgrass prairie" label="Tallgrass prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078746" start="51535" end="51555" title="Carolinian forest" label="Carolinian landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q601510" start="51584" end="51597" title="noise barrier" label="noise barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266001" start="53400" end="53432" title="Gordie Howe International Bridge" label="Gordie Howe International Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031904" start="54639" end="54654" title="Wonderland Road" label="Wonderland Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075207" start="54891" end="54913" title="cloverleaf interchange" label="cloverleaf interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636829" start="54917" end="54936" title="Colonel Talbot Road" label="Colonel Talbot Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443908" start="54993" end="55002" title="Ontario Highway 4" label="Highway 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q175816" start="57997" end="58008" title="Trent River (Ontario)" label="Trent River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300478" start="58383" end="58392" title="Doug Ford" label="Doug Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072776" start="58605" end="58612" title="ONroute" label="ONroute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786866" start="59455" end="59462" title="HMSHost" label="HMSHost"/>
<link wikidata="Q786790" start="59480" end="59489" title="Autogrill" label="Autogrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218108" start="59514" end="59533" title="Larry Tanenbaum" label="Kilmer van Nostrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032400" start="60235" end="60248" title="Canadian Tire" label="Canadian Tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q81799" start="60344" end="60353" title="fast food" label="fast food"/>
<link wikidata="Q175106" start="60369" end="60380" title="Tim Hortons" label="Tim Hortons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818848" start="60382" end="60389" title="A&amp;amp;W (Canada)" label="A&amp;amp;W"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194143" start="60391" end="60402" title="Pizza Pizza" label="Pizza Pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422367" start="60404" end="60416" title="Extreme Pita" label="Extreme Pita"/>
<link wikidata="Q524757" start="60418" end="60421" title="KFC" label="KFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q752941" start="60423" end="60432" title="Taco Bell" label="Taco Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873411" start="60434" end="60450" title="Big Smoke Burger" label="Big Smoke Burger"/>
<link wikidata="Q177054" start="60455" end="60466" title="Burger King" label="Burger King"/>
<link wikidata="" start="60579" end="60596" title="Heavy Rescue: 401" label="Heavy Rescue: 401"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621783" start="60635" end="60652" title="Discovery Channel (Canadian TV channel)" label="Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043935" start="60667" end="60686" title="The Weather Channel" label="The Weather Channel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60821" end="60852" title="Southern Ontario#Transportation" label="Southern Ontario Transportation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291925" wikidata="Q576364" url="?curid=291925" title="Revolt of the Batavi">
<text>The Revolt of the Batavi took place in the Roman province of Germania Inferior (&quot;Lower Germania&quot;) between AD 69 and 70. It was an uprising against the Roman Empire started by the Batavi, a small but militarily powerful Germanic tribe that inhabited Batavia, on the delta of the river Rhine. They were soon joined by the Celtic tribes from Gallia Belgica and some Germanic tribes.

Under the leadership of their hereditary prince Gaius Julius Civilis, an auxiliary officer in the Imperial Roman army, the Batavi and their allies managed to inflict a series of humiliating defeats on the Roman army, including the destruction of two legions. After these initial successes, a massive Roman army led by the Roman general Quintus Petillius Cerialis eventually defeated the rebels. Following peace talks, the Batavi submitted again to Roman rule, but were forced to accept humiliating terms and a legion stationed permanently on their territory, at Noviomagus (modern day Nijmegen, The Netherlands).

== Background ==
The Batavi were a sub-tribe of the Germanic Chatti tribal group who had migrated to the region between the Old Rhine and Waal rivers (still today called the Betuwe after them) in what became the Roman province of Germania Inferior (S Netherlands/Nordrhein). Their land, in spite of potentially fertile alluvial deposits, was largely uncultivable, consisting mainly of Rhine delta swamps. Thus the Batavi population it could support was tiny: not more than 35,000 at this time. However in the century after the Roman conquest of neighbouring Gaul trade had flourished with Roman, Gaulish and Germanic material culture being found together in the region.

They were a warlike people, skilled horsemen, boatmen and swimmers. They were therefore excellent soldier-material. In return for the unusual privilege of exemption from &quot;tributum&quot; (direct taxes on land and heads that most &quot;peregrini&quot; were subject to), they supplied a disproportionate number of recruits to the Julio-Claudian auxilia, particularly in the cavalry: one &quot;ala&quot; and eight &quot;cohortes&quot;. They also provided most of the emperor Augustus&#x27; elite regiment of Germanic bodyguards (&quot;Germani corpore custodes&quot;), which continued in existence until AD 68. The Batavi auxilia amounted to about 5,000 men, implying that for the entire Julio-Claudian period, over 50% of all Batavi males reaching military age (16 years) may have enlisted in the auxilia. Thus, the Batavi, although just about 0.05% of the total population of the empire in AD 23, supplied about 4% of the total auxilia, i.e. 80 times their proportionate share. They were regarded by the Romans as the best and bravest (&quot;fortissimi&quot;, &quot;validissimi&quot;) of their auxiliary, and indeed of all their forces. In Roman service, they had perfected a unique technique for swimming across rivers wearing full armour and weapons.

Gaius Julius Civilis (not his given name) was a hereditary prince of the Batavi and the prefect (commanding officer) of a Batavi cohort. A veteran of 25 years&#x27; distinguished service in the Roman army, he and the eight Batavi cohorts had played an important role in the Roman invasion of Britain in AD 43 and the subsequent subjugation of that country (43–66).


By 69, however, Civilis, the Batavi regiments and the Batavi people had become utterly disaffected from Rome. After the Batavi regiments were withdrawn from Britain in 66, Civilis and his brother (also a prefect) were arrested by the governor of Germania Inferior on false accusations of treason. The governor ordered the brother&#x27;s execution, and sent Civilis to Rome in chains for judgement by the Roman emperor Nero. (The difference in treatment indicates that the brother was still a &quot;peregrinus&quot;, i.e. a non-citizen subject of the empire, while Civilis, as his name implies, had been accorded Roman citizenship, which entitled him to have his case heard by the emperor in person). While Civilis was in prison awaiting trial, Nero was overthrown in AD 68 by an army led into Italy by the governor of Hispania Tarraconensis, the veteran general Galba. Nero committed suicide, ending the rule of the Julio-Claudian dynasty, founded a century earlier by Augustus. Galba was proclaimed emperor. He acquitted Civilis of the treason charge and allowed him to return home.

Back in Germania Inferior, however, it seems that Civilis was arrested again, this time on the order of the new governor Aulus Vitellius, acting at the urging of the legions under his command, which demanded Civilis&#x27; execution. Meanwhile, Galba disbanded the German Bodyguards Regiment, which he distrusted due to the loyalty they had given to Nero in the latter&#x27;s final days. This alienated several hundred crack Batavi troops, and indeed the whole Batavi nation, who considered it a grave insult. At the same time, relations collapsed between the eight Batavi cohorts and their parent-legion XIV Gemina, to which they had been attached since the invasion of Britain 25 years earlier. The seething hatred between the Roman legionaries and their German auxiliaries erupted in serious fighting on at least two occasions.

At this juncture, the Roman Empire was convulsed by its first major civil war for a century, the Year of the Four Emperors. The cause was the fall of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. The descendants of Augustus had enjoyed the automatic and fervent loyalty of ordinary legionaries in the frontier armies, but Galba possessed no such legitimacy in their eyes. Supreme power was now open to whichever general was strong enough to seize it (and keep it). First, in AD 69, Galba&#x27;s deputy, Otho, carried out a coup d&#x27;état in Rome against his leader. Amongst all the chaos, Galba was killed by the Praetorian Guard under Otho&#x27;s command.

Then Vitellius launched his own bid for power and prepared to lead the Rhine legions into Italy against Otho. Now in urgent need of the Batavi&#x27;s military support, Vitellius released Civilis. In return, the Batavi regiments helped Vitellius defeat Otho&#x27;s forces at the Battle of Bedriacum. The Batavi troops were then ordered to return home. But at this point news arrived of the mutiny of general Titus Flavius Vespasianus, commander of forces in Syria, whose own massive army of five legions was soon joined by the legions on the Danube. Vitellius&#x27; governor in Germania Inferior, desperate to raise more troops, lost the goodwill of the Batavi by attempting to conscript more Batavi than the maximum stipulated in their treaty. The brutality and corruption of the Roman recruiting centurions, who were also responsible for many cases of sexual assault on Batavi boys, brought already deep discontent in the Batavi homeland to the boil.

== Uprising ==

In the summer of 69, Civilis was commander of the Batavian auxiliary troops allocated in the Rhine legions. He was aware of Roman military tactics which gave him ideas on how to defeat them. The first action was to set up a decoy and Civilis induced a rebellion outside of Batavia and fragment the Northern Roman army.

Let Syria, Asia Minor, and the East, habituated as it is to despotism, submit to slavery... Freedom is a gift bestowed by nature even on the dumb animals. Courage is the peculiar excellence of man, and the Gods help the braver side. —Gaius Julius Civilis

The tribe of the Cananefates was living in lands between the Batavians and the North Sea. The inducements used by Civilis to instigate rebellion are not known, but the Cananefates, led by their chief Brinno, attacked several Roman forts, including Traiectum (Utrecht). With most of the troops in Italy fighting in the civil war, the Romans were caught off guard. Flaccus, commander of the Rhine legions, sent auxiliary troops to control the situation. The result was another disaster for the Romans. Civilis assumed the role of mastermind of the rebellion and defeated the Romans near modern Arnhem.

Flaccus ordered the V &quot;Alaudae&quot; and the XV &quot;Primigenia&quot; legions to deal with the rebels. Accompanying them were three auxiliary units, including a Batavian cavalry squadron, commanded by Claudius Labeo, a known enemy of Civilis. The battle took place near modern Nijmegen. The Batavian regiment deserted to their countrymen, giving a blow to the already feeble morale of the Romans. The Roman army was beaten and the legions forced to retreat to their base (modern Xanten).

By this time, the Batavians clearly had the upper hand. Even Vespasian, who was fighting Vitellius for the imperial throne, saluted the rebellion that kept his enemy from calling the Rhine legions to Italy. The Batavians were promised independence and Civilis was on his way to becoming king.

==Castra Vetera==
For unknown reasons, this was not enough for the Batavians. Civilis chose to pursue vengeance and swore to destroy the two Roman legions. The timing was well chosen. With the civil war of the Year of the Four Emperors at its peak, it would take some time before Rome could produce an effective counterattack. Moreover, the eight Batavian auxiliary units of Vitellius&#x27; army were on their way home and could be easily persuaded to join the rebellion for an independent Batavia. This was an important reinforcement. Apart from being veteran troops, their numbers were greater than the combined Roman troops stationed in Moguntiacum (Mainz) and Bonna (Bonn).

In September 69, Civilis initiated the siege of Castra Vetera, the camp of the 5,000 legionaries of V &quot;Alaudae&quot; and XV &quot;Primigenia&quot;. The camp was very modern, filled with supplies and well-defended, with walls of mud, brick, and wood, towers, and a double ditch. After some failed attempts to take the camp by force, Civilis decided to starve the troops into surrender.

Meanwhile, Flaccus decided to wait for the result of the war in Italy. Not long before, the Rhine legions had been punished by Galba for their actions against the rebel Vindex of Gallia Lugdunensis. Vespasian was winning the war and Civilis was helping him to become emperor by preventing at least the two legions besieged in Castra Vetera, loyal to Vitellius, from coming to his rescue. Flaccus and his commanders did not want to risk a second military gaffe and decided to wait for instructions. When the news of Vitellius&#x27; defeat arrived, Civilis still continued the siege. He was not fighting for Vespasian, he was fighting for Batavia. Flaccus started to prepare a counterattack to rescue the besieged legions. Civilis was not going to wait until they were fully prepared and launched a surprise attack. In the evening of 1 December, his best eight cavalry cohorts attacked the Romans in Krefeld. The Roman army won the battle and destroyed the Batavian cavalry, but their own losses were enormous.

Knowing that the Romans would come to Castra Vetera, Civilis abandoned the siege and threatened to attack Moguntiacum. The Romans were misled and rushed to the rescue of their main base in Germania Superior. In Moguntiacum they received the news of Vespasian&#x27;s accession to the throne. Flaccus decided to celebrate the event by distributing a sum of money to the legions, but these legions were historically loyal to Vitellius, their former commander, and this act of generosity was interpreted as an offense. Flaccus was murdered and his second-in-command deserted, leaving the Roman army in a state of confusion.

Civilis saw his chance and before the Romans knew what was happening, his troops besieged Castra Vetera once more.

==Rebellion continues==

The year 70 started with the odds favoring the rebels. Two legions were still besieged at Castra Vetera and the rest of the Roman army was not large enough to cope with the revolt. Apart from the Batavian rebellion, the Trevirans and Lingones had declared the independence of Gaul. Julius Sabinus, the rebel emperor, managed to persuade the I &quot;Germanica&quot; and XVI &quot;Gallica&quot; to come over to his side. At Castra Vetera the situation was desperate. Food supplies had run out and the besieged legions were eating horses and mules to survive. With no prospect of a relief, the commander of the troops, Munius Lupercus, decided to surrender.

The legions were promised safe conduct if they left the camp to be sacked by the rebels. All weapons, artillery material, and gold was left to plunder. V &quot;Alaudae&quot; and XV &quot;Primigenia&quot; marched out of the camp, but after only a few kilometers they were ambushed by Germanic troops and destroyed. The commander and principal officers were made slaves and given as a present to Veleda, the prophetess who had predicted the rise of the Batavians.

After this success, Civilis went to Colonia Agrippina (Cologne) and set up camp there. In the next months, he invested his time in convincing other tribes from northern Gaul and Germania to join the rebellion.

==Rome retaliates==
The rebellion in Germania was now a real threat to the Empire. Two legions had been lost, two others (I &quot;Germanica&quot; and XVI &quot;Gallica&quot;) were controlled by the rebels. This could not be allowed for much longer. As soon as Vespasian had the Empire in his hands and the situation in Italy under control, he decided to act. He nominated Quintus Petillius Cerialis, a close relative and experienced general, as commander of the avenging force. Not wanting to risk a defeat, an enormous army was summoned. The legions VIII &quot;Augusta&quot;, XI &quot;Claudia&quot;, XIII &quot;Gemina&quot;, XXI &quot;Rapax&quot;, and the recently levied II &quot;Adiutrix&quot; were immediately sent to Germania. Additionally, the legions I &quot;Adiutrix&quot; and VI &quot;Victrix&quot; were summoned from Hispania and XIV &quot;Gemina&quot; from Britannia. Most parts of these legions were deployed to pacify other parts of Gaul and Germania Superior and secure the Rhine frontier. Still, Cerialis&#x27; army was a massive one and posed a serious threat to the rebels.

On the news of the approaching army, Julius Tutor, one of Civilis&#x27; allies, surrendered. The &quot;imprisoned&quot; legions, I &quot;Germanica&quot; and XVI &quot;Gallica&quot;, capitulated. They were disgraced and no longer had the confidence of Rome. The I &quot;Germanica&quot; was disbanded and its legionaries were added to the VII &quot;Gemina&quot; in Pannonia. XVI &quot;Gallica&quot; was reconstituted with the name of Legio XVI &quot;Flavia Firma&quot;. Pushing down from all directions, Cerialis forced the rebels and their (now scarce) allies to retreat to the North. The rebellion was now confined to Germania Inferior.

From his homeland of Batavia, Civilis tried for some time to attack the Roman army in a series of raids by land and, with the help of his fleet, in the rivers Waal and Rhine. In one of these raids, Civilis managed to capture the flagship of the Roman fleet. This was a humiliation that demanded a response. Cerialis decided to wait no longer and invaded Batavia.

At the outset of the rebellion, Rome was heavily preoccupied with major military operations in Judea during the First Jewish–Roman War. However, the siege of Jerusalem that began in April 70 AD was over by early September, and the war was essentially over. When Civilis heard that Jerusalem had fallen, and he realized that Rome would now bring its full resources to bear upon him, Civilis made peace.

Peace talks followed. A bridge was built over the river Nabalia, where the warring parties approached each other on both sides. The general agreements are unknown, but they were favourable to the Batavians, the Batavians were to renew their alliance with the Roman Empire and to levy another eight auxiliary cavalry units. The Batavian capital of Nijmegen was destroyed and its inhabitants ordered to rebuild it a few kilometers downstream, in a defenseless position. Moreover, X &quot;Gemina&quot; would be stationed close by, to secure peace.

The fate of Civilis is unknown.

==Cultural influence in the Netherlands==
Dutch writers in the 17th and 18th centuries saw the rebellion of the independent and freedom-loving Batavians as mirroring the Dutch revolt against Spain and other forms of tyranny. According to this nationalist view, the Batavians were the &quot;true&quot; forefathers of the Dutch, which explains the recurring use of the name over the centuries. Jakarta was named &quot;Batavia&quot; by the Dutch in 1619. The Dutch republic created in 1795 on the basis of French revolutionary principles was called the Batavian Republic. 

Hence, leaders of the Revolt of the Batavi were given the status of Dutch National Heroes and their revolt against Roman rule regarded as a precursor of the 16th century Dutch revolt against Spanish rule. The painting by Rembrandt at the top of this page is part of that view of the Revolt of the Batavi. In 1613 Otto van Veen also made a series of sequential paintings about the Revolt of the Batavi.

Even today &quot;Batavian&quot; is a term sometimes used to describe the Dutch people; this is similar to use of &quot;Gallic&quot; to describe the French and &quot;Teutonic&quot; to describe the Germans.

==List of legions involved==
*Legio I Germanica
*Legio I Adiutrix
*Legio II Adiutrix
*Legio V Alaudae
*Legio VI Victrix
*Legio VIII Augusta
*Legio XI Claudia
*Legio XIII Gemina
*Legio XIV Gemina
*Legio XV Primigenia
*Legio XVI Flavia Firma
*Legio XVI Gallica
*Legio XXI Rapax

==References==
==External links==

* Livius.org: The Batavian revolt </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q576364" start="4" end="24" title="Revolt of the Batavi" label="Revolt of the Batavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="43" end="57" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q152136" start="61" end="78" title="Germania Inferior" label="Germania Inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="161" end="173" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q176825" start="189" end="195" title="Batavi (Germanic tribe)" label="Batavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q850526" start="259" end="266" title="Batavia (region)" label="Batavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q923381" start="275" end="299" title="Rhine–Meuse–Scheldt delta" label="delta of the river Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q206443" start="349" end="363" title="Gallia Belgica" label="Gallia Belgica"/>
<link wikidata="Q433458" start="439" end="459" title="Gaius Julius Civilis" label="Gaius Julius Civilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q389373" start="464" end="473" title="Roman auxiliaries" label="auxiliary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8772741" start="489" end="508" title="Imperial Roman army" label="Imperial Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="641" end="648" title="Roman legions" label="legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q348926" start="727" end="753" title="Quintus Petillius Cerialis" label="Quintus Petillius Cerialis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="953" end="963" title="Nijmegen#History" label="Noviomagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47887" start="976" end="1001" title="Nijmegen" label="Nijmegen, The Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q176825" start="1026" end="1032" title="Batavi (Germanic tribe)" label="Batavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q164076" start="1066" end="1072" title="Chatti" label="Chatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000221" start="1129" end="1138" title="Oude Rijn (Gelderland)" label="Old Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q216171" start="1143" end="1147" title="Waal (river)" label="Waal"/>
<link wikidata="Q850526" start="1179" end="1185" title="Betuwe" label="Betuwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="1563" end="1567" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676972" start="1909" end="1930" title="Peregrinus (Roman)" label="&amp;quot;peregrini&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511811" start="2052" end="2059" title="Roman cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2071" end="2074" title="Ala (Roman cavalry unit)#Alae" label="ala"/>
<link wikidata="Q202167" start="2097" end="2105" title="Cohort (military unit)" label="cohortes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="2152" end="2160" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514172" start="2185" end="2203" title="Germanic bodyguard" label="Germanic bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="2364" end="2378" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q433458" start="2932" end="2952" title="Gaius Julius Civilis" label="Gaius Julius Civilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="3206" end="3231" title="Roman invasion of Britain" label="Roman invasion of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="3703" end="3716" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="3717" end="3721" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676972" start="3797" end="3807" title="Peregrinus (Roman)" label="peregrinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q213810" start="3911" end="3924" title="Roman citizen" label="Roman citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q216791" start="4117" end="4139" title="Hispania Tarraconensis" label="Hispania Tarraconensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414" start="4161" end="4166" title="Galba" label="Galba"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="4215" end="4237" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417" start="4505" end="4520" title="Vitellius" label="Aulus Vitellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q707649" start="4988" end="4998" title="Legio XIV Gemina" label="XIV Gemina"/>
<link wikidata="Q470596" start="5312" end="5337" title="Year of the Four Emperors" label="Year of the Four Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416" start="5700" end="5704" title="Otho" label="Otho"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="5720" end="5736" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="5812" end="5828" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q63146684" start="6135" end="6154" title="Battle of Bedriacum" label="Battle of Bedriacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421" start="6264" end="6289" title="Titus" label="Titus Flavius Vespasianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="6398" end="6404" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q433458" start="7380" end="7400" title="Gaius Julius Civilis" label="Gaius Julius Civilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q652984" start="7419" end="7430" title="Cananefates" label="Cananefates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="7481" end="7490" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199749" start="7650" end="7669" title="Traiectum (Utrecht)" label="Traiectum (Utrecht)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310" start="7994" end="8000" title="Arnhem" label="Arnhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136322" start="8023" end="8044" title="Legio V Alaudae" label="V &amp;quot;Alaudae&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q977359" start="8053" end="8078" title="Legio XV Primigenia" label="XV &amp;quot;Primigenia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431928" start="8210" end="8224" title="Claudius Labeo" label="Claudius Labeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q47887" start="8286" end="8294" title="Nijmegen" label="Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q162890" start="8488" end="8494" title="Xanten" label="Xanten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="8559" end="8568" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417" start="8587" end="8596" title="Vitellius" label="Vitellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q470596" start="9002" end="9027" title="Year of the Four Emperors" label="Year of the Four Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="9445" end="9450" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="9463" end="9467" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17346959" start="9556" end="9567" title="legionary" label="legionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414" start="9989" end="9994" title="Galba" label="Galba"/>
<link wikidata="Q333826" start="10031" end="10037" title="Vindex" label="Vindex"/>
<link wikidata="Q10971" start="10041" end="10059" title="Gallia Lugdunensis" label="Gallia Lugdunensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805" start="10760" end="10767" title="Krefeld" label="Krefeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="11910" end="11914" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q606722" start="11916" end="11930" title="Julius Sabinus" label="Julius Sabinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q917212" start="11975" end="11998" title="Legio I Germanica" label="I &amp;quot;Germanica&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q660347" start="12003" end="12026" title="Legio XVI Gallica" label="XVI &amp;quot;Gallica&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q267711" start="12684" end="12690" title="Veleda" label="Veleda"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="12808" end="12815" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q348926" start="13336" end="13362" title="Quintus Petillius Cerialis" label="Quintus Petillius Cerialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101126" start="13515" end="13539" title="Legio VIII Augusta" label="VIII &amp;quot;Augusta&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812766" start="13541" end="13563" title="Legio XI Claudia" label="XI &amp;quot;Claudia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q168553" start="13565" end="13588" title="Legio XIII Gemina" label="XIII &amp;quot;Gemina&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q266367" start="13590" end="13611" title="Legio XXI Rapax" label="XXI &amp;quot;Rapax&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064291" start="13637" end="13660" title="Legio II Adiutrix" label="II &amp;quot;Adiutrix&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q608574" start="13722" end="13744" title="Legio I Adiutrix" label="I &amp;quot;Adiutrix&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434251" start="13749" end="13771" title="Legio VI Victrix" label="VI &amp;quot;Victrix&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q707649" start="13804" end="13826" title="Legio XIV Gemina" label="XIV &amp;quot;Gemina&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q153553" start="13919" end="13936" title="Germania Superior" label="Germania Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234638" start="14393" end="14415" title="Legio VII Gemina" label="VII &amp;quot;Gemina&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q956488" start="14488" end="14522" title="Legio XVI Flavia Firma" label="Legio XVI &amp;quot;Flavia Firma&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q476807" start="14792" end="14796" title="Raid (military)" label="raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q202578" start="15170" end="15192" title="First Jewish–Roman War" label="First Jewish–Roman War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369909" start="15517" end="15524" title="Nabalia" label="Nabalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47887" start="15808" end="15816" title="Nijmegen" label="Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q253539" start="15939" end="15959" title="Legio X Gemina" label="X &amp;quot;Gemina&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q176825" start="16305" end="16314" title="Batavians" label="Batavians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="16432" end="16439" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q188553" start="16590" end="16607" title="Batavian Republic" label="Batavian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q176825" start="16647" end="16653" title="Batavi (Germanic tribe)" label="Batavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="16832" end="16841" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q785355" start="16924" end="16937" title="Otto van Veen" label="Otto van Veen"/>
<link wikidata="Q917212" start="17250" end="17267" title="Legio I Germanica" label="Legio I Germanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q608574" start="17269" end="17285" title="Legio I Adiutrix" label="Legio I Adiutrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064291" start="17287" end="17304" title="Legio II Adiutrix" label="Legio II Adiutrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136322" start="17306" end="17321" title="Legio V Alaudae" label="Legio V Alaudae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434251" start="17323" end="17339" title="Legio VI Victrix" label="Legio VI Victrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101126" start="17341" end="17359" title="Legio VIII Augusta" label="Legio VIII Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812766" start="17361" end="17377" title="Legio XI Claudia" label="Legio XI Claudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q168553" start="17379" end="17396" title="Legio XIII Gemina" label="Legio XIII Gemina"/>
<link wikidata="Q707649" start="17398" end="17414" title="Legio XIV Gemina" label="Legio XIV Gemina"/>
<link wikidata="Q977359" start="17416" end="17435" title="Legio XV Primigenia" label="Legio XV Primigenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q956488" start="17437" end="17459" title="Legio XVI Flavia Firma" label="Legio XVI Flavia Firma"/>
<link wikidata="Q660347" start="17461" end="17478" title="Legio XVI Gallica" label="Legio XVI Gallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q266367" start="17480" end="17495" title="Legio XXI Rapax" label="Legio XXI Rapax"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291926" wikidata="Q472147" url="?curid=291926" title="Charles Berlitz">
<text>Charles Frambach Berlitz (November 22, 1914 – December 18, 2003) was an American polyglot, language teacher and writer, known for his language-learning courses and his books on paranormal phenomena.

==Life==
Berlitz was born in New York City. He was the grandson of Maximilian Berlitz, who founded the Berlitz Language Schools. As a child, Charles was raised in a household in which (by his father&#x27;s orders) every relative and servant spoke to Charles in a different language: he reached adolescence speaking eight languages fluently. In adulthood, he recalled having had the childhood delusion that every human being spoke a different language, wondering why he did not have his own language like everyone else in his household. His father spoke to him in German, his grandfather in Russian, and his nanny in Spanish.

He began working for the family language school, The Berlitz School of Languages, during college breaks. The publishing house, of which he was vice president, sold, among other things, tourist phrase books and pocket dictionaries, several of which he authored. He also played a key role in developing record and tape language courses. He left the company in the late 1960s, not long after he sold the company to publishing firm Crowell, Collier &amp; Macmillan. He graduated &quot;magna cum laude&quot; from Yale University.

Berlitz was a writer on paranormal phenomena. He wrote a number of books on Atlantis. In his book &quot;The Mystery of Atlantis&quot;, he claimed Atlantis was real, based on his interpretation of geophysics, psychic studies, classical literature, tribal lore, and archeology. He also attempted to link the Bermuda Triangle to Atlantis. He claimed to have located Atlantis undersea in the area of the Bermuda Triangle. He was also an ancient astronaut proponent who believed that extraterrestrials had visited Earth.

Berlitz spent 13 years on active duty in the U.S. Army, mostly in intelligence. In 1950, he married Valerie Seary, with whom he had two children, a daughter Lin, and son, Marc. He died in 2003 at the age of 89 at University Hospital in Tamarac, Florida.

==Reception==
Berlitz&#x27;s statements about the Bermuda Triangle and the Philadelphia Experiment were heavily criticized by researchers and scientists for their inaccuracy. He has also drawn criticism for ignoring possible natural explanations and promoting pseudoscientific ideas.

Larry Kusche has accused Berlitz of fabricating evidence and inventing mysteries that have no basis in fact.

== See also ==

*Berlitz International

== Bibliography ==
===Anomalous phenomena===
* &quot;The mystery of Atlantis&quot;, 1969
* &quot;Mysteries from forgotten worlds&quot;, 1972
* &quot;The Bermuda triangle&quot;, 1974, 
* &quot;Without a trace&quot;, 1977
* &quot;The Philadelphia experiment – Project Invisibility&quot;, 1979
* &quot;The Roswell Incident&quot;, 1980
* &quot;Doomsday 1999 A.D.&quot;, 1981, 
* &quot;Atlantis - The eighth continent&quot;: G. P. Putnams Sons, New York, 1984
* &quot;&quot;, Macmillan, London, 1984
* &quot;The lost ship of Noah: In search of the ark at Ararat&quot;, 1987
* &quot;World of the incredible but true&quot;: Ballantine Books, New York, 1988
* &quot;The dragon&#x27;s triangle&quot;, 1989
* &quot;World of Strange Phenomena&quot;: Little Brown &amp; Company, New York, 1995

===Language===
* &quot;Native Tongues&quot;, 1982

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q472147" start="0" end="24" title="Charles Berlitz" label="Charles Frambach Berlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="81" end="89" title="polyglot" label="polyglot"/>
<link wikidata="Q332102" start="177" end="187" title="paranormal" label="paranormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="229" end="242" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q85209" start="267" end="285" title="Maximilian Berlitz" label="Maximilian Berlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q821960" start="303" end="327" title="Berlitz International" label="Berlitz Language Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581478" start="1307" end="1322" title="Latin honors" label="magna cum laude"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="1334" end="1349" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q25373" start="1428" end="1436" title="Atlantis" label="Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="1548" end="1558" title="geophysics" label="geophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="1616" end="1626" title="archeology" label="archeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q43708" start="1658" end="1674" title="Bermuda Triangle" label="Bermuda Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q646988" start="1785" end="1802" title="ancient astronaut" label="ancient astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="1831" end="1848" title="extraterrestrials" label="extraterrestrials"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="1914" end="1923" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="1935" end="1947" title="Military intelligence" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q921201" start="2105" end="2121" title="Tamarac, Florida" label="Tamarac, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q496036" start="2199" end="2222" title="Philadelphia Experiment" label="Philadelphia Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="2384" end="2400" title="Pseudoscience" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702773" start="2409" end="2421" title="Larry Kusche" label="Larry Kusche"/>
<link wikidata="Q821960" start="2536" end="2557" title="Berlitz International" label="Berlitz International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279065" start="2702" end="2734" title="The Bermuda Triangle (book)" label="&amp;quot;The Bermuda triangle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q120281447" start="2858" end="2878" title="The Roswell Incident (1980 book)" label="The Roswell Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297109" start="2899" end="2917" title="Doomsday 1999 A.D." label="Doomsday 1999 A.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q16976836" start="3365" end="3379" title="Native Tongues (book)" label="Native Tongues"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291927" wikidata="Q739664" url="?curid=291927" title="Santa Ana, El Salvador">
<text>Santa Ana () is the second largest city in El Salvador, after the capital of San Salvador. It is located 64 kilometers northwest of San Salvador, the capital city. Santa Ana has approximately 277,264 (2020) inhabitants and serves both as the capital of the department of Santa Ana and as the municipal seat for the surrounding municipality of the same name. For its administration the municipality is divided into 35 colonias (neighborhoods) and 318 small villages.

A major processing center for El Salvador&#x27;s sizable coffee bean industry is located near Santa Ana.

Santa Ana has become a tourist destination, especially for tourists eager to learn about Salvadoran culture and traditions.

Currently, the mayor of Santa Ana is Gustavo Acevedo, from Nuevas Ideas.

==Geography==
The city of Santa Ana is located on a plateau about 665 meters above sea level. The city has year-round warm climate with an average temperature of around . The main river is the Guajoyo river which is a major tributary of the much larger Lempa River. There is a major Hydroelectric Power station at the Guajoyo river that provides electricity to most of the western sector of the country.

The city is situated among a number of green hills, including Tecana Hill and the Hills of Santa Lucía.
In the southern part of the municipality is the Ilamatepec volcano, the highest volcano in the country, which had a moderate eruption in 2005 that killed two people. Close to it is another famous volcano, Izalco, known to sailors throughout the mid-19th century and early 20th century as &quot;The lighthouse of the Pacific&quot; due to its constant eruptions.

===Surrounding mountains===
The highest elevation in the town is the Santa Ana volcano (which measures 2365 meters).

===Physio-graphic regions===
The relief of the municipality may be divided into three physiographic regions, which are:

The Apaneca Range, which is located in the southern part of town and home to the Santa Ana volcano (which is the highest volcano in the country), the Izalco volcano (which the youngest volcano in the country having originated in 1770), and the Cerro Verde, located in the Natural Park of Cerro Verde (which was re-opened after a closure in 2001, due to earthquakes that occurred earlier that year).

Apaneca from the mountains to the center of town lies a plain or plain, which lies on the plateau where the city is located.

North of the plateau is the mountain range-Comecayo Mita, in which small rise orographic configurations including the Tecan, Pinalito, Pinalón, Santa Lucia and Camones hills.

===Hydrology===
Guajoyo River is one of the major rivers in the municipality of Santa Ana

The city and the greater part thereof is located in the Lempa River basin region, while the remaining parts of the municipality are in the basin region of Coatepeque. Within the Lempa River basin region, the city and Most of the municipality is located in the upper Lempa River.

The city is surrounded both above aquifers located in the basement, of which most are moderate vulnerability.

====Surface waters====
Within the streams that flow through the territory of the municipality including the City, the main rivers are:

*Lempa River, which forms the border with the municipality of Nueva Concepcion 
*Guajoyo River (where a hydroelectric plant is located) 
*Suquiapa River, which forms the confluence of the Apanchacal and Zarco rivers bordering the town of Coatepeque.

The southern part of the city is connected with Lake Coatepeque, which has become one of the main attractions of the entire Department of Santa Ana.

In addition, another 15 rivers and 52 minor streams flow through the municipality of Santa Ana. The city is criss-crossed by the El Molino, Apanchacal, and Apanteos rivers.

===Climate===
The city and the entire municipality of Santa Ana are located in the tropics and have a tropical savanna climate (according to the Köppen climate classification). The city experiences two distinct seasons, which are: the dry season (November to May) and rainy season (May to November).
The municipality of Santa Ana has a mean annual temperature of with a temperature around and minimum and maximum. Although at times the maximum temperatures often exceed , since it is a city with a very hot climate. It also has an annual relative humidity between 70% and 75%.
The city is dominated by winds from the southwest and west, both during the dry season and during the rainy season, these winds have an annual rate of 7.8 km/h.24

In addition, any municipality, including the city, is affected by the hurricane season in the Atlantic (June–November). In which, the continuous tropical storms and hurricanes increase the flow of rivers, damaging some areas with flooding.

==History==
===Pre-Columbian era===
The city of Santa Ana has a pre-Columbian origin. There is evidence of Preclassic settlements in the area of the city, mainly in the archaeological site of Villa Rosita, where the dominant centre was located in the area. This and other settlements were depopulated by the eruption of Lake Ilopango in 250 AD.

The city was founded by the Maya Poqomam in the classical period. The first name of the settlement is unknown, however, it is known that when the Pipil entered and conquered the area in 1200 during the post-classic period, translated the original Nahuatl name, which was Sihuatehuacán, which means place of priestesses. Sihuatehuacán was located in what is now the suburb of Santa Barbara, west of the Apanchacal and Apanteos rivers.

===Conquest and colonization===
The town was conquered by the Spanish between 1530 and 1540. On July 26, 1569, Guatemalan bishop Bernardino Villalpando changed the name from Sihuatehuacán to that of Santa Ana. The new town at the time was part of the Greater Mayorship of San Salvador. 

San Salvador, the city of Santa Ana, and the western and central part of the current Salvadoran territory (except St Vincent and the paracentral area) was administered by the mayor of the department of San Salvador. Since 1770, the central parish of the city (located where the cathedral was built later) was the head of the parish of Santa Ana. From 1786-1824, the Santa Ana district was part of the San Salvador municipality (&quot;Intendencia de San Salvador&quot;).
===19th century===
In 1806, the council of the town of Santa Ana was established. Its first mayor was José Mariano Castro. Five years later, there were two uprisings in the town as part of the uprising in San Salvador, the first on 17 November 1811, another on 24 June 1812. In November 1812, it was designated with the title of town.

On 21 December 1821, the council declared independence from Spain. In 1824, it received the title of city, as part of the department of Sonsonate. In 1835, it became the head of that department. In 1854, the town of Santa Lucia Chacalcingo became part of Santa Ana. A year later, the Department of Santa Ana was created.

In 1894, a revolution that would overthrew President Carlos Ezeta, who had ruled the country as de facto dictator (from the current headquarters of the Second Infantry Brigade of Santa Ana) occurred. Since then, the town earned the nickname of &quot;the heroic city&quot; as the 44 rebels who led the revolution were from the municipality. They stormed the government headquarters to end the dictatorship. 
===Postwar 20th century and Civil Santa Ana in 1916===
In the so-called &quot;golden age of coffee&quot; in El Salvador, Santa Ana was the most prosperous city in the country, because many of the businessmen who lived in that town owned important coffee processing plants that prepared the coffee for sale. La Hacienda El Molino, owned by the Colombian Rafael Alvarez, was the main plantation and coffee processing plant because of its fame and its technological modernism at the time.

During the civil war in El Salvador (1980–1992), the municipality of Santa Ana was also affected by armed conflict, which led to the emigration of many residents of the city.
After the war, Santa Ana and all of El Salvador began to address the problem of rising crime rates, mostly due to the existence of &quot;maras&quot; or gangs, mainly generated by the deportation of illegal immigrants from the United States. This scourge has been fought with government programs and ordinances issued by the council municipal.

Since the civil war, the municipality has received allowances sent by Salvadorians living abroad to their friends and family. This money has become the largest source of revenue for Santa Ana and El Salvador.

In 1999 the Urban Development Master Plan (PLAMADUR) was launched by the municipal administration of Moses Macall Monterrosa. The PLAMADUR spurred the growth, expansion and management of ciudad.

Also in 2004, the Salvadorian government introduced the National Land Management Plan and Territorial Development (PNODT) that promotes the development, integration and competitiveness of Salvadoran municipalities. For the purposes of planning and development of municipalities, these have been grouped into regions, subregions and microregions. The municipality of Santa Ana was incorporated into the region, &quot;West Central subregion, Santa Ana - Resume&quot; and &quot;microregion of Santa Ana&quot;.

==Education==
The city of Santa Ana has 183 schools according to statistics from the Salvadoran Ministry of Education, out of those 53 are private. Some of the best known schools are:
#Colegio Bautista
#Liceo San Luis
#Escuela Interamericana
#Colegio Latinoamericano
#Colegio Salesiano San José
#Colegio Santa María
#CE INSA
#Colegio María Auxiliadora
#Liceo Santaneco

Santa Ana has a few universities, including Universidad Católica de El Salvador, Universidad Modular Abierta, Universidad de El Salvador Facultad Multidiciplinaria de Occidente, Universidad Francisco Gavidia, and Universidad Autónoma de Santa Ana.

==Economy==

Santa Ana today is the second largest city in population and importance in El Salvador. The main economic engines of the city are in retail and manufacturing. In the north and west of the city are factories and assembly plants mostly of foreign origin. The southern part of the city is more commercially developed, containing many restaurants, commercial banks, hotels and shopping malls. The largest shopping mall in the city is Metrocentro. 

Santa Ana has two main markets: the Colón and Central Markets, only a few streets from one another, offering a great variety of products.

With respect to tourism, the city has many old buildings such as: Catedral de Santa Ana (The Cathedral of Saint Anne), Alcaldía Municipal de Santa Ana (Santa Ana City Hall) and the Teatro de Santa Ana (Santa Ana Theater).

The only museum in the city registered by the Concultura is the Occidental Regional Museum, also known as the Museum of the West. However El Museo Aja is also located in the city. There are also the Apanteos and Sihuatehuacán water parks.

Fiestas Julias is a big traditional celebration in Santa Ana during the 15 through the 31 of July. Every year they usually take place in the Oscar quiteño stadium.

== Culture and art ==
The culture of Santa Ana and all of El Salvador is a result of the influence of the pre-Columbian indigenous inhabitants and the Spanish colonization.

The government agency that is responsible for preserving and promoting culture throughout the country is the Ministry of Culture. Likewise, the city has its own decentralized office that is responsible for preserving and promoting culture and art throughout the city: the Coordinator of culture, recreation, art and education (&quot;Culturarte&quot;).

=== Centers for Cultural Development ===
The city has its own Casa de Cultura, which is managed by the Ministry of Culture and is responsible for disseminating and promoting research, and for expanding local art and art from the entire municipality.

Likewise, there are centers of culture and art education in the city, such as the Western Arts Center which was developed by the Cultural Heritage Association of Santa Ana (&quot;Apaculsa&quot;).

The main museum of the city is the Western Regional Museum, which is a historical site and also one of culture and art. Another is the Aja Museum, developed by the movement Siglo XXIII, which promotes culture and popular art.

Also, the city has its own public library, whose official name is &quot;David Granadino” Public Library, which is managed by Concultura.

For the presentation of the performing arts, the city has important venues. The main venue, because of its size and age, is the National Theater of the city. Other establishments used for the presentation of performing arts are the Cine Principal (Main Theatre) and the Centro Municipal de Usos Múltiples &quot;El Palmar&quot;.

==Notable people==

*Agustín García Calderón (born 1948), former President of the Supreme Court of El Salvador

==Sport==

Santa Ana is home to C.D. FAS, one of the most famous football (soccer) clubs in El Salvador. Their home stadium is Estadio Óscar Quiteño, built in 1963 with an approximate capacity of 20,000 fans.

==Religion==

In regard to religion, as in the rest of the country, the population is mostly Catholic, being the host city of the Diocese of Santa Ana, which occupies the departments of Santa Ana and Ahuachapán. It is part of the ecclesiastical province of El Salvador.

Among the most important Catholic churches are the Cathedral of Santa Ana, (where is the image of the patron saint of the city), the El Calvario church (rebuilt in the late 19th century by Fray Felipe de Jesús Moraga, which was destroyed partially by the earthquake of 13 January 2001, and subsequently rebuilt), El Carmen (which has been administered by the Dominican priests since 1929), the Church of Santa Lucia, San Lorenzo church, Santa Barbara Church, the Mother of the Saviour parish church, and San José Obrero.

Also, several Christian evangelical churches, which have seen an increased influx of believers. Other religious groups, such as The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (better known as Mormons) and Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses also have followers here.

==Twin towns – sister cities==
Santa Ana is twinned with:
* La Ceiba, Honduras
* León, Nicaragua
* Piracicaba, Brasil
* Miramar, United States
* Nueva Trinidad, El Salvador
* Nejapa, El Salvador
* Acajutla, El Salvador

==References==
==External links==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q739664" start="0" end="9" title="Santa Ana, El Salvador" label="Santa Ana"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="43" end="54" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110" start="132" end="144" title="San Salvador" label="San Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q475214" start="257" end="267" title="Departments of El Salvador" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q671158" start="271" end="280" title="Santa Ana Department" label="Santa Ana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="327" end="339" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q153697" start="524" end="535" title="coffee bean" label="coffee bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q57986086" start="757" end="769" title="Nuevas Ideas" label="Nuevas Ideas"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="824" end="831" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511554" start="1025" end="1036" title="Lempa River" label="Lempa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049338" start="1329" end="1339" title="Ilamatepec" label="Ilamatepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q13217621" start="2451" end="2459" title="Comecayo" label="Comecayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q113562" start="3879" end="3903" title="tropical savanna climate" label="tropical savanna climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3922" end="3951" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="4823" end="4836" title="Pre-Columbian era" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q267410" start="5251" end="5256" title="Pipil people" label="Pipil"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="5352" end="5359" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="5651" end="5660" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5669" end="5691" title="Bernardino Villalpando" label="Bernardino Villalpando"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6262" end="6289" title="Intendencia de San Salvador" label="Intendencia de San Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q887723" start="7009" end="7021" title="Carlos Ezeta" label="Carlos Ezeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997114" start="9502" end="9524" title="Escuela Interamericana" label="Escuela Interamericana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9526" end="9549" title="Colegio Latinoamericano" label="Colegio Latinoamericano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010400" start="9600" end="9607" title="CE INSA" label="CE INSA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9763" end="9829" title="Universidad de El Salvador Facultad Multidiciplinaria de Occidente" label="Universidad de El Salvador Facultad Multidiciplinaria de Occidente"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091552" start="9831" end="9860" title="Universidad Francisco Gavidia" label="Universidad Francisco Gavidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367016" start="9866" end="9899" title="Universidad Autónoma de Santa Ana" label="Universidad Autónoma de Santa Ana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051807" start="10565" end="10586" title="Cathedral of Santa Ana (El Salvador)" label="Catedral de Santa Ana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10618" end="10649" title="Mayorship Municipal de Santa Ana" label="Alcaldía Municipal de Santa Ana"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="10661" end="10670" title="City Hall" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10680" end="10699" title="Teatro de Santa Ana" label="Teatro de Santa Ana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10768" end="10778" title="National Advisory for the Culture and the Arts (CONCULTURA)" label="Concultura"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10786" end="10812" title="Occidental Regional Museum" label="Occidental Regional Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351667" start="10860" end="10872" title="El Museo Aja" label="El Museo Aja"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="11153" end="11160" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="11185" end="11196" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="11233" end="11246" title="Pre-Columbian era" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="11247" end="11269" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous inhabitants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="11278" end="11298" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="Spanish colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914" start="11925" end="11932" title="School" label="centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="12111" end="12117" title="museum" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351667" start="12237" end="12247" title="El Museo Aja" label="Aja Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q28564" start="12356" end="12370" title="public library" label="public library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695230" start="12401" end="12416" title="David Granadino" label="David Granadino"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="12495" end="12510" title="performing arts" label="performing arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q194428" start="12535" end="12541" title="Stage (theatre)" label="venues"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694679" start="12817" end="12840" title="Agustín García Calderón" label="Agustín García Calderón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539734" start="12940" end="12948" title="C.D. FAS" label="C.D. FAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382357" start="13035" end="13056" title="Estadio Óscar Quiteño" label="Estadio Óscar Quiteño"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="14213" end="14220" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q916536" start="14229" end="14237" title="La Ceiba" label="La Ceiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q208151" start="14250" end="14254" title="León, Nicaragua" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q330175" start="14268" end="14278" title="Piracicaba" label="Piracicaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q745168" start="14289" end="14296" title="Miramar, Florida" label="Miramar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879292" start="14314" end="14328" title="Nueva Trinidad" label="Nueva Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003551" start="14344" end="14350" title="Nejapa" label="Nejapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q937292" start="14366" end="14374" title="Acajutla" label="Acajutla"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291928" wikidata="Q2597952" url="?curid=291928" title="Operator (physics)">
<text>An operator is a function over a space of physical states onto another space of states. The simplest example of the utility of operators is the study of symmetry (which makes the concept of a group useful in this context). Because of this, they are useful tools in classical mechanics. Operators are even more important in quantum mechanics, where they form an intrinsic part of the formulation of the theory. They play a central role in describing observables (measurable quantities like energy, momentum, etc.).

==Operators in classical mechanics==

In classical mechanics, the movement of a particle (or system of particles) is completely determined by the Lagrangian formula_1 or equivalently the Hamiltonian formula_2, a function of the generalized coordinates &quot;q&quot;, generalized velocities formula_3 and its conjugate momenta:

:formula_4

If either &quot;L&quot; or &quot;H&quot; is independent of a generalized coordinate &quot;q&quot;, meaning the &quot;L&quot; and &quot;H&quot; do not change when &quot;q&quot; is changed, which in turn means the dynamics of the particle are still the same even when &quot;q&quot; changes, the corresponding momenta conjugate to those coordinates will be conserved (this is part of Noether&#x27;s theorem, and the invariance of motion with respect to the coordinate &quot;q&quot; is a symmetry). Operators in classical mechanics are related to these symmetries.

More technically, when &quot;H&quot; is invariant under the action of a certain group of transformations &quot;G&quot;:

:formula_5.

The elements of &quot;G&quot; are physical operators, which map physical states among themselves.

===Table of classical mechanics operators===
where formula_6 is the rotation matrix about an axis defined by the unit vector formula_7 and angle &quot;θ&quot;.

==Generators==
If the transformation is infinitesimal, the operator action should be of the form

: formula_8

where formula_9 is the identity operator, formula_10 is a parameter with a small value, and formula_11 will depend on the transformation at hand, and is called a generator of the group. Again, as a simple example, we will derive the generator of the space translations on 1D functions.

As it was stated, formula_12. If formula_13 is infinitesimal, then we may write

: formula_14

This formula may be rewritten as

: formula_15

where formula_16 is the generator of the translation group, which in this case happens to be the &quot;derivative&quot; operator. Thus, it is said that the generator of translations is the derivative.

==The exponential map==
The whole group may be recovered, under normal circumstances, from the generators, via the exponential map. In the case of the translations the idea works like this.

The translation for a finite value of formula_17 may be obtained by repeated application of the infinitesimal translation:

: formula_18

with the formula_19 standing for the application formula_20 times. If formula_20 is large, each of the factors may be considered to be infinitesimal:

: formula_22

But this limit may be rewritten as an exponential:

: formula_23

To be convinced of the validity of this formal expression, we may expand the exponential in a power series:

: formula_24

The right-hand side may be rewritten as

: formula_25

which is just the Taylor expansion of formula_26, which was our original value for formula_27.

The mathematical properties of physical operators are a topic of great importance in itself. For further information, see C*-algebra and Gelfand–Naimark theorem.

==Operators in quantum mechanics==

The mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics (QM) is built upon the concept of an operator.

Physical pure states in quantum mechanics are represented as unit-norm vectors (probabilities are normalized to one) in a special complex Hilbert space. Time evolution in this vector space is given by the application of the evolution operator.

Any observable, i.e., any quantity which can be measured in a physical experiment, should be associated with a self-adjoint linear operator. The operators must yield real eigenvalues, since they are values which may come up as the result of the experiment. Mathematically this means the operators must be Hermitian. The probability of each eigenvalue is related to the projection of the physical state on the subspace related to that eigenvalue. See below for mathematical details about Hermitian operators.

In the wave mechanics formulation of QM, the wavefunction varies with space and time, or equivalently momentum and time (see position and momentum space for details), so observables are differential operators.

In the matrix mechanics formulation, the norm of the physical state should stay fixed, so the evolution operator should be unitary, and the operators can be represented as matrices. Any other symmetry, mapping a physical state into another, should keep this restriction.

===Wavefunction ===

The wavefunction must be square-integrable (see &quot;Lp&quot; spaces), meaning:

:formula_28

and normalizable, so that:

:formula_29

Two cases of eigenstates (and eigenvalues) are:
* for discrete eigenstates formula_30 forming a discrete basis, so any state is a sum formula_31 where &quot;ci&quot; are complex numbers such that |&quot;ci&quot;|2 = &quot;ci&quot;*&quot;ci&quot; is the probability of measuring the state formula_32, and the corresponding set of eigenvalues &quot;ai&quot; is also discrete - either finite or countably infinite. In this case, the inner product of two eigenstates is given by formula_33, where formula_34 denotes the Kronecker Delta. However, 
* for a continuum of eigenstates formula_30 forming a continuous basis, any state is an integral formula_36 where &quot;c&quot;(&quot;φ&quot;) is a complex function such that |&quot;c&quot;(φ)|2 = &quot;c&quot;(φ)*&quot;c&quot;(φ) is the probability of measuring the state formula_37, and there is an uncountably infinite set of eigenvalues &quot;a&quot;. In this case, the inner product of two eigenstates is defined as formula_38, where here formula_39 denotes the Dirac Delta.

===Linear operators in wave mechanics===

Let be the wavefunction for a quantum system, and formula_40 be any linear operator for some observable (such as position, momentum, energy, angular momentum etc.). If is an eigenfunction of the operator formula_40, then

:formula_42

where is the eigenvalue of the operator, corresponding to the measured value of the observable, i.e. observable has a measured value .

If is an eigenfunction of a given operator formula_40, then a definite quantity (the eigenvalue ) will be observed if a measurement of the observable is made on the state . Conversely, if is not an eigenfunction of formula_40, then it has no eigenvalue for formula_40, and the observable does not have a single definite value in that case. Instead, measurements of the observable will yield each eigenvalue with a certain probability (related to the decomposition of relative to the orthonormal eigenbasis of formula_40).

In bra–ket notation the above can be written;

:formula_47

that are equal if formula_48 is an eigenvector, or eigenket of the observable .

Due to linearity, vectors can be defined in any number of dimensions, as each component of the vector acts on the function separately. One mathematical example is the del operator, which is itself a vector (useful in momentum-related quantum operators, in the table below).

An operator in &quot;n&quot;-dimensional space can be written:

:formula_49

where e&quot;j&quot; are basis vectors corresponding to each component operator &quot;Aj&quot;. Each component will yield a corresponding eigenvalue formula_50. Acting this on the wave function :

:formula_51

in which we have used formula_52

In bra–ket notation:

:formula_53

===Commutation of operators on &quot;Ψ&quot;===

If two observables &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; have linear operators formula_54 and formula_55, the commutator is defined by,

:formula_56

The commutator is itself a (composite) operator. Acting the commutator on &quot;ψ&quot; gives:

:formula_57

If &quot;ψ&quot; is an eigenfunction with eigenvalues &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; for observables &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; respectively, and if the operators commute:

:formula_58

then the observables &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; can be measured simultaneously with infinite precision, i.e., uncertainties formula_59, formula_60 simultaneously. &quot;ψ&quot; is then said to be the simultaneous eigenfunction of A and B. To illustrate this:

:formula_61

It shows that measurement of A and B does not cause any shift of state, i.e., initial and final states are same (no disturbance due to measurement). Suppose we measure A to get value a. We then measure B to get the value b. We measure A again. We still get the same value a. Clearly the state (&quot;ψ&quot;) of the system is not destroyed and so we are able to measure A and B simultaneously with infinite precision.

If the operators do not commute:

:formula_62

they cannot be prepared simultaneously to arbitrary precision, and there is an uncertainty relation between the observables

:formula_63 
even if &quot;ψ&quot; is an eigenfunction the above relation holds. Notable pairs are position-and-momentum and energy-and-time uncertainty relations, and the angular momenta (spin, orbital and total) about any two orthogonal axes (such as &quot;Lx&quot; and &quot;Ly&quot;, or &quot;sy&quot; and &quot;sz&quot;, etc.).

===Expectation values of operators on &quot;Ψ&quot;===

The expectation value (equivalently the average or mean value) is the average measurement of an observable, for particle in region &quot;R&quot;. The expectation value formula_64 of the operator formula_54 is calculated from:

:formula_66

This can be generalized to any function &quot;F&quot; of an operator:

:formula_67

An example of &quot;F&quot; is the 2-fold action of &quot;A&quot; on &quot;ψ&quot;, i.e. squaring an operator or doing it twice:

:formula_68

===Hermitian operators===

The definition of a Hermitian operator is:

:formula_69

Following from this, in bra–ket notation:

:formula_70

Important properties of Hermitian operators include:
* real eigenvalues,
* eigenvectors with different eigenvalues are orthogonal,
* eigenvectors can be chosen to be a complete orthonormal basis,

===Operators in matrix mechanics ===

An operator can be written in matrix form to map one basis vector to another. Since the operators are linear, the matrix is a linear transformation (aka transition matrix) between bases. Each basis element formula_71 can be connected to another, by the expression:

:formula_72

which is a matrix element:

:formula_73

A further property of a Hermitian operator is that eigenfunctions corresponding to different eigenvalues are orthogonal. In matrix form, operators allow real eigenvalues to be found, corresponding to measurements. Orthogonality allows a suitable basis set of vectors to represent the state of the quantum system. The eigenvalues of the operator are also evaluated in the same way as for the square matrix, by solving the characteristic polynomial:

:formula_74

where &quot;I&quot; is the &quot;n&quot; × &quot;n&quot; identity matrix, as an operator it corresponds to the identity operator. For a discrete basis:

:formula_75

while for a continuous basis:

:formula_76

=== Inverse of an operator ===

A non-singular operator formula_40 has an inverse formula_78 defined by:

:formula_79

If an operator has no inverse, it is a singular operator. In a finite-dimensional space, an operator is non-singular if and only if its determinant is nonzero:

:formula_80

and hence the determinant is zero for a singular operator.

===Table of Quantum Mechanics operators ===

The operators used in quantum mechanics are collected in the table below (see for example). The bold-face vectors with circumflexes are not unit vectors, they are 3-vector operators; all three spatial components taken together.

===Examples of applying quantum operators===

The procedure for extracting information from a wave function is as follows. Consider the momentum &quot;p&quot; of a particle as an example. The momentum operator in position basis in one dimension is:

:formula_81

Letting this act on &quot;ψ&quot; we obtain:

:formula_82

if &quot;ψ&quot; is an eigenfunction of formula_83, then the momentum eigenvalue &quot;p&quot; is the value of the particle&#x27;s momentum, found by:

:formula_84

For three dimensions the momentum operator uses the nabla operator to become:

:formula_85

In Cartesian coordinates (using the standard Cartesian basis vectors ex, ey, ez) this can be written;

:formula_86

that is:

:formula_87

The process of finding eigenvalues is the same. Since this is a vector and operator equation, if &quot;ψ&quot; is an eigenfunction, then each component of the momentum operator will have an eigenvalue corresponding to that component of momentum. Acting formula_88 on &quot;ψ&quot; obtains:

:formula_89

==See also==

* Bounded linear operator
* Representation theory
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2597952" start="3" end="11" title="Operator (physics)" label="operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="17" end="25" title="Function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261680" start="33" end="38" title="State space (physics)" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q229102" start="58" end="62" title="onto (mathematics)" label="onto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455736" start="153" end="161" title="Symmetry in physics" label="symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="192" end="197" title="Group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="265" end="284" title="classical mechanics" label="classical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="323" end="340" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q324669" start="661" end="671" title="Lagrangian mechanics" label="Lagrangian"/>
<link wikidata="Q477921" start="702" end="713" title="Hamiltonian mechanics" label="Hamiltonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057607" start="743" end="766" title="generalized coordinates" label="generalized coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501876" start="823" end="840" title="conjugate momenta" label="conjugate momenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q578555" start="1236" end="1258" title="Noether&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Noether&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455736" start="1339" end="1347" title="symmetry (physics)" label="symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="1497" end="1502" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256564" start="1718" end="1733" title="rotation matrix" label="rotation matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q36255" start="1763" end="1774" title="unit vector" label="unit vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q193885" start="1851" end="1864" title="infinitesimal" label="infinitesimal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2084" end="2106" title="Generator (mathematics)#Differential equations" label="generator of the group"/>
<link wikidata="Q19810382" start="2669" end="2684" title="exponential map (Lie theory)" label="exponential map"/>
<link wikidata="Q206925" start="3208" end="3220" title="power series" label="power series"/>
<link wikidata="Q263809" start="3510" end="3520" title="C*-algebra" label="C*-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226682" start="3525" end="3548" title="Gelfand–Naimark theorem" label="Gelfand–Naimark theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q606855" start="3591" end="3636" title="mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics" label="mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q230883" start="3694" end="3704" title="pure state" label="pure state"/>
<link wikidata="Q36255" start="3746" end="3762" title="unit-norm vector" label="unit-norm vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="3815" end="3822" title="complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="3823" end="3836" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156744" start="3838" end="3852" title="Time evolution" label="Time evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="3861" end="3873" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156744" start="3909" end="3927" title="evolution operator" label="evolution operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q845789" start="3934" end="3944" title="observable" label="observable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448009" start="4041" end="4053" title="self-adjoint" label="self-adjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="4054" end="4069" title="linear operator" label="linear operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="4101" end="4111" title="eigenvalue" label="eigenvalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q652941" start="4235" end="4244" title="Hermitian matrix" label="Hermitian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4446" end="4460" title="Schrödinger equation#Particles as waves" label="wave mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225362" start="4564" end="4591" title="position and momentum space" label="position and momentum space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058681" start="4625" end="4646" title="differential operator" label="differential operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q603198" start="4657" end="4673" title="matrix mechanics" label="matrix mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q956437" start="4691" end="4695" title="Norm (mathematics)" label="norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495534" start="4773" end="4780" title="unitary transformation" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530791" start="4968" end="4985" title="square-integrable" label="square-integrable"/>
<link wikidata="Q305936" start="4991" end="5012" title="Lp space" label="&amp;quot;Lp&amp;quot; spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q218005" start="5209" end="5212" title="summation" label="sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="5461" end="5467" title="Finite set" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="5471" end="5489" title="countably infinite" label="countably infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q192826" start="5595" end="5610" title="Kronecker delta" label="Kronecker Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="5710" end="5718" title="integral" label="integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128796" start="5923" end="5943" title="uncountably infinite" label="uncountably infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q209675" start="6089" end="6100" title="Dirac delta" label="Dirac Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="6213" end="6228" title="linear operator" label="linear operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="6393" end="6403" title="Eigenvalues and eigenvectors" label="eigenvalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="7134" end="7145" title="eigenvector" label="eigenvector"/>
<link wikidata="Q59090" start="7150" end="7158" title="eigenket" label="eigenket"/>
<link wikidata="Q334508" start="7347" end="7359" title="del operator" label="del operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="9128" end="9148" title="uncertainty relation" label="uncertainty relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918589" start="9568" end="9585" title="Expectation value (quantum mechanics)" label="expectation value"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500908" start="10078" end="10096" title="Hermitian operator" label="Hermitian operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q215067" start="10290" end="10300" title="orthogonal" label="orthogonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365325" start="10348" end="10365" title="orthonormal basis" label="orthonormal basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="10532" end="10553" title="linear transformation" label="linear transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q849705" start="11147" end="11172" title="characteristic polynomial" label="characteristic polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q193794" start="11245" end="11260" title="identity matrix" label="identity matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q36255" start="11936" end="11947" title="unit vector" label="unit vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q937750" start="12564" end="12569" title="nabla symbol" label="nabla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342396" start="13063" end="13086" title="Bounded linear operator" label="Bounded linear operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220368" start="13089" end="13110" title="Representation theory" label="Representation theory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291929" wikidata="Q470596" url="?curid=291929" title="Year of the Four Emperors">
<text>The Year of the Four Emperors, AD 69, was the first civil war of the Roman Empire, during which four emperors ruled in succession: Galba, Otho, Vitellius, and Vespasian. It is considered an important interval, marking the transition from the Julio-Claudians, the first imperial dynasty, to the Flavian dynasty. The period witnessed several rebellions and claimants, with shifting allegiances and widespread turmoil in Rome and the provinces.

In 68, Vindex, legate of Gallia Lugdunensis, revolted against Nero and encouraged Galba, governor of Hispania, to claim the Empire. The latter was proclaimed emperor by his legion in early April. He was notably supported by Otho, legate of Lusitania. Soon after, the legate of a legion in Africa, Clodius Macer, also rebelled against Nero. Vindex was defeated by the Rhine legions at the Battle of Vesontio, but they too rebelled against Nero. Finally, on 9 June 68, Nero took his own life after being declared a public enemy by the Senate, which made Galba the new emperor. However, Galba was unable to establish his authority over the Empire, as several of his supporters were disappointed by his lack of gratitude. He especially adopted Piso Licinianus as heir (Galba was childless and elderly), instead of Otho, who, it had widely been assumed, would be chosen. Angered by this disgrace, Otho murdered Galba on 15 January with the help of the Praetorian Guard, and became emperor instead. Unlike Galba, he rapidly earned considerable popularity, notably by bestowing favours and emulating Nero&#x27;s successful early years. 

Otho still had to face another claimant, Vitellius, who had been acclaimed by the legions of the Rhine on 1 January 69. Vitellius won the First Battle of Bedriacum on 14 April, defeating the emperor. Otho took his own life the next day, and Vitellius was appointed emperor by the Senate on 19 April. The new emperor had little support outside of his veterans from the German legions, though. When Vespasian, legate of Syria, made his bid known, he received the allegiance of the legions of the Danube as well as many former supporters of Galba and Otho. After his acclamation in Alexandria on 1 July, Vespasian sent his friend Mucianus with a part of his army to fight Vitellius, but the Danubian legions commanded by Antonius Primus had not waited for Mucianus and defeated Vitellius&#x27; legions at the Second Battle of Bedriacum on 24 October. Vitellius was subsequently killed by a mob on 20 December. Mucianus arrived several days after and swiftly secured Vespasian&#x27;s position in Rome (Primus had acted independently from him).

The death of Vitellius did not end the civil war, as the Rhine legions still rejected the rule of Vespasian and the new Flavian dynasty. Some Batavi provincials led by Civilis had fought them since Vitellius&#x27; acclamation. In 70, the new regime finally won the legions&#x27; surrender after negotiations, mainly because they lacked an alternative to Vespasian. Later, the new regime distorted the events—especially through the writings of the historian Tacitus—in order to remove the embarrassment of having relied on the Batavi to fight Roman legions. The Batavi were therefore said to have revolted against Rome, and the events dubbed the Revolt of the Batavi.

==History==
===Vindex&#x27;s revolt and fall of Nero (March–June 68)===
The end of Nero&#x27;s reign (54–68) was marked by political trials and plots, such as the Pisonian conspiracy in 65, showing the disenchantment of the senatorial elite towards the Emperor. In the winter of 67–68, Gaius Julius Vindex, the legate of Gallia Lugdunensis, looked for support among other governors and administrators in order to start a revolt against Nero. Aware of his relatively humble origins, Vindex did not covet the Empire for himself, nor did he name a candidate, probably to maximise his chances of finding someone interested. Plutarch tells that the people reached by Vindex forwarded his letters to Nero, except one: his southern neighbour Servius Sulpicius Galba, the governor of Hispania Tarraconensis, the largest Spanish province. In mid-March 68, Vindex proceeded with his plan and raised an army composed of Gallic tribesmen, which nevertheless cut short his attempts to win over the officers of the seven legions posted on the Rhine, whose soldiers would not accept fighting alongside Gauls. As a result, Vindex turned towards Galba, the only man who had not denounced him to Nero.

In early April 68, Galba accepted Vindex&#x27;s proposition and was acclaimed emperor in Carthago Nova (now Cartagena, Spain). He rapidly received support from officials of Baetica and Lusitania, the other two Iberian provinces, who provided him with the money to raise the VII Galbiana, a second legion, in addition to the VI Victrix based in Galba&#x27;s province.

Meanwhile, Vindex had to besiege his own former capital, Lugdunum, as its citizens were particularly devoted to Nero, which led Lucius Verginius Rufus, the governor of Germania Superior, to march on Vindex. He besieged Vesontio, capital of the Sequani, a tribe that supported Vindex, who therefore had to leave the siege of Lugdunum to come to their aid. Before Vesontio, Verginius and Vindex had a talk, during which they agreed to unite their forces against Nero. However, Verginius&#x27; legions ignored the agreement and charged the unprepared troops of Vindex, of whom up to 20,000 died, while Vindex committed suicide. Soon after, the Rhine legions proclaimed Verginius emperor, but he refused to accept. The soldiers were motivated by their hatred of Galba, as they had not forgotten his term as governor of Germania Superior in 39–41, during which he harshly repressed the legions that had supported the rebellion of Lentulus Gaetilicus in 39.

In Rome, Nero was unable to organise resistance to Galba&#x27;s claim and was even thinking about fleeing to Egypt. The decisive move came from Nymphidius Sabinus, deputy prefect of the Praetorian Guard, who convinced his men to abandon Nero, by promising that Galba would give each of them 30,000 sesterces (equivalent to 10 years of wages), while he expected to be rewarded by the new emperor. On 9 June 68, the Senate declared Nero enemy of the state and proclaimed Galba emperor, which prompted Nero&#x27;s suicide.

===Galba===

Galba was still in Spain when he received the news he had become emperor. He took at least a month to secure the Spanish provinces before leaving. He appointed Cluvius Rufus as his replacement in his own province, but also murdered several of his opponents there, including Obultronius Sabinus, the probable governor of Baetica. Escorted by the VII Galbiana, he left for Rome along the coastline, stopping at Narbo Martius. In Gaul, Galba executed Betuus Cilo, who as governor of Aquitania had fought Vindex. He also relieved Verginius Rufus from his post in Germania Superior because his acclamation by the legions could make him a dangerous rival. Meanwhile, in Rome, Nymphidius Sabinus realised that Galba had no intention of rewarding him with the post of praetorian prefect he coveted. He then pretended to be an illegitimate son of Caligula and started to conspire against Galba to make himself emperor. However, he was murdered by the Praetorian Guards when he tried to read before them a speech announcing his bid for the Empire.

During the first half of October, Galba finally completed his journey to Rome, which was described by Tacitus as &quot;a long and bloody march&quot;, because of the officials he had murdered on his way and also for the massacre he committed on the Milvian Bridge, just before the city. In order to fight Galba, Nero had created the legion I Adiutrix from sailors of the Roman navy; when Galba arrived at Rome, the new legionaries pressed Galba to confirm their status, but he ordered his troops to charge them, killing thousands. He then accepted their request, but after they submitted to a decimation, a practice not used since Tiberius, which severely lowered the troops&#x27; morale. Galba also refused to pay the Praetorians the money promised by Nymphidius for overthrowing Nero.

Galba continued the practice set by Nero of appointing ineffectual men to the most important posts in the provinces: for example, he sent the old and disabled Hordeonius Flaccus to Germania Superior and Aulus Vitellius to Germania Inferior; the latter being mostly known at the time as a penniless glutton. In Rome, Galba considered with contempt anybody who had served under Nero. He only trusted three men who had been with him in Spain: Titus Vinius, Cornelius Laco, and Icelus, who had amassed money as Nero&#x27;s protegés had, which likewise triggered popular resentment against the new emperor. Galba even turned against his first supporters, among them Aulus Caecina Alienus, former quaestor of Baetica, who had sent the money in his possession when Galba rebelled. The emperor had given him command of IV Macedonica in Germania Superior but recalled him for embezzlement soon after.
Moreover, at the beginning of the civil year of 69 on 1 January, the legions of Germania Inferior refused to swear allegiance and obedience to Galba. On the following day, the legions acclaimed their governor Vitellius as emperor. Hearing the news of the loss of the Rhine legions, Galba panicked. He adopted a young senator, Lucius Calpurnius Piso Licinianus, as his successor. By doing so he offended many, above all Marcus Salvius Otho, an influential and ambitious nobleman who desired the honour for himself. Otho bribed the Praetorian Guard, already very unhappy with the emperor. When Galba heard about the coup d&#x27;état, he went to the streets in an attempt to stabilize the situation. It proved a mistake because he could not attract any supporters. Shortly afterwards the Praetorian Guard killed him in the Forum, along with Lucius and impaled their heads on poles.

===Otho===

On the day of Galba&#x27;s murder, the Senate recognized Otho as emperor. They saluted the new emperor with relief. Although ambitious and greedy, Otho did not have a record of tyranny or cruelty and was expected to be a fair emperor. However, Otho&#x27;s initial efforts to restore peace and stability were soon checked by the revelation that Vitellius had declared himself Imperator in Germania and had dispatched half of his army to march on Italy.

Backing Vitellius were the finest legions of the Empire, composed of veterans of the Germanic Wars, such as I &quot;Germanica&quot; and XXI &quot;Rapax&quot;. These would prove to be the best arguments for his bid for power. Otho was not keen to begin another civil war and sent emissaries to propose a peace and convey his offer to marry Vitellius&#x27;s daughter. It was too late to reason; Vitellius&#x27;s generals were leading half of his army toward Italy. After a series of minor victories, Otho suffered defeat in the First Battle of Bedriacum. Rather than flee and attempt a counter-attack, Otho decided to put an end to the anarchy and committed suicide. He had been emperor for a little more than three months.

===Vitellius===
On the news of Otho&#x27;s suicide, the Senate recognized Vitellius as emperor. With this recognition, Vitellius set out for Rome; however, he faced problems from the start of his reign. The city remained very sceptical when Vitellius chose the anniversary of the Battle of the Allia (in 390 BC), a day of bad auspices according to Roman superstition, to accede to the office of &quot;Pontifex Maximus&quot;.

Events seemed to prove the omens right. With the throne tightly secured, Vitellius engaged in a series of banquets (Suetonius refers to three a day: morning, afternoon, and night) and triumphal parades that drove the imperial treasury close to bankruptcy. Debts quickly accrued, and moneylenders started to demand repayment. Vitellius showed his violent nature by ordering the torture and execution of those who dared to make such demands. With financial affairs in a state of calamity, Vitellius took to killing citizens who had named him as their heir, often together with any co-heirs. Moreover, he sought to rid himself of every possible rival, inviting them to the palace with promises of power, only to order their hasty assassination.

===Vespasian===

Meanwhile, the legions stationed in the African province of Egypt and the Middle Eastern provinces of Iudaea (Judea) and Syria acclaimed Vespasian as emperor. Vespasian had received a special command in Judaea from Nero in AD 67, with the task of putting down the First Jewish–Roman War. He gained the support of the governor of Syria, Gaius Licinius Mucianus. A strong force drawn from the Judaean and Syrian legions marched on Rome under the command of Mucianus. Vespasian himself travelled to Alexandria, where he was acclaimed emperor on 1 July, thereby gaining control of the vital grain supplies from Egypt. His son Titus remained in Judaea to deal with the Jewish rebellion. Before the eastern legions could reach Rome, the Danubian legions of the provinces of Raetia and Moesia also acclaimed Vespasian as emperor in August, and, led by Marcus Antonius Primus, invaded Italy. In October, the forces led by Primus won a crushing victory over Vitellius&#x27;s army at the Second Battle of Bedriacum.

Surrounded by enemies, Vitellius made a last attempt to win the city to his side, distributing bribes and promises of power where needed. He tried to levy several allied tribes, such as the Batavians, by force, but they refused. The Danube army was now very near Rome. Realizing the immediate threat, Vitellius made a last attempt to gain time by sending emissaries, accompanied by Vestal Virgins, to negotiate a truce and start peace talks. The following day, messengers arrived with news that the enemy was at the gates of the city. Vitellius went into hiding and prepared to flee, but decided on one last visit to the palace, where Vespasian&#x27;s men caught and killed him. In seizing the capital, they burned down the temple of Jupiter.

The Senate acknowledged Vespasian as emperor the following day, 21 December 69.

Vespasian faced no direct threat to his imperial power after the death of Vitellius. He became the founder of the stable Flavian dynasty, which succeeded the Julio-Claudians. He died of natural causes in 79. The Flavians, each in turn, ruled from AD 69 to AD 96.

==Chronology==

===68===
* April – Galba, governor of Hispania Tarraconensis, and Vindex, governor of Gallia Lugdunensis rebel against Nero
* May – The Rhine legions defeat and kill Vindex in Gaul
* June – Nero is declared a public enemy (&quot;hostis&quot;) by the Senate (8 June) and commits suicide (9 June); Galba is recognised emperor
* November – Vitellius nominated governor of Germania Inferior

===69===
* 1 January  – The Rhine legions refuse to swear loyalty to Galba
* 2 January  – Vitellius acclaimed emperor by the Rhine
* 15 January  – Galba killed by the Praetorian Guard; in the same day, the Senate recognizes Otho as emperor
* 14 April  – Vitellius defeats Otho
* 16 April  – Otho commits suicide; Vitellius recognised emperor
* 1 July  – Vespasian, commander of the Roman army in Judaea, proclaimed emperor by the legions of Egypt under Tiberius Julius Alexander
* August – The Danubian legions announce support to Vespasian (in Syria) and invade Italy in September on his behalf
* October – The Danubian army defeats Vitellius and Vespasian occupies Egypt
* 20 December  – Vitellius killed by soldiers in the Imperial Palace
* 21 December  – Vespasian recognized emperor

== Sources ==
The most detailed historical sources about the events of 69 AD are:
* The &quot;Annals&quot; and the &quot;Histories&quot; of Tacitus;
* &quot;The Twelve Caesars&quot; of Suetonius;
* The &quot;Roman History&quot; of Cassius Dio;
* The &quot;Life of Galba&quot;, the &quot;Life of Otho&quot; and fragments of the &quot;Life of Nero&quot; by Plutarch;

Other sources on the Year of the Four Emperors are &quot;The Jewish War&quot; and the &quot;Antiquities of the Jews&quot; of Josephus; while mainly focusing on the events of Palestine, these works also mention the revolts in Rome.

==See also==

* Tacitus, &quot;Histories&quot;
* Year of the Five Emperors (AD 193)
* Year of the Six Emperors (AD 238)

==References==
== Bibliography ==

=== Ancient sources ===
* Plutarch, &quot;Life of Galba&quot;.
* Plutarch, &quot;Life of Otho.&quot;
* Suetonius, &quot;Life of Galba.&quot;
* Suetonius, &quot;Life of Otho.&quot;
* Suetonius, &quot;Life of Vitellius.&quot;
* Suetonius, &quot;Life of Vespasian.&quot;

=== Modern sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Five maps covering the Year of Four Emperors at Omniatlas.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q470596" start="4" end="29" title="Year of the Four Emperors" label="Year of the Four Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q30203" start="31" end="36" title="AD 69" label="AD 69"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="69" end="81" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414" start="131" end="136" title="Galba" label="Galba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416" start="138" end="142" title="Otho" label="Otho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417" start="144" end="153" title="Vitellius" label="Vitellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="159" end="168" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="242" end="257" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudians"/>
<link wikidata="Q200565" start="294" end="309" title="Flavian dynasty" label="Flavian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="431" end="440" title="Roman province" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q333826" start="450" end="456" title="Gaius Julius Vindex" label="Vindex"/>
<link wikidata="Q212624" start="458" end="464" title="Legatus" label="legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10971" start="468" end="486" title="Gallia Lugdunensis" label="Gallia Lugdunensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="505" end="509" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="544" end="552" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q188650" start="683" end="692" title="Lusitania" label="Lusitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434231" start="722" end="728" title="Legio III Augusta" label="legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q550616" start="740" end="753" title="Lucius Clodius Macer" label="Clodius Macer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237125" start="831" end="849" title="Battle of Vesontio (68)" label="Battle of Vesontio"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="976" end="982" title="Roman Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q882953" start="1183" end="1198" title="Lucius Calpurnius Piso Frugi Licinianus" label="Piso Licinianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="1390" end="1406" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1712" end="1737" title="Battle of Bedriacum#First Battle of Bedriacum" label="First Battle of Bedriacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="1992" end="1997" title="Roman Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q521520" start="2201" end="2209" title="Gaius Licinius Mucianus" label="Mucianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q712981" start="2292" end="2307" title="Marcus Antonius Primus" label="Antonius Primus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2380" end="2406" title="Battle of Bedriacum#Second Battle of Bedriacum" label="Second Battle of Bedriacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200565" start="2735" end="2750" title="Flavian dynasty" label="Flavian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q176825" start="2757" end="2763" title="Batavi (Germanic tribe)" label="Batavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q433458" start="2783" end="2790" title="Gaius Julius Civilis" label="Civilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="3072" end="3079" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q576364" start="3260" end="3280" title="Revolt of the Batavi" label="Revolt of the Batavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="3366" end="3370" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268528" start="3446" end="3465" title="Pisonian conspiracy" label="Pisonian conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q333826" start="3569" end="3588" title="Gaius Julius Vindex" label="Gaius Julius Vindex"/>
<link wikidata="Q10971" start="3604" end="3622" title="Gallia Lugdunensis" label="Gallia Lugdunensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="3903" end="3911" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414" start="4018" end="4041" title="Galba" label="Servius Sulpicius Galba"/>
<link wikidata="Q216791" start="4059" end="4081" title="Hispania Tarraconensis" label="Hispania Tarraconensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q162615" start="4576" end="4592" title="Cartagena, Spain" label="Cartagena, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q219415" start="4641" end="4648" title="Hispania Baetica" label="Baetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q188650" start="4653" end="4662" title="Lusitania" label="Lusitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234638" start="4742" end="4754" title="Legio VII Gemina" label="VII Galbiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434251" start="4792" end="4802" title="Legio VI Victrix" label="VI Victrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q665" start="4893" end="4901" title="Lugdunum" label="Lugdunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q704842" start="4964" end="4986" title="Lucius Verginius Rufus" label="Lucius Verginius Rufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q153553" start="5004" end="5021" title="Germania Superior" label="Germania Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q37776" start="5055" end="5063" title="Besançon" label="Vesontio"/>
<link wikidata="Q852935" start="5080" end="5087" title="Sequani" label="Sequani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236001" start="5761" end="5780" title="Gnaeus Cornelius Lentulus Gaetulicus (consul 26)" label="Lentulus Gaetilicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="5898" end="5903" title="Roman Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q734088" start="5933" end="5951" title="Nymphidius Sabinus" label="Nymphidius Sabinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="5975" end="5991" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q208041" start="6087" end="6096" title="Sestertius" label="sesterces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414" start="6323" end="6328" title="Galba" label="Galba"/>
<link wikidata="Q74243" start="6483" end="6496" title="Marcus Cluvius Rufus" label="Cluvius Rufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11939218" start="6597" end="6616" title="Obultronius Sabinus" label="Obultronius Sabinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555" start="6732" end="6745" title="Narbonne" label="Narbo Martius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="7161" end="7169" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127325" start="7610" end="7624" title="Ponte Milvio" label="Milvian Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q608574" start="7701" end="7711" title="Legio I Adiutrix" label="I Adiutrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q465119" start="7954" end="7964" title="Decimation (punishment)" label="decimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="7992" end="8000" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q205636" start="8308" end="8326" title="Hordeonius Flaccus" label="Hordeonius Flaccus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417" start="8352" end="8367" title="Vitellius" label="Aulus Vitellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236415" start="8589" end="8601" title="Titus Vinius" label="Titus Vinius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133873" start="8603" end="8617" title="Cornelius Laco" label="Cornelius Laco"/>
<link wikidata="Q11926389" start="8623" end="8629" title="Icelus Martianus" label="Icelus"/>
<link wikidata="Q432569" start="8810" end="8831" title="Aulus Caecina Alienus" label="Aulus Caecina Alienus"/>
<link wikidata="Q167440" start="8960" end="8973" title="Legio IV Macedonica" label="IV Macedonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q882953" start="9367" end="9400" title="Lucius Calpurnius Piso Licinianus" label="Lucius Calpurnius Piso Licinianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416" start="9460" end="9479" title="Otho" label="Marcus Salvius Otho"/>
<link wikidata="Q180212" start="9861" end="9866" title="Roman Forum" label="Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516956" start="10471" end="10484" title="Germanic Wars" label="Germanic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q917212" start="10494" end="10517" title="Legio I Germanica" label="I &amp;quot;Germanica&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q266367" start="10522" end="10543" title="Legio XXI Rapax" label="XXI &amp;quot;Rapax&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10912" end="10937" title="Battle of Bedriacum#First Battle of Bedriacum" label="First Battle of Bedriacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q655777" start="11389" end="11408" title="Battle of the Allia" label="Battle of the Allia"/>
<link wikidata="Q779777" start="11435" end="11442" title="auspice" label="auspice"/>
<link wikidata="Q212943" start="11510" end="11526" title="Pontifex Maximus" label="Pontifex Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229963" start="11651" end="11660" title="Lives of the Twelve Caesars" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="12355" end="12360" title="Egypt (Roman province)" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="12397" end="12411" title="Iudaea Province" label="Iudaea (Judea)"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="12416" end="12421" title="Syria (Roman province)" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="12432" end="12441" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q202578" start="12559" end="12581" title="First Jewish–Roman War" label="First Jewish–Roman War"/>
<link wikidata="Q521520" start="12631" end="12654" title="Gaius Licinius Mucianus" label="Gaius Licinius Mucianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="12791" end="12801" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q495053" start="12882" end="12896" title="Rome&amp;#x27;s grain supply" label="grain supplies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421" start="12917" end="12922" title="Titus" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156789" start="13063" end="13069" title="Raetia" label="Raetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q199499" start="13074" end="13080" title="Moesia" label="Moesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q712981" start="13140" end="13162" title="Marcus Antonius Primus" label="Marcus Antonius Primus"/>
<link wikidata="Q63146684" start="13280" end="13299" title="Battle of Bedriacum" label="Battle of Bedriacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q188761" start="13684" end="13697" title="Vestal Virgin" label="Vestal Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q586468" start="14026" end="14043" title="Temple of Jupiter (Capitoline Hill)" label="temple of Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q200565" start="14248" end="14263" title="Flavian dynasty" label="Flavian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="14285" end="14300" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414" start="14426" end="14431" title="Galba" label="Galba"/>
<link wikidata="Q216791" start="14445" end="14467" title="Hispania Tarraconensis" label="Hispania Tarraconensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q333826" start="14473" end="14479" title="Vindex" label="Vindex"/>
<link wikidata="Q10971" start="14493" end="14511" title="Gallia Lugdunensis" label="Gallia Lugdunensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="14526" end="14530" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417" start="14744" end="14753" title="Vitellius" label="Vitellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018001" start="14764" end="14775" title="Roman governors of Germania Inferior" label="governor of"/>
<link wikidata="Q152136" start="14776" end="14793" title="Germania Inferior" label="Germania Inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="14962" end="14978" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416" start="15019" end="15023" title="Otho" label="Otho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="15149" end="15158" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="15191" end="15197" title="Iudaea Province" label="Judaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="15236" end="15241" title="Aegyptus (Roman province)" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q361357" start="15248" end="15273" title="Tiberius Julius Alexander" label="Tiberius Julius Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="15340" end="15345" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q564358" start="15678" end="15684" title="Annals (Tacitus)" label="Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247073" start="15705" end="15714" title="Histories (Tacitus)" label="Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="15724" end="15731" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229963" start="15741" end="15759" title="The Twelve Caesars" label="The Twelve Caesars"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="15769" end="15778" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="15815" end="15826" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="15939" end="15947" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q44276" start="16007" end="16021" title="The Jewish War" label="The Jewish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232616" start="16042" end="16065" title="Antiquities of the Jews" label="Antiquities of the Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="16075" end="16083" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="16198" end="16205" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247073" start="16213" end="16222" title="Histories (Tacitus)" label="Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q243721" start="16231" end="16256" title="Year of the Five Emperors" label="Year of the Five Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q887817" start="16268" end="16292" title="Year of the Six Emperors" label="Year of the Six Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="16364" end="16372" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="16441" end="16450" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291934" wikidata="Q4300739" url="?curid=291934" title="USS Shaw (DD-68)">
<text>USS &quot;Shaw&quot; (DD-68) was a in the United States Navy during World War I. She was later transferred to the United States Coast Guard as CG-22.

==Construction and commissioning==
&quot;Shaw&quot; was laid down on 7 February 1916 by the Mare Island Navy Yard, launched on 9 December 1916, sponsored by Mrs. Virginia Kemper Lynch Millard, and commissioned on 9 April 1917.

==Service history==
===World War I===
&quot;Shaw&quot; sailed from Mare Island on 25 May 1917 and arrived at New York on 10 June 1917 ready for distant service. She sailed a week later as one of the escort of Group 4 of the Expeditionary Force from the United States to France. On 26 June, she fueled at sea from a tanker, and the convoy arrived at Quiberon Bay, France, on 1 July. On the 4th, she sailed from St. Nazaire and arrived at Cobh, Ireland, the next day. On 10 July, she began patrol and convoy escort duty based on Cobh, convoying eastbound and westbound ships through the submarine danger zone around Great Britain and Ireland, for the most part without incident. On 1 July 1918, she received an SOS from the torpedoed American transport, , and rushed to her aid. On arrival, she found that &quot;Covington&quot;″s survivors had been removed and the ship had been taken under tow. But, the crippled transport sank later in the day. On 25 September, a ship in &quot;Shaw&quot;″s convoy was attacked by a submarine but not damaged.

On 9 October 1918, while escorting , &quot;Shaw&quot;&#x27;s rudder jammed just as she was completing the right leg of a zigzag, leaving her headed directly towards the transport. A moment later, &quot;Aquitania&quot; struck &quot;Shaw&quot;, cutting off of the destroyer&#x27;s bow, mangling her bridge and setting her on fire. &quot;Shaw&quot;″s crew brought her damage under control, and a skeleton crew of 21 men took the wreck 40 miles into port under her own power. Twelve men died in the accident.

&quot;Shaw&quot; remained under repair at Portsmouth, England, until 29 May 1919 when she sailed for the United States. She arrived at New York on 17 June 1919 and moved to the Philadelphia Navy Yard on 2 October where she joined the reserve destroyer group and was decommissioned on 21 June 1922.

===United States Coast Guard===

&quot;Shaw&quot; was struck from the Navy list on 25 March 1926 and transferred to the Coast Guard the same day, to serve in the Rum Patrol. She was returned to the Navy by the Coast Guard and reinstated on the Navy list effective 30 June 1933.

Her name was canceled on 1 November 1933 for assignment to a new destroyer, and the ship was struck again on 5 July 1934 and sold on 22 August 1934 for scrapping to Michael Plynn, Inc., Brooklyn, New York.

==References==
==External links==
*Tin Can Sailors.com USS Shaw DD-68 
*Navy Source.org
*Launch photos</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4300739" start="0" end="28" title="USS Shaw (DD-68)" label="USS &amp;quot;Shaw&amp;quot; (DD-68)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="42" end="60" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="68" end="79" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="114" end="139" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4300739" start="143" end="148" title="USS Shaw (DD-68)" label="CG-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q14592615" start="207" end="216" title="Keel laying" label="laid down"/>
<link wikidata="Q657784" start="243" end="264" title="Mare Island Navy Yard" label="Mare Island Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="649" end="655" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q370330" start="710" end="716" title="convoy" label="convoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571760" start="728" end="740" title="Quiberon Bay" label="Quiberon Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q152027" start="789" end="800" title="St. Nazaire" label="St. Nazaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q733093" start="816" end="829" title="Cobh, Ireland" label="Cobh, Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="993" end="1006" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="1011" end="1018" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548690" start="2106" end="2128" title="Philadelphia Navy Yard" label="Philadelphia Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475803" start="2298" end="2307" title="Naval Vessel Register" label="Navy list"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379103" start="2390" end="2400" title="Rum Patrol" label="Rum Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032694" start="2568" end="2581" title="USS Shaw (DD-373)" label="new destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="2693" end="2711" title="Brooklyn, New York" label="Brooklyn, New York"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291937" wikidata="Q2032694" url="?curid=291937" title="USS Shaw (DD-373)">
<text>USS &quot;Shaw&quot; (DD-373) was a &quot;Mahan&quot;-class destroyer and the second ship of the United States Navy to be named for Captain John Shaw, a naval officer. Commissioned in 1936, &quot;Shaw&quot; was plagued by construction deficiencies and was not fully operational until 1938. After training in the Atlantic, she was transferred to the Pacific and was berthed in a dry dock in Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941.

&quot;Shaw&quot; sustained major damage from several bomb hits by Japanese forces during the attack on Pearl Harbor. The spectacular explosion of her forward magazine provided one of the most iconic photographs of the attack. She was repaired within a few months of the attack, and served in the Pacific through the rest of World War II, earning 11 battle stars.

&quot;Shaw&quot; was decommissioned in October 1945 and sold for scrap in July 1946.

==History==

&quot;Shaw&quot; was laid down on 1 October 1934 at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; launched on 28 October 1935, sponsored by Miss Dorthy L. Tinker; and commissioned on 18 September 1936.

Following commissioning, &quot;Shaw&quot; remained at Philadelphia until April 1937, when she crossed the Atlantic on her shakedown cruise. Returning to Philadelphia on 18 June, she commenced a year of yard work to correct deficiencies before completing acceptance trials in June 1938. &quot;Shaw&quot; conducted training exercises in the Atlantic for the remainder of the year. She then transited to the Pacific and underwent overhaul at Mare Island from 8 January to 4 April 1939.

&quot;Shaw&quot; remained on the West Coast until April 1940, participating in various exercises and providing services to carriers and submarines operating in the area. In April, she sailed for Hawaii, where she participated in Fleet Problem XXI, an eight-phased operation for the defense of the Hawaiian area. She remained in the Hawaiian area until November, when she returned to the West Coast for overhaul.

Back in the Hawaiian area by mid-February 1941, &quot;Shaw&quot; operated in those waters until November, when she entered the Navy Yard at Pearl Harbor for repairs, drydocking in YFD-2.

===Attack on Pearl Harbor===
On 7 December, &quot;Shaw&quot; was still in auxiliary floating drydock YFD-2, receiving adjustments to her depth charge mechanisms. During the Japanese attack, she took three hits – two bombs through the forward machine gun platform, and one through the port wing of the bridge. Fires spread through the ship. By 0925, all fire-fighting facilities were exhausted, and the order to abandon ship was given. Efforts to flood the dock were only partially successful, and shortly after 0930, her forward magazine exploded.

Temporary repairs were made at Pearl Harbor during December 1941 and January 1942. On 9 February, &quot;Shaw&quot; steamed towards San Francisco, where repairs were completed, including the installation of a new bow, at the end of June. Following training in the San Diego, California, area, &quot;Shaw&quot; returned to Pearl Harbor on 31 August 1942.

===Further service in World War II===
For the next two months, she escorted convoys between the West Coast and Hawaii. In mid-October, as a unit of a carrier force centered on the , &quot;Shaw&quot; departed from Pearl Harbor and steamed westwardly. Meeting with a carrier force centered on , the two carrier groups united as Task Force 61, and then moved north of the Santa Cruz Islands to intercept enemy forces headed to attack Guadalcanal.
By mid-morning on the 26th, both carrier groups were under attack. As an accompanying ship, , stopped to pick up survivors from a downed torpedo plane, she was torpedoed. &quot;Shaw&quot; went to &quot;Porter&quot;&#x27;s assistance. Half an hour later, she was ordered to take off &quot;Porter&quot;&#x27;s crew and sink the disabled destroyer. Periscope sightings followed by depth charge attacks delayed execution of the mission. By noon, however, the transfer was completed. An hour later, &quot;Porter&quot; was gone, and &quot;Shaw&quot; left the scene to rejoin the task force.

Two days later, &quot;Shaw&quot; headed for the New Hebrides, where she commenced escorting ships moving men and supplies to Guadalcanal. She continued that duty through November and December and into January 1943. On 10 January, while entering Nouméa Harbor, New Caledonia, &quot;Shaw&quot; ran aground on Sournois Reef. She was freed on the 15th, but extensive damage to her hull, propellers, and sound gear necessitated temporary repairs at Nouméa – followed by lengthy repairs and rearmament at Pearl Harbor, which took through September.
On 6 October, &quot;Shaw&quot; headed west again, reaching Nouméa on the 18th and Milne Bay, New Guinea, on the 24th. Now a unit of the 7th Amphibious Force, &quot;Shaw&quot; escorted reinforcements to Lae and Finschhafen for the remainder of October and during November. Following an unsuccessful diversionary assault by Army troops against Umtingalu, New Britain, on 15 December, &quot;Shaw&quot; recovered survivors from two rubber boats and escorted and back to Buna, Papua New Guinea.

On 25 December, &quot;Shaw&quot; escorted units engaged in the assault against Cape Gloucester, where she provided gunfire support and served as fighter director ship. On the 26th, &quot;Shaw&quot; sustained casualties and damage when attacked by two &quot;Vals.&quot; Thirty-six men were injured, three of whom later died of their wounds. The &quot;Shaw&quot; returned to Cape Sudest, New Guinea, on the 27th; she transferred her wounded and dead to shore facilities there, and continued on to Milne Bay for temporary repairs. Permanent repairs were completed at Hunter&#x27;s Point, California, on 1 May 1944.
&quot;Shaw&quot; returned to Pearl Harbor on the 10th, joined the 5th Fleet there, and steamed toward the Marshall Islands on the 15th. She got underway from the Marshalls on 11 June with TF-52 to engage in the assault on Saipan Island. Four days later, the attack began. For the next three and one-half weeks, the destroyer rotated between screening and &quot;call fire&quot; support duties of the Marines on shore. In mid-July, &quot;Shaw&quot; was back in the Marshall Islands. On the 18th, &quot;Shaw&quot; got underway to return to the Mariana Islands accompanying the Guam assault forces. During the action that followed, &quot;Shaw&quot; performed escort and patrol duties.
&quot;On 23 September, Shaw&quot; departed the Marianas. Following a tender repair availability at Eniwetok, she rejoined the 7th Amphibious Force on 20 October and headed for Leyte Gulf on the 25th. Convoy escort duties between the Philippines and New Guinea involved &quot;Shaw&quot; until the invasion of Luzon took place at Lingayen Gulf on 9 January 1945. From the 9th to the 15th, she performed screening, &quot;call fire&quot; support for the soldiers ashore, night illumination with star shells, and shore bombardment missions. Following this operation, &quot;Shaw&quot; was involved in the recapture of Manila Bay, Luzon. After the Luzon operations, &quot;Shaw&quot; supported the assault and occupation of Palawan Island during the period from 28 February to 4 March.

In early April, &quot;Shaw&quot; operated in the Visayas, setting two Japanese barges on fire off Bohol on 2 April. Damaged soon thereafter on an uncharted pinnacle, she underwent temporary repairs. On the 25th, she steamed toward the United States West Coast. &quot;Shaw&quot; arrived at San Francisco on 19 May. Repairs and upgrades to her systems continued into August. The work was completed on the 20th. &quot;Shaw&quot; then departed for the East Coast of the United States. Upon her arrival at Philadelphia, the warship was routed to New York City for deactivation. Decommissioned on 2 October 1945, her name was stricken from the Navy List two days later. Her hull was scrapped in July 1946.

&quot;Shaw&quot; earned 11 battle stars during World War II.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Sweatt, Greg. &quot;USS &quot;Shaw&quot;: A Ship too Tough to Die!&quot; &quot;Sea Classics&quot;, March 2006.

==External links==

* USS &quot;Shaw&quot; Pearl Harbor after action report
* USS &quot;Shaw&quot; (DD-373), 1936–1946 US Naval Historical Center photo galleries
* The USS &quot;Shaw&quot; / Edgar Rice Burroughs Connection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2032694" start="0" end="29" title="USS Shaw (DD-373)" label="USS &amp;quot;Shaw&amp;quot; (DD-373)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884796" start="36" end="69" title="Mahan-class destroyer" label="&amp;quot;Mahan&amp;quot;-class destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="97" end="115" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036512" start="132" end="139" title="Captain (U.S. Navy)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257486" start="140" end="149" title="John Shaw (navy)" label="John Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="517" end="539" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="748" end="760" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035234" start="773" end="784" title="battle star" label="battle star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548690" start="943" end="970" title="Philadelphia Naval Shipyard" label="Philadelphia Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="972" end="998" title="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="1069" end="1081" title="ship commissioning" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="1211" end="1219" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q657784" start="1544" end="1555" title="Mare Island Naval Shipyard" label="Mare Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="1712" end="1720" title="aircraft carrier" label="carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="1725" end="1734" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="1784" end="1790" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073511" start="1818" end="1835" title="Fleet Problem XXI" label="Fleet Problem XXI"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="2142" end="2154" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769350" start="2264" end="2290" title="auxiliary floating drydock" label="auxiliary floating drydock"/>
<link wikidata="Q60789305" start="2291" end="2296" title="YFD-2" label="YFD-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q653260" start="2327" end="2339" title="depth charge" label="depth charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="2363" end="2378" title="Attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Japanese attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2870" end="2883" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="3002" end="3023" title="San Diego, California" label="San Diego, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q148839" start="3462" end="3480" title="Santa Cruz Islands" label="Santa Cruz Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q192767" start="3524" end="3535" title="Guadalcanal" label="Guadalcanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q753224" start="3674" end="3687" title="torpedo bomber" label="torpedo plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q165363" start="3697" end="3704" title="torpedo" label="torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183122" start="3883" end="3892" title="Periscope" label="Periscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q653260" start="3915" end="3927" title="depth charge" label="depth charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q752431" start="4171" end="4183" title="New Hebrides" label="New Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q9733" start="4368" end="4374" title="Nouméa" label="Nouméa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="4383" end="4396" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781066" start="4748" end="4757" title="Milne Bay" label="Milne Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="4759" end="4769" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687290" start="4802" end="4822" title="VII Amphibious Force" label="7th Amphibious Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q612250" start="4868" end="4871" title="Lae" label="Lae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217719" start="4876" end="4887" title="Finschhafen" label="Finschhafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091385" start="4948" end="5017" title="Battle of Arawe" label="an unsuccessful diversionary assault by Army troops against Umtingalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q59771" start="5019" end="5030" title="New Britain" label="New Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236032" start="5132" end="5154" title="Buna, Papua New Guinea" label="Buna, Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702791" start="5236" end="5251" title="Cape Gloucester (Papua New Guinea)" label="Cape Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q403668" start="5414" end="5418" title="Aichi D3A" label="Vals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035075" start="5530" end="5541" title="Cape Sudest" label="Cape Sudest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892361" start="5721" end="5740" title="Hunters Point (San Francisco)" label="Hunter&amp;#x27;s Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="5742" end="5752" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q537291" start="5835" end="5844" title="United States Fifth Fleet" label="5th Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="5875" end="5891" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q51679" start="5991" end="5997" title="Saipan" label="Saipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="6310" end="6325" title="Mariana Islands" label="Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="6343" end="6347" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q649190" start="6549" end="6557" title="Eniwetok" label="Eniwetok"/>
<link wikidata="Q240753" start="6626" end="6636" title="Leyte Gulf" label="Leyte Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="6683" end="6694" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="6758" end="6763" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41891" start="6778" end="6791" title="Lingayen Gulf" label="Lingayen Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q676154" start="7062" end="7072" title="Manila Bay" label="Manila Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q13869" start="7166" end="7173" title="Palawan" label="Palawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211436" start="7278" end="7285" title="Visayas" label="Visayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13752" start="7327" end="7332" title="Bohol" label="Bohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="7677" end="7708" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast of the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291938" wikidata="Q11326028" url="?curid=291938" title="High Society (magazine)">
<text>High Society is an American pornographic magazine. In addition to hardcore pictorials of nude models, it also has feature articles and occasional celebrity pictorials.

==History==
&quot;High Society&quot; was first published in May 1976. Carl Ruderman hired the adult industry&#x27;s first female men&#x27;s magazine editor, Gloria Leonard, in 1977.

Leonard, an adult film star, is credited with the use of &quot;900&quot; and &quot;976 phone numbers&quot; to advertise upcoming magazine issues. This evolved into the very first &quot;phone sex&quot; lines.

In November 1981 a spin-off magazine, &quot;High Society Live!&quot;, debuted. Another venture was a celebrity focused publication, &quot;Celebrity Skin&quot; magazine, in 1986. The 10th Anniversary Issue of High Society, published May, 1986 featured Gail Thackray (Gail Harris) with a 10-page spread, Centerfold and Front cover. Over its 25-year run Margot Kidder, Ann-Margret and Barbra Streisand unsuccessfully attempted to sue the magazine after it published nude photos of them.

&quot;High Society&quot; has a pay-per-view TV channel.

The magazine is published by the Magna Publishing Group, which was acquired by 1-800-PHONESEX on December 22, 2015.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3244962" start="28" end="49" title="pornographic magazine" label="pornographic magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777448" start="66" end="74" title="hardcore pornography" label="hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q10791" start="89" end="93" title="nudity" label="nude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957360" start="298" end="317" title="men&amp;#x27;s magazine" label="men&amp;#x27;s magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q448343" start="326" end="340" title="Gloria Leonard" label="Gloria Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165793" start="415" end="418" title="900 numbers" label="900"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="435" end="452" title="Premium-rate telephone number#Canada, United States, and other NANP countries" label="976 phone numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186399" start="580" end="588" title="Spin-off (media)" label="spin-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057764" start="699" end="713" title="Celebrity Skin (magazine)" label="Celebrity Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517090" start="827" end="838" title="Gail Harris" label="Gail Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q234471" start="912" end="925" title="Margot Kidder" label="Margot Kidder"/>
<link wikidata="Q232059" start="927" end="938" title="Ann-Margret" label="Ann-Margret"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="943" end="959" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864537" start="1136" end="1158" title="Magna Publishing Group" label="Magna Publishing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864537" start="1182" end="1196" title="1-800-PHONESEX" label="1-800-PHONESEX"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291939" wikidata="Q175130" url="?curid=291939" title="Alfred Sisley">
<text>Alfred Sisley (; ; 30 October 1839 – 29 January 1899) was an Impressionist landscape painter who was born and spent most of his life in France, but retained British citizenship. He was the most consistent of the Impressionists in his dedication to painting landscape &quot;en plein air&quot; (i.e., outdoors). He deviated into figure painting only rarely and, unlike Renoir and Pissarro, he found that Impressionism fulfilled his artistic needs.

Among his important works are a series of paintings of the River Thames, mostly around Hampton Court, executed in 1874, and landscapes depicting places in or near Moret-sur-Loing. The notable paintings of the Seine and its bridges in the former suburbs of Paris are like many of his landscapes, characterised by tranquillity, in pale shades of green, pink, purple, dusty blue and cream. Over the years Sisley&#x27;s power of expression and colour intensity increased.

==Biography==
Sisley was born in Paris to affluent British parents. His father, William Sisley, was in the silk business, and his mother, Felicia Sell, was a cultivated music connoisseur.

In 1857, at the age of 18, Alfred Sisley was sent to London to study for a career in business, but he abandoned it after four years and returned to Paris in 1861. From 1862, he studied at the Paris École des Beaux-Arts within the &quot;atelier&quot; of Swiss artist Marc-Charles-Gabriel Gleyre, where he became acquainted with Frédéric Bazille, Claude Monet, and Pierre-Auguste Renoir. Together they would paint landscapes &quot;en plein air&quot; rather than in the studio, in order to capture the transient effects of sunlight realistically. This approach, innovative at the time, resulted in paintings more colourful and more broadly painted than the public was accustomed to seeing. Consequently, Sisley and his friends initially had few opportunities to exhibit or sell their work. Their works were usually rejected by the jury of the most important art exhibition in France, the annual Salon. During the 1860s, though, Sisley was in a better financial position than some of his fellow artists, as he received an allowance from his father.

In 1866, Sisley began a relationship with Eugénie Lescouezec (1834–1898; usually known as Marie Lescouezec), a Breton living in Paris. The couple had two children: son Pierre (born 1867) and daughter Jeanne (1869). At the time, Sisley lived not far from Avenue de Clichy and the Café Guerbois, the gathering-place of many Parisian painters.

In 1868, his paintings were accepted at the Salon, but the exhibition did not bring him financial or critical success; nor did subsequent exhibitions.
In 1870, the Franco-Prussian War began; as a result, Sisley&#x27;s father&#x27;s business failed, and the painter&#x27;s sole means of support became the sale of his works. For the remainder of his life he would live in poverty, as his paintings did not rise significantly in monetary value until after his death. Occasionally, however, Sisley would be backed by patrons, and this allowed him, among other things, to make a few brief trips to Britain.

The first of these occurred in 1874, after the first independent Impressionist exhibition. The result of a few months spent south-west of London was a series of nearly twenty paintings of the non-tidal Thames at East Molesey and below its Hampton Court Bridge where the south bank becomes Thames Ditton which was later described by art historian Kenneth Clark as &quot;a perfect moment of Impressionism.&quot;

Until 1880, Sisley lived and worked in the country west of Paris; then he and his family moved to a small village near Moret-sur-Loing, close to the forest of Fontainebleau, where the painters of the Barbizon school had worked earlier in the century. Here, as art historian Anne Poulet has said, &quot;the gentle landscapes with their constantly changing atmosphere were perfectly attuned to his talents. Unlike Monet, he never sought the drama of the rampaging ocean or the brilliantly colored scenery of the Côte d&#x27;Azur.&quot;
In 1881, Sisley made a second brief voyage to Great Britain.

In 1897, Sisley and his partner visited Britain again, and were finally married in Wales at Cardiff Register Office on 5 August. They stayed at Penarth, where Sisley painted at least six oils of the sea and the cliffs. In mid-August they moved to the Osborne Hotel at Langland Bay on the Gower Peninsula, where he produced at least eleven oil paintings in and around Langland Bay and Rotherslade (then called Lady&#x27;s Cove). They returned to France in October. This was Sisley&#x27;s last voyage to his ancestral homeland. The National Museum Cardiff possesses two of his oil paintings of Penarth and Langland.

The following year Sisley applied for French citizenship, but was refused. A second application was made and supported by a police report, but illness intervened, and Sisley remained a British national until his death.

He died on 29 January 1899 of throat cancer in Moret-sur-Loing at the age of 59, a few months after the death of his wife.

==Work==

Sisley&#x27;s student works are lost. His first landscape paintings are sombre, coloured with dark browns, greens, and pale blues. They were often executed at Marly and Saint-Cloud. Little is known about Sisley&#x27;s relationship with the paintings of J. M. W. Turner and John Constable, which he may have seen in London, but some have suggested that these artists may have influenced his development as an Impressionist painter, as may have Gustave Courbet and Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot.

He was inspired by the style and subject matter of previous modern painters Camille Pissarro and Edouard Manet. Among the Impressionists, Sisley has been overshadowed by Monet, whose work his resembles in style and subject matter, although Sisley&#x27;s effects are more subdued. Described by art historian Robert Rosenblum as having &quot;almost a generic character, an impersonal textbook idea of a perfect Impressionist painting&quot;, his work strongly invokes atmosphere, and his skies are always impressive. He concentrated on landscape more consistently than any other Impressionist painter.
Among Sisley&#x27;s best-known works are &quot;Street in Moret&quot; and &quot;Sand Heaps&quot;, both owned by the Art Institute of Chicago, and &quot;The Bridge at Moret-sur-Loing&quot;, shown at Musée d&#x27;Orsay, Paris. &quot;Allée des peupliers de Moret&quot; (&quot;The Lane of Poplars at Moret&quot;) has been stolen three times from the Musée des Beaux-Arts in Nice – once in 1978 when on loan in Marseilles (recovered a few days later in the city&#x27;s sewers), again in 1998 (when the museum&#x27;s curator was convicted of the theft and jailed for five years with two accomplices), and finally in August 2007 (on 4 June 2008 French police recovered it and three other stolen paintings from a van in Marseilles).

A large number of fake Sisleys have been discovered. Sisley produced some 900 oil paintings, some 100 pastels and many other drawings.

During the Nazi period (1933–1945) a number of Sisley works were taken from Jewish art collectors by Nazis or their agents as part of the massive looting of Jews that preceded the Holocaust. On 18 June 2004 Sisley&#x27;s &quot;Soleil de printemps, le Loing&quot; (1892) was restored to the family of Louis Hirsch, in a ceremony in Paris.

In 2008 a dispute erupted between Alain Dreyfus, an art dealer in Switzerland, and the auction house Christie&#x27;s over a Sisley painting &quot;First Day of Spring in Moret&quot;, that was claimed by the Lindon family in court in Paris. Dreyfus said that Christie&#x27;s had not sufficiently examined the work&#x27;s history, or provenance, before putting it up for sale.

Also in 2008, the Sisley &quot;Bateaux en Réparation à Saint Mammès&quot; (1885) was recognised as having been looted by the Nazis and the subject of a settlement with the heirs of Benno and Frances Bernstein who had owned it before Nazi occupation.

Numerous Sisleys such as &quot;Winter Landscape&quot; were known to have been seized by the Nazi looting organisation known as the E.R.R. and still have not been found.

The German Lost Art Foundation has 24 listings for Sisley.

==Selected works==

* &quot;Avenue of Chestnut Trees near La Celle-Saint-Cloud&quot; (1865)
* &quot;View of Montmartre from Cité des Fleurs to Les Batignolles&quot; (1869)
* &quot;The Bridge at Villeneuve-la-Garenne&quot; (1872)
* &quot;Ferry to the Ile-de-la-Loge – Flood&quot; (1872)
* &quot;La Grande-Rue, Argenteuil&quot; ()
* &quot;Square in Argenteuil (Rue de la Chaussee)&quot; (1872)
* &quot;&quot; (1872)
* &quot;Chemin de la Machine, Louveciennes&quot; (1873)
* &quot;&quot; (1873)
* &quot;Hampton Court Bridge (painting)&quot; (1874)
* &quot;Molesey Weir – Morning&quot; (1874)
* &quot;Regatta at Molesey&quot; (1874)
* &quot;Under Hampton Court Bridge&quot; (1874)
* &quot;The Terrace at Saint-Germain, Spring&quot; (1875)
* &quot;The Small Meadows in Spring, By&quot; ()

==Gallery==
==Notes==
==References==
*Bomford, David, Jo Kirby, John Leighton, Ashok Roy, and Raymond White (1990). &quot;Impressionism&quot;. London: National Gallery. 
*Sylvie Brame, François Lorenceau. &quot;Alfred Sisley – Catalogue raisonné des peintures et des pastels&quot;. Paris, Galerie Brame &amp; Lorenceau, 2021
*Daulte, F. (1959). &quot;Alfred Sisley Catalogue raisonnee de l&#x27;oeuvre peint&quot; 
*Denvir, B. (2000). &quot;The Chronicle of Impressionism: An Intimate Diary of the Lives and World of the Great Artists&quot;. London: Thames &amp; Hudson. 
*Poulet, A. L., &amp; Murphy, A. R. (1979). &quot;Corot to Braque: French Paintings from the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston&quot;. Boston: The Museum. 
*Reed, Nicholas, (2008). &quot;Sisley on the Thames and the Welsh Coast&quot;. Lilburne Press. 
*Rosenblum, Robert (1989). &quot;Paintings in the Musée d&#x27;Orsay&quot;. New York: Stewart, Tabori &amp; Chang. 
*Turner, J. (2000). &quot;From Monet to Cézanne: late 19th-century French artists&quot;. Grove Art. New York: St Martin&#x27;s Press. 

==External links==
*
* Alfred Sisley.org
* Paintings by Sisley
* 
* &quot;Impressionism : a centenary exhibition, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, December 12, 1974 – February 10, 1975&quot;, fully digitised text from The Metropolitan Museum of Art libraries</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q175130" start="0" end="13" title="Alfred Sisley" label="Alfred Sisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="61" end="74" title="Impressionism" label="Impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="75" end="84" title="Landscape art" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q829298" start="273" end="285" title="en plein air" label="en plein air"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448026" start="327" end="342" title="figure painting" label="figure painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="367" end="373" title="Pierre-Auguste Renoir" label="Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q134741" start="378" end="386" title="Camille Pissarro" label="Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="506" end="518" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q205666" start="534" end="547" title="Hampton Court" label="Hampton Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q839537" start="610" end="625" title="Moret-sur-Loing" label="Moret-sur-Loing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="656" end="661" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056289" start="1303" end="1323" title="École des Beaux-Arts" label="École des Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q746628" start="1335" end="1354" title="studio" label="&amp;quot;atelier&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q452119" start="1371" end="1398" title="Marc-Charles-Gabriel Gleyre" label="Marc-Charles-Gabriel Gleyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q207298" start="1432" end="1448" title="Frédéric Bazille" label="Frédéric Bazille"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="1450" end="1462" title="Claude Monet" label="Claude Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="1468" end="1489" title="Pierre-Auguste Renoir" label="Pierre-Auguste Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q829298" start="1534" end="1546" title="en plein air" label="en plein air"/>
<link wikidata="Q667276" start="1960" end="1974" title="art exhibition" label="art exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q262478" start="1997" end="2002" title="Salon (Paris)" label="Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025611" start="2430" end="2443" title="Café Guerbois" label="Café Guerbois"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="2657" end="2676" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="3299" end="3305" title="River Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q624065" start="3314" end="3321" title="Molesey" label="Molesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529328" start="3336" end="3356" title="Hampton Court Bridge" label="Hampton Court Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q954764" start="3386" end="3399" title="Thames Ditton" label="Thames Ditton"/>
<link wikidata="Q371258" start="3443" end="3456" title="Kenneth Clark" label="Kenneth Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q839537" start="3627" end="3642" title="Moret-sur-Loing" label="Moret-sur-Loing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293678" start="3657" end="3680" title="forest of Fontainebleau" label="forest of Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q143357" start="3708" end="3723" title="Barbizon school" label="Barbizon school"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877388" start="3782" end="3793" title="Anne Poulet" label="Anne Poulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q182822" start="4018" end="4034" title="French Riviera" label="Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="4088" end="4101" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="4187" end="4192" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="4196" end="4203" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q427792" start="4248" end="4255" title="Penarth" label="Penarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486177" start="4372" end="4384" title="Langland Bay" label="Langland Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141148" start="4392" end="4407" title="Gower Peninsula" label="Gower Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370456" start="4488" end="4499" title="Rotherslade" label="Rotherslade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321874" start="4634" end="4657" title="National Museum Cardiff" label="National Museum Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q839537" start="4986" end="5001" title="Moret-sur-Loing" label="Moret-sur-Loing"/>
<link wikidata="Q736185" start="5232" end="5237" title="Château de Marly" label="Marly"/>
<link wikidata="Q189153" start="5242" end="5253" title="Saint-Cloud" label="Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="5326" end="5341" title="J. M. W. Turner" label="J. M. W. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q159297" start="5346" end="5360" title="John Constable" label="John Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q34618" start="5516" end="5531" title="Gustave Courbet" label="Gustave Courbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q148475" start="5536" end="5563" title="Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot" label="Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot"/>
<link wikidata="Q134741" start="5642" end="5658" title="Camille Pissarro" label="Camille Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q40599" start="5663" end="5676" title="Edouard Manet" label="Edouard Manet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436186" start="5873" end="5889" title="Robert Rosenblum" label="Robert Rosenblum"/>
<link wikidata="Q239303" start="6280" end="6304" title="Art Institute of Chicago" label="Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q23402" start="6362" end="6380" title="Musée d&amp;#x27;Orsay" label="Musée d&amp;#x27;Orsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330218" start="6510" end="6530" title="Musée des Beaux-Arts de Nice" label="Musée des Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q673751" start="8122" end="8128" title="Reichsleiter Rosenberg Taskforce" label="E.R.R."/>
<link wikidata="Q19820361" start="8249" end="8299" title="Avenue of Chestnut Trees at La Celle-Saint-Cloud" label="Avenue of Chestnut Trees near La Celle-Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q19820448" start="8321" end="8379" title="View of Montmartre from Cité des Fleurs to Les Batignolles" label="View of Montmartre from Cité des Fleurs to Les Batignolles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382435" start="8401" end="8436" title="The Bridge at Villeneuve-la-Garenne" label="The Bridge at Villeneuve-la-Garenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q47500913" start="8458" end="8493" title="Ferry to the Ile-de-la-Loge – Flood" label="Ferry to the Ile-de-la-Loge – Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q42319360" start="8515" end="8540" title="The Grand-Rue in Argenteuil" label="La Grande-Rue, Argenteuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3451370" start="8558" end="8599" title="Rue de la Chaussée in Argenteuil" label="Square in Argenteuil (Rue de la Chaussee)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955422" start="8643" end="8677" title="Chemin de la Machine, Louveciennes" label="Chemin de la Machine, Louveciennes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8721" end="8752" title="Hampton Court Bridge (painting)" label="Hampton Court Bridge (painting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16247530" start="8774" end="8786" title="Molesey Lock" label="Molesey Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235227" start="8818" end="8836" title="Regatta at Molesey near Hampton Court" label="Regatta at Molesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492138" start="8858" end="8884" title="Under Hampton Court Bridge" label="Under Hampton Court Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768503" start="8906" end="8942" title="The Terrace at Saint-Germain, Spring (painting)" label="The Terrace at Saint-Germain, Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234637" start="8964" end="8995" title="The Small Meadows in Spring, By" label="The Small Meadows in Spring, By"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291940" wikidata="Q1434231" url="?curid=291940" title="Legio III Augusta">
<text>Legio III Augusta (&quot;Third Augustan Legion&quot;) was a legion of the Imperial Roman army. Its origin may have been the Republican 3rd Legion which served the general Pompey during his civil war against Gaius Julius Caesar (49–45 BC). It supported the general Octavian (later emperor Augustus) in his civil war against Mark Antony (31–30 BC). It was officially refounded in 30 BC, when Octavian achieved sole mastery of the Roman empire. In that year, it was deployed in the Roman province of Africa, where it remained until at least the late 4th century AD.

==History and troop movements==
The Legio III Augusta was placed in Africa to ensure a steady grain supply to Rome. Under Augustus, the African Proconsul had command over it and several other legions. By the end of Tiberius&#x27;s reign, it was the only legion in Africa. Under Caligula, command of the army was withdrawn from the proconsul and given to a Propraetorial legate who answered directly to the emperor. The Legio III Augusta first set up camp at Haidra before 14. The base at Haidra was not large enough to support an entire legion; this suggests that the legion was split up. Desert warfare required a small and highly mobile fighting force and it was not unheard of for the emperor to split a legion into several vexillations and place them at separate fortresses. For the most part, whole legions were not moved into Africa but rather, small vexillations were formed from the armies of Germany and Pannonia and sent to help when needed.

The Roman military presence in North Africa was not always accepted or welcomed. Most notably in opposition to the Roman institution was Tacfarinas, a former Roman soldier turned Musulamii guerrilla leader. Tacfarinas is an example of the multiple rebellions against the expansion of the Roman Empire through military establishment and geographical positioning as well as the adequate and tactful response by the Third Augustan Legion.

The Berber tribes attacked the Augustan Legion when they were particularly vulnerable. It is reported that the first attacks were in 14 AD when the Legion had just completed its first road building project. The timing suggests that the Third Augustan Legion had not yet established its roots or an approving reputation. This first revolt was swiftly put down. 

However, just three years later Tacfarinas started his attacks against the Romans. The guerrilla warfare tactics combined with Tacfarinas&#x27; novel approach to attack from the rear, created additional difficulties for the Third Augustan Legion in their efforts to defeat Tacfarinas. The manner in which Tacfarinas led his rebellions was of particular concern to the Third Augustan Legion. At first, Tacfarinas did not appear to be a great threat; his initial band of fighters was composed mainly of robbers and rebels. However, Tacfarinas&#x27; band of robbers soon gained the expertise and precision of the Roman Army. Tacfarinas traveled through North Africa collecting Roman soldiers left behind by the Third Augustan Legion; Tacitus describes this process as a &quot;cherry picking &quot; of sorts, using soldiers who had already been trained by the Roman army and using their skills against their creator. Tacfarinas created a new coalition from the collected Roman soldiers and North African citizens looking to rebel against the expansion of the Roman Empire into the Musulamii people, under his sole command.

With the traditional tactics used by the Roman army, the enemy was expected to attack in formation, as the Roman legions did. With the rebellion of Tacfarinas, Roman commanders had to change their mode of attack. The general of the Third Augustan Legion split up the army into small units of men that took orders from a commanding officer. These units of men were constantly battle ready, mobile, and trained to fight in the desert, anticipating attacks from Tacfarinas and his rebels. With this change in traditional tactics, Tacfarinas was defeated in a matter of years.

Tacfarinas&#x27; army was ultimately defeated and Tacfarinas himself committed suicide, however his revolts and rebellious efforts should not go unnoticed. The Third Augustan Legion had to master the revolutionary techniques of Tacfarinas&#x27; band of robbers and ex-soldiers to succeed in conquering Tacfarinas. The guerrilla warfare strategies that Tacfarinas displays are one of the many ways the Third Augustan Legion had to alter its defense techniques in order to settle rebels throughout North Africa. The Musulamii gang under leadership and control of Tacfarinas was just one example of rebellions that the Legion had to settle, however no army of rebels proved as difficult, incessant, or resilient as the guerrilla army under Tacfarinas.

The Third Augustan Legion was responsible for multiple building projects and the enforced the presence of the Roman Empire against rebellions in North Africa for over three hundred years. However, they influenced the frontier in ways other than through expansion and urbanization. Militarily, they reformed the structure of the frontier through cultural changes and their mere presence throughout Africa.

However, the legion was self-sufficient in protecting the African provinces for the majority of the time. Most threats that required reinforcements arose in Mauretania, as this was where the Moors were the most dangerous. The Third Augustan had around 5000–6000 men with about 10,000–15,000 auxiliary men stationed close by. Almost half of these soldiers were stationed in Mauretania Tingitana; the rest were positioned based on the military needs of that time. The Emperor Vespasian reunited the legion in a single fortress at Theveste, most likely in 75. In 115 or 120, the Legio III Augusta established their camp at Lambaesis where it remained for two centuries apart from the period 238–253.

The legion was disbanded in 238 AD &quot;because of its role in putting down an African-based revolt against the emperor Maximinus in favor of the provincial governor Gordianus.&quot; Capelianus was a legate in the legion and the officer who (mis)used his legion to attack Gordian. For this reason, Gordian III disbanded the legion.

In 252, Valerian reformed the legion to deal with the &quot;five people groups&quot;, a dangerous coalition of Berber tribes. The legion prevailed in 260 but the threat remained, and fortifications of Lambaesis were expanded over the following years. In 289, the struggle began again and the emperor Maximianus took personal control of the legion. The war lasted until 297 at which point the legion was victorious.

In the early 4th century, Diocletian personally put down a rebellious governor and immediately afterward, transferred the Legio III Augusta from Lambaesis to another, unknown base within the region. Diocletian often worked with the legion during the period of military anarchy from 235 to 284. He was particularly prolific with his building projects, many of which were in Africa. Most of the projects were aimed at either replacing earlier works destroyed during the period of military anarchy or repairing public improvements, which had been allowed to fall into decay. The Legion was the main labor resource for these projects. The legion was still mentioned as late as the early 5th century but the actual date of its final disbandment is unknown.

==Urbanization==
The Third Augustan Legion was not only a source of protection for the Roman Empire, but also largely responsible for the urbanization of the North African provinces. The Legion was initially stationed in Ammaedara (modern-day Haïdra) where they built their first military camp. From there. the legionaries invested part of their time in the construction of roads, bringing with it the expansion of the empire. 

These new connections led to the development of new towns and cities for civilians, camps for the military and even colonies for the veterans. All three were usually distinct from each other, but as time progressed, civilian towns, military camps and veterants colonies tended to merge.

The Legion did not always build up an entire town. Often, civilians assisted in part of the building projects. The most common construction projects soldiers were requested to work on were aqueducts, fortifications and amphitheaters. Typically they were more involved with &quot;monumental projects&quot; rather than &quot;pure architecture.&quot; The legion was therefore no solely a military force but also a corps of engineers and surveyors, which required an advanced mix of skills.

===Roads===
The first instance of military roads built by the Legio III Augusta happened in 14 AD: It connected their base in Ammaedara, through Thelepte, all the way to the Oasis of Gafsa. Further expansion occurred under the rule of Tiberius with a road from the Oasis of Gafsa to the Oasis of Gabes. Between these two cities, the Legion stopped for rest and created five stations.

The Legion sometimes followed the previously existing paved road or hard-packed dirt tracks between Punic or Berber towns, but they mainly created new roads. Their construction followed a distinct system. Since these roads were commonly built for the use of military movement, they needed to be kept as straight (for speed of movement) and as safe as possible (Therefore where possible built on higher ground, avoiding valleys). Due to the higher location, some roads were even built with a system to drain water. Calculations estimate that the total length of roads in North Africa during Roman rule reached about 19,300 kilometres.

Other important roads for the Legio III Augusta included the one linking Tebessa to the port of Hippo Regius. Its construction was imperative for more efficient delivery of supplies to the Legion and town. Another was the road from Tébessa (Tebessa) to Carthage; both roads were built during Vespasian&#x27;s reign. 

Finally, a road built under Trajan ran south across the mountains of the Gulf of Syrte. The strategic importance of the road is indicated by the number of forts built along it.

Some Emperors really encouraged building of roads. One in particular was Hadrian. He was deeply involved with the work of the Legio III Augusta and sought to make sure they were involved in building projects. the advantages of building roads was not restricted to military matters but provided economic incentives positive for the empire: For example, the long roads built in Leptis Magna helped open up the interior lands. Farmers seized this opportunity to plant more olive groves and therefore more oil was able to be exported to Rome.

Once towns began to take in close proximity to military camps, marks of separation were needed. Typically, arches were used to mark on roads (or above them) the distinction between the civilian area and the entrance into the Roman military camp. The &quot;&quot;—a road built under the reign of Septimius Severus in the town of Lambaesis - illustrates this with the presence of a Triple Arch, marking the boundary where the Third Augustan Legion was within its military zone.

===Aqueducts===
The members of the Third Augustan Legion did not solely consist of military men. The Emperors made an effort to recruit some men that were experts in surveying and the mathematics of construction. There is good evidence of this from emperors Augustus, Hadrian and Trajan, who all held engineers responsible for both construction and the military. There were not always many of these talented men in Northern Africa so it was important to train other men for the job. Thus over time the army became a place to learn the technical skills of engineering and surveying. These men would become involved in the construction of the big duties like canals or aqueducts.

The construction of aqueducts was not an easy job. It was very difficult to make sure all the pipes were level and that the pressure was correct at both ends. The surveyor was responsible for calculating all these measurements beforehand and then leaving the directions with the procurator. They would most likely be handed off to an officer known as the &#x27;, whose position was comparable to that of a contractor, and he was in charge of overseeing the production. His main purpose was to assist in the layout of Roman camps and towns, and he directed the use of measuring instruments. One of the most commonly used devices was a &#x27; which helped with the measurement of right angles.

However, the &#x27; and the legionaries were not always experts so the accuracy of the &#x27; only helped to a certain extent. When this happened, surveyors had to be recalled for recalculations. There is a well-preserved inscription depicting this situation in Africa. The surveyor, Nonius Datus, wrote about his encounters with the Third Augustan Legion and how he had carefully surveyed, taken the measures of all the mountains and mapped out the axis for which the tunnel would need to be excavated. This he gave to the procurator. He even gave the information to the contractor to be sure everything was done correctly. As Datus&#x27; skills were so widely needed, he had to leave the Legion for four years expecting the construction would go along smoothly without him. The construction did not go according to plan. The legionaries were unable to dig the tunnels at the right measurement causing them to be completely off the intended line. It was up to Datus to fix the situation.

The surveyors knew how to properly construct these aqueducts. If they stayed to monitor the actual construction, the operation ran successfully. This can be witnessed by the vast number of aqueducts that stood hundreds of years, some of them even thousands. For example, the water springs from Jebel Zaghouan still bring water all the way to Tunis. Historian E. Lennox Manton says, &quot;A large new pipeline takes it through those same conduits in the hills which were originally excavated by the legion.&quot; Although the pipping system was changed, the original layout is still used.

===The Third Augustan Legion&#x27;s camp bases===
Augustus officially stationed his Third Legion in 30 BC at Ammaedara which was located in the Aures Mountains. There they protected the North African provinces for 105 years. Not much remains today, at the exception of ruins of theaters and churches that are quite recognizable. A large military cemetery has been found, most of the tombs being from legionaries. During their time stationed at Ammaedara, the Legion discovered the town of Sbeitla. Many soldiers were recruited from this town. Then in 75 AD the Legion&#x27;s camp was moved to Theveste (present day Tebessa). However, many of the veterans stayed behind and were able to settle in town, several becoming farmers.

The move to Theveste in 75 AD was not very far—just a bit west of Ammaedara. They relocated for purely strategic reasons. It was believed that if they moved they would be closer to the enemy—the local tribes who had been uprising often. The Legion was dedicated to its protection so they wanted to make sure they were in the best place possible to do so. They settled the area and built their own town. This town was physically constructed according to the principle of Hippodamus, the grid layout. The few remains in modern time include just a few pieces of architecture: the arch to Caracalla, a temple to Minerva and ruins of an amphitheater. On the arch &quot;medallions of Septimius Severus and Julia Domna still survive on its faces&quot; and the temple is &quot;…one of the three or four best-preserved temples of the Roman world,&quot; says John Ferguson, archaeologist, who explored the area. It is uncertain whether or not the Legion participated in the construction of these buildings, but it is clear that they were once in the town of their home base.

The Legion was moved a third and final time to station at Lambaesis in 128 AD. Once again this move was for strategic reasons as it was located in the Aures Mountains. This placement was the optimal location for control over the tribes. Originally they built their camp to be about 220 square yards following the same grid plan as they did at Theveste. As historian E. Lennox Manton describes the construction, he says it was built &quot;to a rectangular plan with military precision.&quot; By the middle of the 2nd century, the town grew perhaps to four times its original size.

Throughout their stay at Lambaesis, columns, pillars with rounded niches and statues were all built around the town. They even paved a courtyard that was surrounded by porticos with rooms on three sides. Some of these rooms were just for the military guards and the Commander-in-chief. The fourth side consisted of a basilica. Probably one of the most &quot;impressive&quot; and &quot;the most dominant memorials of Roman military might&quot; was the praetorium built in Lambaesis. This praetorium served as the house of the commander — most likely the procurator. They also had baths and an amphitheater outside the camp. After some time civilians began to settle close by, but their area was marked off by an arch.

===Veteran towns===
One veteran town from the Third Augustan Legion (and actually other legions in the Empire) was Thuburbo Majus. Here colonies were arranged granting veterans with, at the most, ¾ an acre of land. Although they were considered retired, these veterans were still involved in the protection of the provinces. Therefore, their colonies were spread out according to the Legion&#x27;s strategic plan, and members actually guarded the areas. They sometimes built towers or ditches to be even more secure. Regardless of the militaristic constructions in the town, there were still beautiful public buildings such as a forum, mosaic floors, baths, churches and temples.

Another town founded by Nerva especially for veterans was Cuicul (now Djémila), &quot;the beautiful&quot; in the 1st century. The Legion also helped protect this town just as in Thuburbo Majus. The town is located on a hill and the lower part was the original foundation. It was later extended up the hill as more and more commercial activity occurred. Originally, at the end of the 1st century, there was a forum built. This later became known as the North Forum because another was built in the 3rd century. The second forum included a beautiful temple to Septimius Severus. The staircase in the temple was wonderful, &quot;…the most impressive flight of steps ever to be built to such an edifice in North Africa.&quot; There was a paved road that connected the two forums and upon walking, temples, buildings, homes and even the old market area could be seen. The wealthier veterans were able to construct baths and mosaics around the town. This made the area even more beauteous.

Thamugadi, or modern Timgad, was a town founded for the sole purpose of resettling veterans. Original inhabitants were given a small plot of land inside the city to build on and a small plot of land outside the city to farm. The city grew rapidly, fueled by the security provided by the nearby army camp and the economic prosperity of the mid-2nd century. Over the following generations, crops were sold to Rome and the economic status of the cities inhabitants shifted; some became wealthy while others remained in comparative poverty. The wealthy were not only able to build better homes for themselves, but also contributed to the town of Timgad by donating money for public monuments. The presence of a library within the town signifies a high standard of learning and indicates a high level of prosperity within this veteran settlement. Life after the military was apparently not as harsh as life in the military. The town&#x27;s paved streets can still be walked on today, and it is possible to see the numerous public buildings as well. A library, a large theater (seating between 4000–5000 people) and most notably an amazing forum are all still standing. Trajan&#x27;s arch is also visible. This was built to replace the Lambaesis Gate—a monument built on the street that led to Lambeasis. The town itself was most likely a very clean place. There are many baths throughout, probably close to 12–14.

==Lifestyle and culture==

===Composition of the legion===
Originally, the Legion was composed mainly of Italian soldiers, but by the 3rd century AD the legion was almost entirely of Punic and Libyan origin. Italy and Gaul were hard-pressed to cope with the demand for troops during the 2nd century. As a result, the African Legions had to get manpower from eastern and local sources.

===Daily life===
When the Legion was not campaigning, it was engaged in vast public works projects across North Africa. There was very little serious fighting between the end of Tacfarinas&#x27; rebellion in AD 24 and the assassination of Severus Alexander in 235. It is believed that a soldier in the Third Augustan during this time spent his days securing food, fuel, fodder, and completing general duties of camp life. They rebuilt structures, built roads, and repaired equipment. It is likely that they went out on routine patrols of the countryside. The Legio III Augusta built the thirty-nine kilometers of the Lambaesis aqueduct in eight months, and the Legion or its temporary successor kept the roads in repair throughout the period of military anarchy. The Legion built and fortified Lambaesis and a military colony at Thamugadi, which was settled largely by veterans of the legion.

===Marriage of soldiers===
As was the case throughout the empire, soldiers of the Third Augustan Legion were forbidden to marry. A mobile army might have been in state of forced celibacy but this was not possible or practical for soldiers in fixed frontier posts. Inscriptions from Lambaesis often mention women companions of soldiers, which indicate that although they did not marry during active duty, they did form relationships with local women.

==See also==
*List of Roman legions

==Further reading==

1. John Hartwell, unlike many other creators of Legion websites, provides an accessible outline of the important facts and figures. Hartwell categorizes the three hundred years into sections that read easily and provide reliable information found from primary sources. http://hauburn.tripod.com/LegIII.html

2. This website provides a chronologically accurate timeline of the Legion. However, the author of this website does not appear to use any primary sources in their bibliography. https://www.livius.org/le-lh/legio/iii_augusta.html

3. The author provides a basic interpretation and timeline for the events and doings of the Legion, but does not provide a bibliography. http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/intro/legion.htm

==References==
===Bibliography===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
==External links==
* La Troisième Légion Auguste</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1434231" start="0" end="17" title="Legio III Augusta" label="Legio III Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="60" end="66" title="Roman legion" label="legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8772741" start="74" end="93" title="Imperial Roman army" label="Imperial Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="124" end="134" title="Roman Republic" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="171" end="177" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="207" end="226" title="Gaius Julius Caesar" label="Gaius Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="288" end="296" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="323" end="334" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="428" end="440" title="Roman empire" label="Roman empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="497" end="503" title="Africa (Roman province)" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="779" end="800" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius&amp;#x27;s reign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="842" end="850" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q736456" start="1654" end="1664" title="Tacfarinas" label="Tacfarinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180117" start="1696" end="1705" title="Musulamii" label="Musulamii"/>
<link wikidata="Q736456" start="3895" end="3905" title="Tacfarinas" label="Tacfarinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q736456" start="3963" end="3973" title="Tacfarinas" label="Tacfarinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244742" start="5539" end="5559" title="Mauretania Tingitana" label="Mauretania Tingitana"/>
<link wikidata="Q12220954" start="5694" end="5702" title="Theveste" label="Theveste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777" start="5985" end="5994" title="Maximinus Thrax" label="Maximinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q708268" start="6048" end="6058" title="Capelianus" label="Capelianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812" start="6163" end="6174" title="Gordian III" label="Gordian III"/>
<link wikidata="Q46750" start="6206" end="6214" title="Valerian (emperor)" label="Valerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="6640" end="6650" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358652" start="7588" end="7597" title="Ammaedara" label="Ammaedara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358652" start="7610" end="7616" title="Haïdra" label="Haïdra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063167" start="8717" end="8725" title="Thelepte" label="Thelepte"/>
<link wikidata="Q984575" start="9665" end="9672" title="Tébessa" label="Tebessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q858024" start="9688" end="9700" title="Hippo Regius" label="Hippo Regius"/>
<link wikidata="Q984575" start="9824" end="9831" title="Tébessa" label="Tébessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="9845" end="9853" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="9884" end="9893" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="9938" end="9944" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191504" start="10464" end="10476" title="Leptis Magna" label="Leptis Magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="10923" end="10940" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309744" start="10956" end="10965" title="Lambaesis" label="Lambaesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="11363" end="11371" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="11373" end="11380" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="11385" end="11391" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q62624" start="14200" end="14215" title="Aures Mountains" label="Aures Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q12220954" start="14649" end="14657" title="Theveste" label="Theveste"/>
<link wikidata="Q984575" start="14671" end="14678" title="Tébessa" label="Tebessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q298071" start="15255" end="15265" title="Hippodamus" label="Hippodamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446" start="15370" end="15379" title="Caracalla" label="Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q126916" start="15393" end="15400" title="Minerva" label="Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q229246" start="15485" end="15496" title="Julia Domna" label="Julia Domna"/>
<link wikidata="Q62624" start="16002" end="16017" title="Aures Mountains" label="Aures Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967945" start="17265" end="17279" title="Thuburbo Majus" label="Thuburbo Majus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424" start="17855" end="17860" title="Nerva" label="Nerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q457362" start="17889" end="17909" title="Djémila" label="Cuicul (now Djémila)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967945" start="18009" end="18023" title="Thuburbo Majus" label="Thuburbo Majus"/>
<link wikidata="Q459629" start="18837" end="18843" title="Timgad" label="Timgad"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="19223" end="19227" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q459629" start="19458" end="19464" title="Timgad" label="Timgad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="20409" end="20414" title="Punic" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370577" start="20419" end="20425" title="Ancient Libya" label="Libyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="20434" end="20439" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="20444" end="20448" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q736456" start="20790" end="20800" title="Tacfarinas" label="Tacfarinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q459629" start="21441" end="21450" title="Thamugadi" label="Thamugadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334983" start="21971" end="21992" title="List of Roman legions" label="List of Roman legions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291941" wikidata="Q1447333" url="?curid=291941" title="Pedroche">
<text>Pedroche is a municipality in the province of Córdoba, Andalusia, Spain. It is located at the centre of Los Pedroches comarca, the northernmost part of Córdoba and Andalusia.

== History ==

Known history of the place started with a Roman villa named Oxintigis, but its exact origin is unknown.

In 1660, Andrés de Guadalupe (1602-1668) writes that &quot;Pedroche tuvo su origen por los años 3914 de la creación del mundo, 2263 antes de la venida de Cristo&quot;; Roman historian Pliny the Elder mentions a foundation in 300 AD. 

The Visigoths expelled the Vandals from Pedroche and built the Castle of Pedroche, which they named Bretus Hins.

Pedroche (as well as Torremilano) was the capital or main settlement of the seven villas of the Pedroches (&quot;Las Siete Villas de Los Pedroches&quot;). 

During the Arab domination, Pedroche was called Bitraws; it was the most important locality of the &quot;kura&quot; of Fash al Ballut (field of the acorns), and the residence of judges (&quot;cadíes&quot;) and governors (&quot;walíes&quot;). It was already known for its production of pork, fed on acorns. Aḥmad al-Rāzī (Córdoba, 888 - Córdoba, 955) calls the Pedroches &quot;Fahs al Ballut&quot;, which means &quot;plain of acorns&quot;. He says: &quot;The oak is the only tree species in this area. That’s why it is called &quot;The plain of acorns&quot;, and they are the best in Spain.&quot;

In 1155 it was conquered by the troops of Alfonso VII, who called himself &quot;Emperor of Pedroche&quot;. But the locality did not definitively pass into the power of the Christians until after the conquest of Cordoba by Fernando III (1236), who gave the Pedroches to Córdoba in 1243.

Andrés de Guadalupe suggests that at the end of the 12th century, some inhabitants of Pedroche worked further from the village and started to build houses and various buildings that in time, and given the discomfort of having to return to their remote village, became actual settlements.

In 1242 Ferdinand III donated the towns and areas of Santa Eufemia, Belalcázar and Pedroche to the council of Córdoba. The territory of the Pedroches became part of the capital&#x27;s rural territory (&quot;alfoz&quot;), governed by the set of law (&quot;fuero&quot;) that said king had granted the city in 1241.

Pedroche was abandoned by its inhabitants fleeing from the Black Death, some time around or shortly after 1350. According to historian , this was the origin of the development of Villanueva de Córdoba: he says that the latter town was founded between 1348 and 1360 and links it with the exodus that came from Pedroche.

The repopulating process in the Pedroches is unclear. But during the 15th century, Pedroche, and indeed the Pedroches, was a rich area: in 1478 for example, the income from the tithes of wine attributes to Pedroche 123,041 maravedíes, second only to the capital in the province.

On April 18, 1553, Villanueva de Córdoba and its 280 inhabitants received its title of villa and was removed from the jurisdiction of Pedroche, for which it paid the Crown 700,000 maravedies. In the same 16th century, the population of the Pedroches notably grew, from 5,502 inhabitants in 1530 to 6,525 inhabitants in 1587 — an increase of almost 20%, most of whom lived in the local towns with few farms or other rural settlements. 

In 1590, Pedroche, Torremilano and Añora shared the costs of repair for the parochial church San Sebastián of Añora.

The councils of the seven villas used to meet at the hermitage of Piedras Santas de Pedroche, until the joint monarchs of Spain Isabella and Ferdinand ordered in 1480 that all city councils and villages were to build their own town hall — but this was not done immediately everywhere; for example Añora&#x27;s town hall dates from the 16th century.

== &quot;Los Pedroches&quot; designation of origin for ham ==

Nowadays &quot;Los Pedroches&quot; is one of the four Spanish designations of origin (&quot;Denominación de origen&quot;) for ham; it is produced and processed in an area that covers 32 towns and villages in the Los Pedroches valley.)

== Ecology ==

=== Mediterranean turtles ===
The otter (&quot;Lutra lutra&quot;) feeds mainly on fish and crustaceans, but it occasionnally feeds on other mammals, insects and reptiles; it behaves as an opportunistic predator, with the vulnerability of the prey being more determinant than its abundance. 

On January 14, 2006, in the Santa María reservoir (likely a mere enlargement of the Santa María rivulet that crosses the area), a large otter feeding place was found filled exclusively with shells or Spanish pond turtle (&quot;Mauremys leprosa&quot;), except for the remains of feathers from a small bird. Two recent otter feces with remains of the aforementioned reptile: phalanges, nails and some tail, were located next to the feeding place. More than 85 dead turtle shells were counted, some fresh from that morning, in which it was observed that only the outer parts of the shell, that is the head, legs and tail, had been ingested, leaving the rest of the prey with no signs of the shell having been forced to access the interior. All the shells observed were over 10 cm long, most of them around 15 cm; their state of conservation was very good, with very recent shells and older ones perfectly preserved. 

On May 26, 2006, the site was visited again; only a few white shells remained of the plethora seen in January. The otters&#x27; feeding place had practically disappeared but for the remains of some shells and traces of otter left in the mud, and no fresh otter excrement or large latrines as observed in January were found.

It was also observed that 70 Spanish pond turtles swam alive in the reservoir, even an adult of about 20 cm walking along the shore and countless turtle footprints around the reservoir.

There are some examples of massive predations of this type in the same period in Arribes and the province of Toledo. The mass death of the Galapagos due to poor water quality in the reservoir and subsequent predation by the otter is generally ruled out: on the second visit, the water quality looked much worse. The mostly adult turtles would be more likely to emerge from hibernation early in the winter and the otters would take advantage of the resource&#x27;s explosion.

== Landmarks ==

=== Convent ===

The Convento de Nuestra Señora de la Concepción is a mudéjar building the year 500 BC.

=== El Salvador (church) ===

Its construction is Catholic Monarchs, the stones of the Castle advantage previously demolished. Its clear structure can be seen Mudejar. It has three naves and can be classified among the religious monuments of the thirteenth century and fourteenth centuries, whose construction began after completion of the Reconquista by Fernando III. The head of the temple was built in the fifteenth century and was decorated with paintings of this era that can still be seen behind the Baroque altar. An original coffered ceiling in good condition, covers the central nave was made in the fifteenth century, all multicolored and beautiful execution. Striking is the small coffered ceiling over the Baptistery.

=== Renaissance Tower ===

Pedroche Tower national monument since 1979, is located on the highest part of town, next to the parish and Our Lady of the Castle. It is one of the most beautiful and graceful in Spain.

Using materials of the castle began construction of the tower, probably in 1520. From the second body, in 1544, the architect Hernán Ruiz the Younger took over management of the works, which he held until 1558. Architect known for transforming the minaret tower of the mosque in Cordoba and the Giralda bell tower. Juan de Ochoa finished the work by placing the barrel in 1588, apparently on the master designs.

The tower is composed four bodies, reaching a height of 56 meters. The first homer, the second octagonal bell tower is the third or square and the latter is cylindrical.

=== Ermita de la Virgen de Piedrasantas ===
It is located some 2 km north of the town and keeps the patron of Pedroche, the Piedrasantas Virgin. Built in the sixteenth century baroque stand, it was added to in the eighteenth century. Inside are kept seven wooden benches with the names of the seven villages of the Pedroches, whose representatives used to gather here to discuss issues pertaining to the villas.

==See also==
* Los Pedroches
* List of municipalities in Córdoba

==Notes==

==References==
==External links==
*Pedroche en la Red
*Solienses</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1447333" start="0" end="8" title="Pedroche" label="Pedroche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074737" start="14" end="26" title="Municipalities of Spain" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q81972" start="46" end="53" title="Córdoba (Spanish province)" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="55" end="64" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117207" start="104" end="117" title="Los Pedroches" label="Los Pedroches"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="480" end="495" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="535" end="544" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="558" end="565" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117207" start="737" end="750" title="Los Pedroches" label="the Pedroches"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891503" start="907" end="911" title="Kura (al-Andalus)" label="kura"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192126" start="1108" end="1121" title="Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Musa al-Razi" label="Aḥmad al-Rāzī"/>
<link wikidata="Q243122" start="1983" end="1996" title="Ferdinand III of Castile" label="Ferdinand III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750943" start="2028" end="2041" title="Santa Eufemia, Córdoba" label="Santa Eufemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q854373" start="2043" end="2053" title="Belalcázar, Spain" label="Belalcázar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="2085" end="2092" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q8195251" start="2182" end="2187" title="alfoz (territory)" label="alfoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q123550" start="2230" end="2235" title="fuero" label="fuero"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="2348" end="2359" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q879493" start="2468" end="2489" title="Villanueva de Córdoba" label="Villanueva de Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q184664" start="2786" end="2791" title="tithe" label="tithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248202" start="2832" end="2840" title="maravedí" label="maravedí"/>
<link wikidata="Q879493" start="2908" end="2929" title="Villanueva de Córdoba" label="Villanueva de Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q854390" start="3435" end="3440" title="Añora" label="Añora"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="3571" end="3579" title="Isabella I of Castile" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="3584" end="3593" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q854390" start="3740" end="3745" title="Añora" label="Añora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139487" start="3918" end="3940" title="Denominación de origen" label="designations of origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29995" start="4141" end="4146" title="Eurasian otter" label="otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q582797" start="4599" end="4618" title="Spanish pond turtle" label="Spanish pond turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="4722" end="4727" title="feces" label="feces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663056" start="6340" end="6383" title="Convento de Nuestra Señora de la Concepción (Pedroche)" label="Convento de Nuestra Señora de la Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q329759" start="6389" end="6396" title="mudéjar" label="mudéjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="6419" end="6421" title="Common Era" label="BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9003235" start="7496" end="7519" title="Hernán Ruiz the Younger" label="Hernán Ruiz the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117207" start="8265" end="8278" title="los Pedroches" label="the Pedroches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117207" start="8382" end="8395" title="Los Pedroches" label="Los Pedroches"/>
<link wikidata="Q93186" start="8398" end="8431" title="List of municipalities in Córdoba" label="List of municipalities in Córdoba"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291945" wikidata="Q4657754" url="?curid=291945" title="Transhumance">
<text>Transhumance is a type of pastoralism or nomadism, a seasonal movement of livestock between fixed summer and winter pastures. In montane regions (&quot;vertical transhumance&quot;), it implies movement between higher pastures in summer and lower valleys in winter. Herders have a permanent home, typically in valleys. Generally only the herds travel, with a certain number of people necessary to tend them, while the main population stays at the base. In contrast, movement in plains or plateaus &quot;(horizontal transhumance)&quot; is more susceptible to disruption by climatic, economic, or political change.

Traditional or fixed transhumance has occurred throughout the inhabited world, particularly Europe and western Asia. It is often important to pastoralist societies, as the dairy products of transhumance flocks and herds (milk, butter, yogurt and cheese) may form much of the diet of such populations. In many languages there are words for the higher summer pastures, and frequently these words have been used as place names: e.g. hafod in Wales, shieling in Scotland, or alp in Germany, Austria and German-speaking regions of Switzerland.

== Etymology and definition ==
The word &quot;transhumance&quot; comes from French and derives from the Latin words &quot;across&quot; and &quot;ground&quot;. Literally, it means crossing the land. Transhumance developed on every inhabited continent. Although there are substantial cultural and technological variations, the underlying practices for taking advantage of remote seasonal pastures are similar linguistically.

Khazanov categorizes nomadic forms of pastoralism into five groups as follows: &quot;pure pastoral nomadism&quot;, &quot;semi-nomadic pastoralism&quot;, &quot;semi-sedentary pastoralism&quot;, &quot;distant-pastures husbandry&quot; and &quot;seasonal transhumance&quot;. Eickelman does not make a distinction between transhumant pastoralism and seminomadism, but he clearly distinguishes between nomadic pastoralism and seminomadism.

== In prehistory ==
There is evidence that transhumance was practised world-wide prior to recorded history: in Europe, isotope studies of livestock bones suggest that certain animals were moved seasonally.

The prevalence of various groups of Hill people around the world suggests that indigenous knowledge regarding transhumance must have developed and survived over generations to allow for the acquisition of sufficient skills to thrive in mountainous regions. Most drovers are conversant with subsistence agriculture, pastoralism as well as forestry and frozen water and fast stream management.

== Europe ==

=== Alps ===
=== Balkans ===

In the Balkans, Albanians, Greek Sarakatsani, Eastern Romance (Romanians, Aromanians, Megleno-Romanians and Istro-Romanians) and Turkish Yörük peoples traditionally spent summer months in the mountains and returned to lower plains in the winter. When the area was part of the Austro-Hungary and Ottoman Empires, borders between Greece, Albania, Bulgaria and the former Yugoslavia were relatively unobstructed. In summer, some groups went as far north as the Balkan Mountains, and they would spend the winter on warmer plains in the vicinity of the Aegean Sea.

The Morlach or Karavlachs were a population of Eastern Romance shepherds (&quot;ancestors&quot; of the Istro-Romanians) who lived in the Dinaric Alps (western Balkans in modern use), constantly migrating in search of better pastures for their sheep flocks. But as national states appeared in the area of the former Ottoman Empire, new state borders were developed that divided the summer and winter habitats of many of the pastoral groups. These prevented easy movement across borders, particularly at times of war, which have been frequent.

=== Poland ===
In Poland it is called redyk, it is the ceremonial departure of shepherds with their flocks of sheep and shepherd dogs, to graze in the mountain pastures (spring redyk), as well as their return from grazing (autumn redyk). In the local mountain dialect, autumn redyk is called uosod, which comes from the Polish word &quot;uosiadć&quot; (ôsawiedź), to return sheep to individual farms. There is also a theory that it comes from the word uozchod (ôzchod), which means the separation of sheep from individual gazdōwek (farms). In this word, there may have been a complete loss of the pronunciation of ch, which in the Podhale dialect (Poland) in this type of positions is pronounced as a barely audible h (so-called sonorous h), similarly to the word schować, which in the highlander language is pronounced as sowa. In the Memoir of the Tatra Society from 1876, the way in which this is done is described: &quot;(...) they herd sheep from the entire village to one agreed place, give them to the shepherds and shepherds one by one, then mix them together and count the number of the whole herd (flock). ) pieces is (what they call &quot;the reading&quot;). The reading is done in such a way that one juhas, holding the chaplet in his hand, puts one bead for each ten sheep counted. The second one takes one sheep from the flock and, as he lets it out of the fenced barracks, counts: one, two, three, etc. up to ten, and after each ten he calls out: &quot;desat&quot;

The leading of the sheep was preceded by magical procedures that were supposed to protect them from bad fate and from being enchanted. For this purpose, bonfires were lit and sheep were led through the fire. It began with the resurrection of the &quot;holy fire&quot; in the kolyba (shepherd&#x27;s hut). Custom dictated that from that day on, it was to be kept burning continuously by the main shepherd – the shepherd. Next, the sheep were led around a small chevron or spruce tree stuck in the ground – the so-called mojka (which was supposed to symbolize the health and strength of everyone present in the hall) and they were fumigated with burning herbs and a połazzka brought to the sałasz. This was intended to cleanse them of diseases and prevent misfortune. Then the flock was herded around it three times, which was intended to concentrate the sheep into one group and prevent individual animals from escaping.
Baca&#x27;s task was to pull the sheep behind him, helping himself with salt which he sprinkled on the flock. With the help of dogs and whistles, the Juhasi encouraged the herd and made sure that the sheep followed the shepherd. Sheep that fell outside the circle boded ill. It was believed that the number of sheep that fell outside the circle would die in the coming season.

The stay in the pasture (hala) begins on St. Wojciech&#x27;s Day (23 April), and ends on Michaelmas Day (29 September).

This method of sheep grazing is a relic of transhumant agriculture, which was once very common in the Carpathians. (Carpathian transhumance agriculture).

In the pastoral culture in Poland, Redyk was perceived as the greatest village festival. Farmers who gave their sheep to a shepherd for the entire season, before grazing in the pastures, listed them (most often by marking them with notches on the shepherd&#x27;s stick, stick or beam), marked them and placed them in a basket made of tynin. In the Memoir of the Tatra Society from 1876, the way in which this is done is described: &quot;(...) they herd sheep from the entire village to one agreed place, give them to the shepherds and shepherds one by one, then mix them together and count the number of the whole herd (flock).

The sheep of all the shepherds were gathered in one place at the foot of the mountains, and then one large herd was driven to the szalas. The entrance to the hala was also particularly emphasized: there was shooting, honking and shouting all the way. This was intended to drive away evil spirits from their animals and to keep the entire herd together.

At the end of the ceremony, there was music and dancing together. The musicians played traditional instruments: gajdas and violins. To the accompaniment of music, the Sałashniks performed the oldest individual dance – the owiedziok, the owczarza, the kolomajka, the swinszczok, the masztołka.

Redyk included many local practices, rituals and celebrations. In modern time it is mainly a part of local traditional entertainment. The modern spring and autumn Redyk (sheep drive) has the character of a folkloric spectacle addressed to locals and tourists, but also to the highlanders themselves, who to identify with their traditions. Sometimes common redyk was organised also in Czechia, Slovakia and Romania. In Poland, the organisers was the Transhumant Pastoral Foundation.

=== Britain ===
==== Wales ====
In most parts of Wales, farm workers and sometimes the farmer would spend the summer months at a hillside summer house, or (), where the livestock would graze. During the late autumn the farm family and workers would drive the flocks down to the valleys and stay at the main house or ().

This system of transhumance has generally not been practised for almost a century; it continued in Snowdonia after it ceased elsewhere in Wales, and remnants of the practice can still be found in rural farming communities in the region to this day. Both &quot;Hafod&quot; and &quot;Hendref&quot; survive in Wales as place names and house names and in one case as the name of a raw milk cow cheese (Hafod). Today, cattle and sheep that summer on many hill farms are still transported to lowland winter pastures, but by truck rather than being driven overland.

==== Scotland ====
In many hilly and mountainous areas of Scotland, agricultural workers spent summer months in bothies or &quot;shielings&quot; ( or in Scottish Gaelic). Major drovers&#x27; roads in the eastern part of Scotland include the Cairnamounth, Elsick Mounth and Causey Mounth. This practice has largely stopped but was practised within living memory in the Hebrides and in the Scottish Highlands. Today much transhumance is carried out by truck, with upland flocks being transported under agistment to lower-lying pasture during winter.

==== England ====
Evidence exists of transhumance being practised in England since at least medieval times, from Cornwall in the south-west, through to the north of England. In the Lake District, hill sheep breeds, such as the Herdwick and Swaledale are moved between moor and valley in summer and winter. This led to a trait and system known as &quot;hefting&quot;, whereby sheep and flock remain in the farmer&#x27;s allotted area (heaf) of the commons, which is still practised.

=== Ireland ===
In Ireland, transhumance is known as &quot;booleying&quot;. Transhumance pastures were known as , variously anglicised as , , or . These names survive in many place names such as Buaile h&#x27;Anraoi in Kilcommon parish, Erris, North Mayo, where the landscape still clearly shows the layout of the rundale system of agriculture. The livestock, usually cattle, was moved from a permanent lowland village to summer pastures in the mountains. The appearance of &quot;Summerhill&quot; () in many place names also bears witness to the practice. This transfer alleviated pressure on the growing crops and provided fresh pasture for the livestock. Mentioned in the Brehon Laws, booleying dates back to the Early Medieval period or even earlier. The practice was widespread in the west of Ireland up until the time of the Second World War. Seasonal migration of workers to Scotland and England for the winter months superseded this ancient system, together with more permanent emigration to the United States.

=== Italy ===

In Southern Italy, the practice of driving herds to hilly pasture in summer was also known in some parts of the regions l and has had a long-documented history until the 1950s and 1960s with the advent of alternative road transport. Drovers&#x27; roads, or , up to wide and more than long, permitted the passage and grazing of herds, principally sheep, and attracted regulation by law and the establishment of a mounted police force as far back as the 17th century. The tratturi remain public property and subject to conservation by the law protecting cultural heritage. The Molise region candidates the tratturi to the UNESCO as a world heritage.

=== Spain ===

Transhumance is historically widespread throughout much of Spain, particularly in the regions of Castile, Leon and Extremadura, where nomadic cattle and sheep herders travel long distances in search of greener pastures in summer and warmer climatic conditions in winter. Spanish transhumance is the origin of numerous related cultures in the Americas such as the cowboys of the United States and the Gauchos of Argentina, Paraguay and Brazil.

A network of droveways, or , crosses the whole peninsula, running mostly south-west to north-east. They have been charted since ancient times, and classified according to width; the standard is between wide, with some (meaning &quot;royal droveways&quot;) being wide at certain points. The land within the droveways is publicly owned and protected by law.

In some high valleys of the Pyrenees and the Cantabrian Mountains, transhumant herding has been the main, or only, economic activity. Regulated passes and pasturage have been distributed among different valleys and communities according to the seasonal range of use and community jurisdiction. Unique social groups associated with the transhumant lifestyle are sometimes identified as a remnant of an older ethnic culture now surviving in isolated minorities, such as the &quot;Pasiegos&quot; in Cantabria, &quot;Agotes&quot; in Navarre, and &quot;Vaqueiros de alzada&quot; in Asturias and León.

=== The Pyrenees ===

Transhumance in the Pyrenees involves relocation of livestock (cows, sheep, horses) to high mountains during the summer months, because farms in the lowland are too small to support a larger herd all year round. The mountain period starts in late May or early June, and ends in early October. Until the 1970s, transhumance was used mainly for dairy cows, and cheese-making was an important activity in the summer months. In some regions, nearly all members of a family decamped to higher mountains with their cows, living in rudimentary stone cabins for the summer grazing season. That system, which evolved during the Middle Ages, lasted into the 20th century. It declined and broke down under pressure from industrialisation, as people left the countryside for jobs in cities. However, the importance of transhumance continues to be recognised through its celebration in popular festivals.

The Mont Perdu / Monte Perdido region of the Pyrenees has been designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site by virtue of its association with the transhumance system of agriculture.

=== Scandinavian Peninsula ===
In Scandinavia, transhumance is practised to a certain extent; however, livestock are transported between pastures by motorised vehicles, changing the character of the movement. The Sami people practice transhumance with reindeer by a different system than is described immediately below.

The common mountain or forest pasture used for transhumance in summer is called or / . The same term is used for a related mountain cabin, which was used as a summer residence. In summer (usually late June), livestock is moved to a mountain farm, often quite distant from a home farm, to preserve meadows in valleys for producing hay. Livestock is typically tended during the summer by girls and younger women, who also milk and make cheese. Bulls usually remain at the home farm. As autumn approaches and grazing is exhausted, livestock is returned to the farm.

In Sweden, this system was predominantly used in Värmland, Dalarna, Härjedalen, Jämtland, Hälsingland, Medelpad and Ångermanland.

The practice was common throughout most of Norway, due to its highly mountainous nature and limited areas of lowland for cultivation. 
While previously many farms had their own seters, it is more usual for several farmers to share a modernised common seter (). Most of the old seters have been left to decay or are used as recreational cabins.

The name for the common mountain pasture in most Scandinavian languages derives from the Old Norse term . In Norwegian, the term is or ; in Swedish, . The place name appears in Sweden in several forms as and , and as a suffix: -, -, - and -. Those names appear extensively across Sweden with a centre in the Mälaren basin and in Östergötland. The surname &quot;Satter&quot; is derived from these words.

In the heartland of the Swedish transhumance region, the most commonly used term is or (the word is also used for small storage houses and the like; it has evolved in English as &quot;booth&quot;); in modern Standard Swedish, .

The oldest mention of in Norway is in &quot;Heimskringla&quot;, the saga of Olaf II of Norway&#x27;s travel through Valldal to Lesja.

The practice of summer farming at fäbod and seter in Sweden and Norway has been included in UNESCO&#x27;s Lists of Intangible Cultural Heritage since 2024.

=== Caucasus and northern Anatolia ===

In the heavily forested Caucasus and Pontic mountain ranges, various peoples still practice transhumance to varying degrees. During the relatively short summer, wind from the Black Sea brings moist air up the steep valleys, which supports fertile grasslands at altitudes up to , and a rich tundra at altitudes up to . Traditionally, villages were divided into two, three or even four distinct settlements (one for each season) at different heights of a mountain slope. Much of this rural life came to an end during the first half of the 20th century, as the Kemalist and later Soviet governments tried to modernise the societies and stress urban development, rather than maintaining rural traditions.

In the second half of the 20th century, migration for work from the Pontic mountains to cities in Turkey and western Europe, and from the northern Caucasus to Moscow, dramatically reduced the number of people living in transhumance. It is estimated, however, that tens of thousands of rural people still practice these traditions in villages on the northern and southwestern slopes of the Caucasus, in the lesser Caucasus in Armenia, and in the Turkish Black Sea region.

Some communities continue to play out ancient migration patterns. For example, the Pontic Greeks visit the area and the monastery Sumela in the summer. Turks from cities in Europe have built a summer retreat on the former &quot;yayla&quot; grazing land.

Transhumance related to sheep farming is still practised in Georgia. The shepherds with their flocks have to cross the high Abano Pass from the mountains of Tusheti to the plains of Kakheti. Up until the dissolution of Soviet Union they intensively used the Kizlyar plains of Northern Dagestan for the same purpose.

== Asia ==
=== Afghanistan ===
In Afghanistan, the central Afghan highlands surround the Koh-i-Baba and continue eastward into the Hindu Kush range. Summers are short and cool while winters are very cold. These highlands have mountain pastures during summer (), watered by many small streams and rivers. Winter pastures in the neighboring warm lowlands () make the region ideal for seasonal transhumance. The Afghan Highlands contain about of summer pasture, which is used by both settled communities and nomadic pastoralists like the Pashtun Kuchis. Major pastures in the region include the Nawur pasture in northern Ghazni Province (whose area is about 600 km2 at elevation of up to 3,350 m), and the Shewa pasture and the Little Pamir in eastern Badakhshan Province. The Little Pamir pasture, whose elevation is above , is used by the Afghan Kyrgyz to raise livestock.

In Nuristan, the inhabitants live in permanent villages surrounded by arable fields on irrigated terraces. Most of the livestock are goats. They are taken up to a succession of summer pastures each spring by herdsmen while most of the villagers remain behind to irrigate the terraced fields and raise millet, maize, and wheat; work mostly done by the women. In the autumn after the grain and fruit harvest, livestock are brought back to spend the winter stall-fed in stables.

=== India ===
Jammu and Kashmir in India has the world&#x27;s highest transhumant population as per a survey conducted by a team led by Dr Shahid Iqbal Choudhary, IAS, Secretary to the Government of Jammu and Kashmir, Tribal Affairs Department. The 1st Survey of Transhumance in 2021 captured details of 6,12,000 members of ethnic tribal communities viz Gujjars, Bakkerwals, Gaddis and Sippis. The survey was carried out for development and welfare planning for these communities notified as Scheduled tribes under the Constitution of India. Subsequent to the survey a number of flagship initiatives were launched by the Government for their welfare and development especially in sectors like healthcare, veterinary services, education, livelihood and transportation support for migration. Transhumance in Jammu and Kashmir is mostly vertical while some families in the plains of the Jammu, Samba and Kathua districts also practice lateral or horizontal transhumance. More than 85% of the migratory transhumant population moves within the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir while the remaining 15% undertakes inter-state movement to the neighbouring Punjab State and to the Ladakh Union territory. Gujjars – a migratory tribe – also sparsely inhabit several areas in parts of Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand. The Gujjar-Bakkerwal tribe represents the highest transhumant population in the world and accounts for nearly 98% of the transhumant population in Jammu and Kashmir. The Bhotiya communities of Uttarakhand historically practiced transhumance. They would spend the winter months at low altitude settlements in the Himalayan foothills, gathering resources to trade in Tibet over the summer. In the summer, they would move up to high-altitude settlements along various river valleys. Traditionally involved in wool cleaning, spinning, and weaving items like shawls and carpets, these villagers now rely on transhumant herders for raw materials as they no longer keep livestock. Some people would remain at these settlements to cultivate farms; some would head to trade marts, crossing high mountain passes into western Tibet, while some others would practice nomadic pastoralism. This historic way of life came to an abrupt halt due to the closure of the Sino-Indian border following the Sino-Indian War of 1962. In the decades following this war, transhumance as a way of life rapidly declined among the Bhotiya people.

The pastoral Gujars of northern India rely on state forests for pasture but face increasing restrictions from the government. This has led to significant impoverishment as they lose traditional grazing land and fall into debt. Transhumant pastoralism, guided by traditional ecological knowledge (TEK), helps the Kinnaura community in Himachal Pradesh adapt to harsh high-altitude conditions. However, this age-old practice is under threat due to socioeconomic, policy, and environmental changes, risking the erosion of pastoralism-related TEK.

=== Iran ===

The Bakhtiari tribe of Iran still practised this way of life in the mid-20th century. All along the Zagros Mountains from Azerbaijan to the Arabian Sea, pastoral tribes move back and forth with their herds annually according to the seasons, between their permanent homes in the valley and one in the foothills.

The Qashqai (Kashkai) are a Turkic tribe of southern Iran, who in the mid-20th century still practised transhumance. The tribe was said to have settled in ancient times in the province of Fars, near the Persian Gulf, and by the mid-20th century lived beyond the Makran mountains. In their yearly migrations for fresh pastures, the Kashkai drove their livestock from south to north, where they lived in summer quarters, known as , in the high mountains from April to October. They traditionally grazed their flocks on the slopes of the Kuh-e-Dinar, a group of mountains from , part of the Zagros chain.

In autumn the Kashkai broke camp, leaving the highlands to winter in warmer regions near Firuzabad, Kazerun, Jerrè, Farashband, on the banks of the Mond River. Their winter quarters were known as . The migration was organised and controlled by the Kashkai Chief. The tribes avoided villages and towns, such as Shiraz and Isfahan, because their large flocks, numbering seven million head, could cause serious damage.

In the 1950s, the Kashkai tribes were estimated to number 400,000 people in total. There have been many social changes since that time.

=== Lebanon ===

Examples of fixed transhumance are found in the North Governorate of Lebanon. Towns and villages located in the Qadisha valley are at an average altitude of . Some settlements, like Ehden and Kfarsghab, are used during summer periods from the beginning of June until mid-October. Inhabitants move in October to coastal towns situated at an average of above sea level. The transhumance is motivated by agricultural activities (historically by the mulberry silkworm culture). The main crops in the coastal towns are olive, grape and citrus. For the mountain towns, the crops are summer fruits, mainly apples and pears. Other examples of transhumance exist in Lebanon.

=== Kyrgyzstan ===
In Kyrgyzstan, transhumance practices, which never ceased during the Soviet period, have undergone a resurgence in the difficult economic times following independence in 1991. Transhumance is integral to Kyrgyz national culture. The people use a wool felt tent, known as the yurt or , while living on these summer pastures. It is symbolised on their national flag. Those shepherds prize a fermented drink made from mare&#x27;s milk, known as . A tool used in its production is the namesake for Bishkek, the country&#x27;s capital city.

=== South and East Asia ===
Transhumance practices are found in temperate areas, above ≈ in the Himalaya–Hindu Kush area (referred to below as Himalaya); and the cold semi-arid zone north of the Himalaya, through the Tibetan Plateau and northern China to the Eurasian Steppe.

Mongolia, China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Bhutan, India, Nepal and Pakistan all have vestigial transhumance cultures. The Bamar people of Myanmar were transhumance prior to their arrival to the region. In Mongolia, transhumance is used to avoid livestock losses during harsh winters, known as &quot;zuds&quot;. For regions of the Himalaya, transhumance still provides mainstay for several near-subsistence economiesfor example, that of Zanskar in northwest India, Van Gujjars and Bakarwals of Jammu and Kashmir in India, Kham Magar in western Nepal and Gaddis of Bharmaur region of Himachal Pradesh. In some cases, the distances travelled by the people with their livestock may be great enough to qualify as nomadic pastoralism.

== Oceania ==
=== Australia ===
In Australia, which has a large station (i.e., ranch) culture, stockmen provide the labour to move the herds to seasonal pastures.

Transhumant grazing is an important aspect of the cultural heritage of the Australian Alps, an area of which has been included on the Australian National Heritage List. Colonists started using this region for summer grazing in the 1830s, when pasture lower down was poor. The practice continued during the 19th and 20th centuries, helping make pastoralism in Australia viable. Transhumant grazing created a distinctive way of life that is an important part of Australia&#x27;s pioneering history and culture. There are features in the area that are reminders of transhumant grazing, including abandoned stockman&#x27;s huts, stock yards and stock routes.

== Africa ==
=== North Africa ===

The Berber people of North Africa were traditionally farmers, living in mountains relatively close to the Mediterranean coast, or oasis dwellers. However, the Tuareg and Zenaga of the southern Sahara practice nomadic transhumance. Other groups, such as the Chaouis, practised fixed transhumance.

=== Horn of Africa ===
In rural areas, the Somali and Afar of Northeast Africa also traditionally practise nomadic transhumance. Their pastoralism is centred on camel husbandry, with additional sheep and goat herding.

The classic, &quot;fixed&quot; transhumance is practiced in the Ethiopian Highlands. During the cropping season the lands around the villages are not accessible for grazing. For instance, farmers with livestock in Dogu&#x27;a Tembien organise annual transhumance, particularly towards remote and vast grazing grounds, deep in valleys (where the grass grows early due to temperature) or mountain tops. Livestock will stay there overnight (transhumance) with children and a few adults keeping them.

 For instance, the cattle of Addi Geza&#x27;iti () are brought every rainy season to the gorge of River Tsaliet () that holds dense vegetation. The cattle keepers establish enclosures for the cattle and places for them to sleep, often in rock shelters. The cattle stay there until harvesting time, when they are needed for threshing, and when the stubble becomes available for grazing. Many cattle of Haddinnet and also Ayninbirkekin in Dogu&#x27;a Tembien are brought to the foot of the escarpment at Ab&#x27;aro. Cattle stay on there on wide rangelands. Some cattle keepers move far down to open woodland and establish their camp in large caves in sandstone.

=== East Africa ===

The Pokot community are semi-nomadic pastoralists who are predominantly found in northwestern Kenya and Amudat district of Uganda. The community practices nomadic transhumance, with seasonal movement occurring between grasslands of Kenya (North Pokot sub-county) and Uganda (Amudat, Nakapiripirit and Moroto districts) (George Magak Oguna, 2014).

The Maasai are semi-nomadic people located primarily in Kenya and northern Tanzania who have transhumance cultures that revolve around their cattle.

=== Nigeria ===
&quot;Fulani&quot; is the Hausa word for the pastoral peoples of Nigeria belonging to the &quot;Fulbe&quot; migratory ethnic group. The &quot;Fulani&quot; rear the majority of Nigeria&#x27;s cattle, traditionally estimated at 83% pastoral, 17% village cattle and 0.3% peri-urban).

Cattle fulfil multiple roles in agro-pastoralist communities, providing meat, milk and draught power while sales of stock generate income and provide insurance against disasters. They also play a key role in status and prestige and for cementing social relationships such as kinship and marriage. For pastoralists, cattle represent the major household asset.

Pastoralism, as a livelihood, is coming under increased pressure across Africa, due to changing social, economic, political and environmental conditions. Prior to the 1950s, a symbiotic relationship existed between pastoralists, crop farmers and their environment with pastoralists practising transhumance. During the dry season, pastoralists migrated to the southern parts of the Guinea savannah zone, where there was ample pasture and a lower density of crop farmers. In the wet season, these areas faced high challenge from African animal trypanosomiasis transmitted by tsetse flies, so pastoralists would migrate to visit farmlands within the northern Sudan savannah zone, supplying dairy products to the local farming community. Reciprocally, the farming community supplied pastoralists with grain, and after the harvest, cattle were permitted to graze on crop residues in fields leaving behind valuable manure.

=== Angola ===
In Southern Angola, several peoples, chiefly the Ovambo and part of the Nyaneka-Khumbi, have cultures that are entirely organised according to the practice of transhumance.

=== Lesotho ===
The traditional economy of the Basotho in Lesotho is based on rearing cattle. They practise a seasonal migration between valley and high plateaus of the Maloti (basalt mountains of Lesotho). Pressure on pasture land has increased due to increases in population, as well as construction of large storage dams in these mountains to provide water to South Africa&#x27;s arid industrial heartland. Growing pressure on pastures is contributing to degradation of sensitive grasslands and could contribute to sedimentation in man-made lakes. The traditional transhumance pattern has become modified.

=== South Africa ===
In South Africa the transhumance lifestyle of the Nama clan of the Khoikhoi continues in the Richtersveld, a montane-desert located close to the Atlantic coast in the northwestern area of the country. In this area, people move seasonally (three or four times per annum) with their herds of sheep and goats. Transhumance is based on small family units, which use the same camps each year.

A portable, dome tent, called a (Afrikaans for &quot;mat house&quot;) or (meaning &quot;rush house&quot; in Nama) is a feature of Khoikhoi culture. These dwellings are used in their seasonal camps in the Richtersveld. It consists of a frame traditionally covered with rush mats. In the 21st century, the people sometimes use a variety of manufactured materials. In recognition of its significance, the Richtersveld has been designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

== North America ==
In the southern Appalachians of the United States in the 19th and early 20th centuries, settlers often pastured livestock, especially sheep, on grassy bald mountain tops where wild oats predominate. Historians have speculated that these &quot;balds&quot; are remnants of ancient bison grazing lands (which were possibly maintained by early native peoples of North America). In the absence of transhumance, these balds have been becoming covered by forest since the late 20th century. It is unclear whether efforts will be made to preserve these historic managed ecosystems.

Transhumance, in most cases relying on use of public land, continues to be an important ranching practice in the western United States. In the northern areas, this tradition was based on moving herds to higher ground with the greening of highland pastures in spring and summer. These uplands are part of large public lands, often under the jurisdiction of the United States Forest Service. In the winter, herds use lowland steppe or desert, also often government land under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management.

In California and Texas, a greater proportion of the range is held as private land, due to differing historical development of these areas. The general pattern is that in summer, ranch families, hired shepherds, or hired cowboys travel to the mountains and stay in a line camp during the summer. They may also visit the upland ranch regularly, using trailers to transport horses for use in the high country.
Traditionally in the American West, shepherds spent most of the year with a sheep herd, searching for the best forage in each season. This type of shepherding peaked in the late nineteenth century. Cattle and sheep herds are generally based on private land, although this may be a small part of the total range when all seasons are included. Some farmers who raised sheep recruited Basque shepherds to care for the herds, including managing migration between grazing lands. Workers from Peru, Chile (often Native Americans), and Mongolia have now taken shepherd roles; the Basque have bought their own ranches or moved to urban jobs. Shepherds take the sheep into the mountains in the summer (documented in the 2009 film &quot;Sweetgrass&quot;) and out on the desert in the winter, at times using crop stubble and pasture on private land when it is available. There are a number of different forms of transhumance in the United States:

The Navajo began practicing transhumance in the 1850s, after they were forced out of their traditional homeland in the San Juan River valley. They maintain many sheep.

In California, the home ranch tends to have more private land, largely because of the legacy of the Spanish land grant system. For this reason, extensive acreages of Mediterranean oak woodlands and grasslands are stewarded by ranches whose economy depends on summer range on government land under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Forest Service.

== South America ==

South American transhumance partially relies on &quot;cowboy&quot; counterparts, the of Argentina, Uruguay, Paraguay and (with the spelling &quot;&quot;) southern Brazil, the of Colombia and Venezuela, and the of Chile.

Transhumance is currently practised at least in Argentina, Chile, Peru and Bolivia, as well as in the Brazilian Pantanal. It mainly involves the movement of cattle in the Pantanal and parts of Argentina. In the Altiplano, communities of indigenous people depend on raising camelids, especially llamas. Herds of goats are managed by transhumance in North Neuquén and South Mendoza, while sheep are more used in the Patagonian plains. &quot;Criollos&quot; and indigenous peoples use transhumant practices in areas of South America.

== See also ==
* Altitudinal migration
* Kuchis
*List of Intangible Cultural Heritage elements in Albania
* Rarámuri
* Sarakatsani
* Seasonal human migration
* Yaylak

== Sources ==
* Jones, Schuyler. &quot;Transhumance Reconsidered&quot;. &quot;Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute&quot;, London, 2005.
* Costello, Eugene &amp; Svensson, Eva (eds.). Historical Archaeologies Of Transhumance Across Europe Routledge, London, 2018.
* Jones, Schuyler. &quot;Men of Influence: Social Control &amp; Dispute Settlement in Waigal Valley, Afghanistan&quot;. Seminar Press, London &amp; New York, 1974.
== References ==
== External links ==
* U.S. Department of Agriculture Discussion on Asia
* U.S. Department of Agriculture Discussion on Africa 
* Transhumance and &#x27;The Waiting Zone&#x27; in North Africa
* Limited traditional transhumance in Australia
* Pastoralism 
* Short mention of transhumance in North America
* Swiss land registry of alpine pastures (German)
* La transhumancia in Madrid Spain
* The transhumance from Schnals Valley (Italy) to Ötz Valley (Austria)
* Interview with Lionel Martorell, one of the last transhumant pastors in Eastern Spain</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4657754" start="0" end="12" title="Transhumance" label="Transhumance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056738" start="26" end="37" title="pastoralism" label="pastoralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="74" end="83" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="129" end="136" title="montane" label="montane"/>
<link wikidata="Q30121" start="217" end="224" title="pasture" label="pasture"/>
<link wikidata="Q209542" start="337" end="341" title="herd" label="herd"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="705" end="711" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="724" end="728" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q637776" start="785" end="790" title="dairy" label="dairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="834" end="838" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q34172" start="840" end="846" title="butter" label="butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q13317" start="848" end="854" title="yogurt" label="yogurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="859" end="865" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1043" end="1048" title="Agriculture in Wales#History" label="hafod"/>
<link wikidata="Q76212808" start="1059" end="1067" title="shieling" label="shieling"/>
<link wikidata="Q14774083" start="1084" end="1087" title="alpine pasture" label="alp"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1229" end="1235" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1257" end="1262" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107" start="1393" end="1402" title="continent" label="continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752198" start="1577" end="1585" title="Anatoly Khazanov" label="Khazanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252171" start="2255" end="2266" title="Hill people" label="Hill people"/>
<link wikidata="Q127604535" start="2481" end="2488" title="Droving" label="drovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="2509" end="2532" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056738" start="2534" end="2545" title="pastoralism" label="pastoralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="2557" end="2565" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2599" end="2609" title="Water resources#Water resource management" label="management"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="2663" end="2670" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="2672" end="2681" title="Albanians" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q841744" start="2689" end="2700" title="Sarakatsani" label="Sarakatsani"/>
<link wikidata="Q147576" start="2702" end="2717" title="Eastern Romance languages" label="Eastern Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="2719" end="2728" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q201111" start="2730" end="2740" title="Aromanians" label="Aromanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287652" start="2742" end="2759" title="Megleno-Romanians" label="Megleno-Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295763" start="2764" end="2779" title="Istro-Romanians" label="Istro-Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q170056" start="2793" end="2798" title="Yörük" label="Yörük"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="2932" end="2946" title="Austro-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2951" end="2965" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170427" start="3114" end="3130" title="Balkan Mountains" label="Balkan Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="3204" end="3214" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259773" start="3221" end="3228" title="Morlach" label="Morlach"/>
<link wikidata="Q147576" start="3264" end="3279" title="Eastern Romance languages" label="Eastern Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q189915" start="3354" end="3366" title="Dinaric Alps" label="Dinaric Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="3532" end="3546" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="8624" end="8629" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q867913" start="8995" end="9004" title="Snowdonia" label="Snowdonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39425" start="9568" end="9575" title="Bothy" label="bothies"/>
<link wikidata="Q76212808" start="9585" end="9593" title="shieling" label="shieling"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="9609" end="9624" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168568" start="9633" end="9651" title="drovers&amp;#x27; road" label="drovers&amp;#x27; road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017670" start="9697" end="9709" title="Cairnamounth" label="Cairnamounth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367561" start="9711" end="9724" title="Elsick Mounth" label="Elsick Mounth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054660" start="9729" end="9742" title="Causey Mounth" label="Causey Mounth"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="9824" end="9832" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="9844" end="9862" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q60744688" start="9918" end="9924" title="Upland pasture" label="upland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039708" start="9956" end="9965" title="agistment" label="agistment"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="10118" end="10126" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741252" start="10707" end="10716" title="Kilcommon" label="Kilcommon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776648" start="10725" end="10730" title="Erris" label="Erris"/>
<link wikidata="Q178626" start="10732" end="10742" title="County Mayo" label="North Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776456" start="10802" end="10809" title="rundale" label="rundale"/>
<link wikidata="Q905501" start="11162" end="11173" title="Early Irish law" label="Brehon Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="11203" end="11217" title="Early Medieval" label="Early Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168568" start="11755" end="11773" title="Drovers&amp;#x27; road" label="Drovers&amp;#x27; road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443" start="12097" end="12103" title="Molise" label="Molise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="12142" end="12148" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168568" start="12643" end="12652" title="Drovers&amp;#x27; road" label="droveways"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="13015" end="13023" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q208076" start="13032" end="13052" title="Cantabrian Mountains" label="Cantabrian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472433" start="13465" end="13473" title="Valles Pasiegos" label="Pasiegos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946" start="13483" end="13492" title="Cantabria" label="Cantabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025746" start="13500" end="13506" title="Cagot" label="Agotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="13516" end="13523" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q386837" start="13535" end="13554" title="Vaqueiros de alzada" label="Vaqueiros de alzada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934" start="13564" end="13572" title="Asturias" label="Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q71140" start="13577" end="13581" title="Province of León" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="13626" end="13634" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="14225" end="14236" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="14315" end="14332" title="industrialisation" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="14578" end="14604" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="14893" end="14904" title="Sami people" label="Sami people"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="14932" end="14940" title="reindeer" label="reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777019" start="15298" end="15304" title="meadow" label="meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q336989" start="15331" end="15334" title="hay" label="hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="15443" end="15447" title="cattle" label="Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q211638" start="15614" end="15622" title="Värmland" label="Värmland"/>
<link wikidata="Q205218" start="15624" end="15631" title="Dalarna" label="Dalarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q207444" start="15633" end="15643" title="Härjedalen" label="Härjedalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q211661" start="15645" end="15653" title="Jämtland" label="Jämtland"/>
<link wikidata="Q206564" start="15655" end="15666" title="Hälsingland" label="Hälsingland"/>
<link wikidata="Q210687" start="15668" end="15676" title="Medelpad" label="Medelpad"/>
<link wikidata="Q209853" start="15681" end="15693" title="Ångermanland" label="Ångermanland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="16130" end="16139" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q184492" start="16349" end="16356" title="Mälaren" label="Mälaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q214829" start="16370" end="16382" title="Östergötland" label="Östergötland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="16662" end="16669" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q215806" start="16718" end="16730" title="Heimskringla" label="Heimskringla"/>
<link wikidata="Q208331" start="16750" end="16767" title="Olaf II of Norway" label="Olaf II of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073271" start="16790" end="16797" title="Valldal" label="Valldal"/>
<link wikidata="Q488405" start="16801" end="16806" title="Lesja" label="Lesja"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477" start="17030" end="17038" title="Caucasus Mountains" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q519263" start="17043" end="17049" title="Pontic mountains" label="Pontic"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="17181" end="17190" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q43262" start="17296" end="17302" title="tundra" label="tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="17564" end="17572" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Kemalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="17867" end="17873" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="18133" end="18140" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="18161" end="18170" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="18495" end="18502" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q374999" start="18559" end="18569" title="Abano Pass" label="Abano Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142561" start="18592" end="18599" title="Tusheti" label="Tusheti"/>
<link wikidata="Q169674" start="18617" end="18624" title="Kakheti" label="Kakheti"/>
<link wikidata="Q145810" start="18693" end="18700" title="Kizlyar" label="Kizlyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="18720" end="18728" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q109297364" start="18803" end="18827" title="central Afghan highlands" label="central Afghan highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886920" start="18841" end="18851" title="Koh-i-Baba" label="Koh-i-Baba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472" start="18883" end="18893" title="Hindu Kush" label="Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="19287" end="19294" title="Pashtuns" label="Pashtun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244978" start="19295" end="19301" title="Kuchi people" label="Kuchis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226694" start="19344" end="19357" title="Nawur pasture" label="Nawur pasture"/>
<link wikidata="Q180415" start="19370" end="19385" title="Ghazni Province" label="Ghazni Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694396" start="19455" end="19468" title="Shewa pasture" label="Shewa pasture"/>
<link wikidata="Q165376" start="19501" end="19520" title="Badakhshan Province" label="Badakhshan Province"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19590" end="19603" title="Kyrgyz people#In Afghanistan" label="Afghan Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q167485" start="19628" end="19636" title="Nuristan" label="Nuristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q66278313" start="20116" end="20133" title="Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274487" start="20456" end="20463" title="Gurjar" label="Gujjars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516317" start="20477" end="20483" title="Gaddis" label="Gaddis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11555014" start="20594" end="20610" title="Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes" label="Scheduled tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="20621" end="20642" title="Constitution of India" label="Constitution of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637938" start="21592" end="21599" title="Bhotiya" label="Bhotiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499" start="21615" end="21626" title="Uttarakhand" label="Uttarakhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="21787" end="21792" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q208694" start="22406" end="22421" title="Sino-Indian War" label="Sino-Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q798284" start="23103" end="23112" title="Bakhtiari people" label="Bakhtiari"/>
<link wikidata="Q167021" start="23199" end="23215" title="Zagros Mountains" label="Zagros Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="23221" end="23231" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="23239" end="23250" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q249893" start="23415" end="23422" title="Qashqai people" label="Qashqai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004666" start="23599" end="23603" title="Fars province" label="Fars"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="23614" end="23626" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q695111" start="23673" end="23679" title="Makran" label="Makran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143042" start="23946" end="23957" title="Kuh-e-Dinar" label="Kuh-e-Dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955477" start="24162" end="24172" title="Mond River" label="Mond River"/>
<link wikidata="Q390267" start="24633" end="24650" title="North Governorate" label="North Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="24654" end="24661" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29384" start="24697" end="24704" title="Qadisha" label="Qadisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q611452" start="24767" end="24772" title="Ehden" label="Ehden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195900" start="24777" end="24786" title="Kfarsghab" label="Kfarsghab"/>
<link wikidata="Q44789" start="25031" end="25039" title="mulberry" label="mulberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q134747" start="25040" end="25048" title="silkworm" label="silkworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="25099" end="25104" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="25106" end="25111" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="25116" end="25122" title="citrus" label="citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="25184" end="25189" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q434" start="25195" end="25199" title="pear" label="pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="25274" end="25284" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="25340" end="25353" title="USSR" label="Soviet period"/>
<link wikidata="Q484479" start="25475" end="25481" title="Kyrgyz people" label="Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15680" start="25546" end="25550" title="yurt" label="yurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q165641" start="25621" end="25634" title="Flag of Kyrgyzstan" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q16797981" start="25660" end="25675" title="fermented drink" label="fermented drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="25765" end="25772" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="25904" end="25912" title="Himalaya" label="Himalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472" start="25913" end="25923" title="Hindu Kush" label="Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q179842" start="26025" end="26040" title="Tibetan Plateau" label="Tibetan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q77120" start="26067" end="26082" title="Eurasian Steppe" label="Eurasian Steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="26085" end="26093" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="26102" end="26112" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="26114" end="26124" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="26126" end="26132" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="26141" end="26146" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q503963" start="26206" end="26218" title="Bamar people" label="Bamar people"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="26222" end="26229" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262272" start="26383" end="26386" title="zud" label="zud"/>
<link wikidata="Q147011" start="26520" end="26527" title="Zanskar" label="Zanskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274487" start="26548" end="26559" title="Gujjar" label="Van Gujjars"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988987" start="26605" end="26615" title="Kham Magar" label="Kham Magar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361802" start="26792" end="26811" title="nomadic pastoralism" label="nomadic pastoralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097233" start="26878" end="26885" title="Station (Australian agriculture)" label="station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743503" start="26909" end="26917" title="Stockman (Australia)" label="stockmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056738" start="27322" end="27333" title="pastoralism" label="pastoralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="27673" end="27686" title="Berber people" label="Berber people"/>
<link wikidata="Q58843" start="27828" end="27834" title="Tuareg people" label="Tuareg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510021" start="27839" end="27845" title="Zenaga people" label="Zenaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q402515" start="27926" end="27933" title="Chaouis" label="Chaouis"/>
<link wikidata="Q241696" start="28009" end="28015" title="Somali people" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q211720" start="28020" end="28024" title="Afar people" label="Afar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375" start="28127" end="28132" title="camel" label="camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q85810460" start="28249" end="28268" title="Transhumance in Ethiopia" label="Ethiopian Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021278" start="28399" end="28418" title="Dogu&amp;#x27;a Tembien" label="Dogu&amp;#x27;a Tembien"/>
<link wikidata="Q85783204" start="28712" end="28730" title="Addi Geza&amp;#x27;iti" label="Addi Geza&amp;#x27;iti"/>
<link wikidata="Q86754922" start="28787" end="28794" title="Tsaliet" label="Tsaliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q85765446" start="29084" end="29093" title="Haddinnet" label="Haddinnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q85744466" start="29103" end="29116" title="Ayninbirkekin" label="Ayninbirkekin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021278" start="29120" end="29139" title="Dogu&amp;#x27;a Tembien" label="Dogu&amp;#x27;a Tembien"/>
<link wikidata="Q86754275" start="29185" end="29196" title="Ab&amp;#x27;aro" label="Ab&amp;#x27;aro"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="29460" end="29465" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="29489" end="29495" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q163022" start="29718" end="29724" title="Maasai people" label="Maasai"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="29770" end="29775" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="29789" end="29797" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q202575" start="29976" end="29981" title="Fula people" label="Fulbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617145" start="31057" end="31079" title="animal trypanosomiasis" label="animal trypanosomiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q205256" start="31095" end="31107" title="tsetse flies" label="tsetse flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="31467" end="31473" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137067" start="31504" end="31510" title="Ovambo people" label="Ovambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402452" start="31527" end="31541" title="Demographics of Angola" label="Nyaneka-Khumbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q577576" start="31676" end="31683" title="Basotho" label="Basotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013" start="31687" end="31694" title="Lesotho" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430420" start="31798" end="31804" title="Maloti Mountains" label="Maloti"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="31806" end="31812" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="31992" end="32004" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q694525" start="32310" end="32314" title="Nama people" label="Nama"/>
<link wikidata="Q219252" start="32327" end="32335" title="Khoikhoi" label="Khoikhoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353565" start="32353" end="32365" title="Richtersveld" label="Richtersveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="32369" end="32376" title="montane" label="montane"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="32377" end="32383" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="32682" end="32691" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q13301" start="32757" end="32761" title="Khoekhoe language" label="Nama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353565" start="32853" end="32865" title="Richtersveld" label="Richtersveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353565" start="33051" end="33063" title="Richtersveld" label="Richtersveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="33089" end="33115" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="33154" end="33166" title="Appalachians" label="Appalachians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858591" start="33282" end="33293" title="grassy bald" label="grassy bald"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="33478" end="33509" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="native peoples of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034648" start="33759" end="33770" title="public land" label="public land"/>
<link wikidata="Q60744688" start="33997" end="34004" title="Upland pasture" label="uplands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="34073" end="34101" title="United States Forest Service" label="United States Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="34211" end="34236" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655685" start="35374" end="35384" title="Sweetgrass (film)" label="Sweetgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="35588" end="35594" title="Navajo" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542874" start="35703" end="35717" title="San Juan River (Colorado River)" label="San Juan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="36205" end="36214" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="36216" end="36223" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="36225" end="36233" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="36295" end="36303" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="36308" end="36317" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="36330" end="36335" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="36404" end="36408" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="36413" end="36420" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157603" start="36450" end="36458" title="Pantanal" label="Pantanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q118574" start="36549" end="36558" title="Altiplano" label="Altiplano"/>
<link wikidata="Q867207" start="36611" end="36619" title="Lamini" label="camelids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="36649" end="36653" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q44800" start="36692" end="36699" title="Neuquén Province" label="Neuquén"/>
<link wikidata="Q44797" start="36710" end="36717" title="Province of Mendoza" label="Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="36725" end="36730" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="36752" end="36761" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242047" start="36777" end="36785" title="Criollo people" label="Criollos"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="36796" end="36806" title="indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906310" start="36886" end="36907" title="Altitudinal migration" label="Altitudinal migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244978" start="36910" end="36916" title="Kuchis" label="Kuchis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29837706" start="36918" end="36974" title="List of Intangible Cultural Heritage elements in Albania" label="List of Intangible Cultural Heritage elements in Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q429921" start="36977" end="36985" title="Rarámuri" label="Rarámuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q841744" start="36988" end="36999" title="Sarakatsani" label="Sarakatsani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354288" start="37002" end="37026" title="Seasonal human migration" label="Seasonal human migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670331" start="37029" end="37035" title="Yaylak" label="Yaylak"/>
<link wikidata="Q112492514" start="37053" end="37068" title="Jones, Schuyler" label="Jones, Schuyler"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291947" wikidata="Q7154375" url="?curid=291947" title="Paul William Roberts">
<text>Paul William Roberts (1950 – May 17, 2019) was a Canadian writer who spent many years in Toronto before moving to the Laurentians in Quebec upon losing his vision.

Born in Wales and educated at Exeter College, Oxford, where he gained a second in English Language and Literature, Roberts moved permanently to Canada in 1980. He lived for several years prior to this in India, where he taught at Bangalore University and studied Sanskrit at the Banaras Hindu University in Varanasi.

While working on his first novel, &quot;The Palace of Fears&quot;, he worked as a television producer at the BBC, and then the CBC and Citytv in Toronto, and was one of the original cohosts of TVOntario&#x27;s literature talk series &quot;Imprint&quot;. He covered both the 1991 and 2003 Iraq wars for &quot;Harper&#x27;s&quot;, winning numerous awards and accolades, including the 2005 inaugural PEN &#x27;Paul Kidd Award for Courage in Journalism&#x27;.

While known to be a friend of &quot;Harper&#x27;s&quot; editor Lewis H. Lapham, whom he regards as a mentor, he was believed to be something of a recluse. His non-fiction writing has always received highly enthusiastic reviews, but is difficult to categorize, being more memoir, political critique and history than travelogue.

In 2008 Roberts lost vision in both eyes and was declared legally blind. Roberts had completed an historical novel on Queen Victoria&#x27;s father, the Duke of Kent and several works of fiction and memoir when he died before publishing. He died on May 17, 2019

==Political stance==
Although praised by Noam Chomsky and others on the Left for his tireless opposition to the 2003 invasion of Iraq and ongoing US policies in the Middle East and Persian Gulf, Roberts&#x27; criticisms of neoconservatism and its influence over foreign policy seem to stem from deeper philosophical differences with the ideas of Leo Strauss, who many regard as the founder of the new Right&#x27;s ideology. Roberts contended that Strauss is guilty of a fundamental and possibly willful misreading of Plato that stems from using al-Farabi&#x27;s Commentary rather than the Socratic texts. He also placed Strauss within the context of Nietzsche, Adorno, Heidegger and other exponents of what he termed &quot;philosophical fascism&quot;.

Roberts was a long-time friend of the writers Martin Amis, with whom he shared a house at Oxford, and Christopher Hitchens.

Roberts was for many years a supporter of Israel but he increasingly criticized Israeli policies and expressed sympathy for the plight of Palestinians, stating that he viewed them as &quot;more sinned against than sinning&quot;.

==Works==
*&quot;River in the Desert: Modern Travels in Ancient Egypt&quot; – 1992; (hardcover); (paperback)
*&quot;The Palace of Fears: a novel&quot; – 1994; 
*&quot;Empire of the Soul: Some Journeys in India&quot; – 1996; (hardcover); (paperback)
*&quot;Journey of the Magi: In Search of the Birth of Jesus&quot; – 1995; 
*&quot;The Demonic Comedy: Some Detours in the Baghdad of Saddam Hussein&quot; – 1997; 
*&quot;Smokescreen: One Man Against the Underworld&quot; – 2001; 
*&quot;A War Against Truth : An Intimate Account of the Invasion of Iraq&quot; – 2004; 
*&quot;Homeland: a novel&quot; – 2006; 

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7154375" start="0" end="20" title="Paul William Roberts" label="Paul William Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q81173" start="195" end="217" title="Exeter College, Oxford" label="Exeter College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="237" end="243" title="British undergraduate degree classification" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519221" start="395" end="415" title="Bangalore University" label="Bangalore University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="428" end="436" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q806116" start="444" end="468" title="Banaras Hindu University" label="Banaras Hindu University"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="472" end="480" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="592" end="595" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="610" end="613" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931559" start="618" end="624" title="CITY-TV" label="Citytv"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512565" start="676" end="685" title="TVOntario" label="TVOntario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007660" start="722" end="729" title="Imprint (TV series)" label="Imprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="757" end="761" title="Gulf War" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="766" end="770" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="771" end="775" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="791" end="804" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q206811" start="880" end="883" title="International PEN" label="PEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536635" start="1003" end="1018" title="Lewis H. Lapham" label="Lewis H. Lapham"/>
<link wikidata="Q967647" start="1041" end="1047" title="Mentoring" label="mentor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303143" start="1086" end="1093" title="recluse" label="recluse"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="1571" end="1583" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="1602" end="1606" title="Left-wing politics" label="Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="1711" end="1723" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="1753" end="1768" title="neoconservatism" label="neoconservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q77144" start="1876" end="1887" title="Leo Strauss" label="Leo Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="1931" end="1936" title="Right-wing politics" label="Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="2047" end="2052" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q160460" start="2075" end="2084" title="al-Farabi" label="al-Farabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="2119" end="2127" title="Socrates" label="Socratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="2180" end="2189" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q152388" start="2191" end="2197" title="Theodor W. Adorno" label="Adorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="2199" end="2208" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q310176" start="2329" end="2340" title="Martin Amis" label="Martin Amis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49081" start="2385" end="2405" title="Christopher Hitchens" label="Christopher Hitchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="2450" end="2456" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="2546" end="2558" title="Palestinians" label="Palestinians"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291951" wikidata="Q5146020" url="?curid=291951" title="Collect Pond">
<text>Collect Pond, or Fresh Water Pond, was a body of fresh water in what is now Chinatown in Lower Manhattan, New York City. For the first two centuries of European settlement in Manhattan, it was the main New York City water supply system for the growing city. A jail was later built on the former pond. In the 20th century, the site became Collect Pond Park (), which includes a reflecting pool to acknowledge the historic importance of this body of water.

==Pond description==
The pond occupied approximately and was as deep as . Fed by an underground spring, it was located in a valley, with Bayard Mount (at the tallest hill in lower Manhattan) to the northeast and &quot;Kalck Hoek&quot; (Dutch for &quot;Chalk Point&quot;, named for the numerous oyster shell middens left by the indigenous Native American inhabitants) to the west. A stream flowed north out of the pond and then west through a salt marsh (which, after being drained, became a meadow by the name of &quot;Lispenard Meadows&quot;) to the Hudson River, while another stream issued from the southeastern part of the pond in an easterly direction to the East River.

The southwestern shore of Collect Pond was the site of a Native American settlement known as &quot;Werpoes&quot;. A small band of Munsee, the northernmost division of the Lenape, occupied the site. The Munsee continued to live at Collect Pond until the Dutch settlement of New Amsterdam was established in the 17th century. It is possible that members of this band were the participants in the &quot;sale&quot; of Manhattan to the Dutch.

Collect Pond was used as a terms of boundary for night watch duties in 1731 under John Montgomerie&#x27;s charter during the British rule in New York City. The pond was home to a copious amount of fish, and in 1734 legislation was passed preventing the use of nets in the pond. This was prior to the extreme pollution to the pond, which included the dumping of dead animals.

== 18th century ==
In the 18th century, the pond was used as a picnic area during summer and a skating rink during the winter. Beginning in the early 18th century, various commercial enterprises were built along the shores of the pond in order to use the water. These businesses included Coulthards Brewery, Nicholas Bayard&#x27;s slaughterhouse on Mulberry Street (which was nicknamed &quot;Slaughterhouse Street&quot;), numerous tanneries on the southeastern shore, and the pottery works of German immigrants Johan Willem Crolius and Johan Remmey on Pot Bakers Hill on the south-southwestern shore. By the late 18th century, the pond was considered &quot;a very sink and common sewer&quot;.

===John Fitch&#x27;s steamboat experiment===
Connecticut inventor John Fitch was an instrument maker working in the later part of the 18th century. As an early pioneer of steam navigation, Fitch tested several steamboats on the Delaware River between 1785 and 1788. Fitch’s real success, however, occurred in 1796 when he tested another ship equipped with a paddle wheel on Collect Pond. On the boat with him was fellow inventor Robert Fulton, Robert R. Livingston, who was the first Chancellor of New York and a signer of the Declaration of Independence, and 16-year-old John Hutchings, steering.

This was six years before Fulton and Livingston launched “Fulton’s Folly” on the Seine River in France. Hutchings claims to have been a “lad” at the time who “assisted Mr. Fitch in steering the boat”. In a broadside issued in 1846, Hutchings asserts that it was in fact Fitch who designed the steam propulsion mechanism. He claims that both Fulton and Livingston were present during Collect Pond tests and in fact depicts both, as well as Fitch and himself, in a paddlewheel steam ship in the upper left quadrant of the broadside. Though Fulton seems to have received most of the credit for the era of steam navigation, Hutchings hoped, through the publication of this broadside, to shed some light on Fitch’s contributions as well. A plaque at Collect Pond Park, however, states that though Fitch&#x27;s account &quot;is often repeated, no evidence has been found to substantiate the story.&quot;

==Contamination and landfill==
The contaminated wastewater of the businesses surrounding the pond flowed back into the pond, creating a severe pollution problem and environmental health hazard. Pierre Charles L&#x27;Enfant proposed cleaning the pond and making it a centerpiece of a recreational park, around which the residential areas of the city could grow. His proposal was rejected, and it was decided to drain and fill in the pond. This was accomplished with soil partially obtained from leveling the nearby hills of Bayard&#x27;s Mount and Kalck Hoek, and by digging a canal to the north to encourage the water to drain into the river. The landfill was completed in 1811, and middle class homes were soon built on the reclaimed land.

The landfill was poorly engineered. The buried vegetation began to release methane gas (a byproduct of decomposition) and the area, still in a natural depression, lacked adequate storm sewers. As a result, the ground gradually subsided. Houses shifted on their foundations, the unpaved streets were often buried in a foot of mud and mixed with human and animal excrement, and mosquitoes bred in the stagnant pools created by the poor drainage.

Several decades later, New York City obtained a new, plentiful supply of fresh water from the Croton Aqueduct. The neighborhood known as &quot;Five Points&quot;, a notorious slum, developed near the former eastern bank of the Collect and owed its existence in some measure to the poor landfill job (completed in 1811) which created swampy, mosquito-ridden conditions on land that had originally had more well-to-do residents.

Most middle and upper class inhabitants fled the area, leaving the neighborhood open to poor immigrants that began arriving in the early 1820s. This influx reached a height in the 1840s, with large numbers of Irish Catholics fleeing the Great Famine.

==The Tombs==
New York&#x27;s jail, nicknamed &quot;The Tombs&quot;, was built on Centre Street in 1838 on the site of the pond and was constructed on a huge platform of hemlock logs in an attempt to give it secure foundations. The design, by John Haviland, was based on an engraving of an ancient Egyptian mausoleum. The building was in length by wide and it occupied a full block, surrounded by Centre, Franklin, Elm (today&#x27;s Lafayette), and Leonard Streets. It initially accommodated about 300 prisoners.

The prison building began to subside almost as soon as it was completed and was notorious for leaks in its lowest tier and for its general dampness. The original building was replaced in 1902 with a new one on the same site connected by a &quot;Bridge of Sighs&quot; to the Criminal Courts Building on the Franklin Street side. When the original Tombs building was condemned and demolished at the end of the century, large concrete caissons were emplaced to bedrock, as much as 140 feet below street level, in order to give its replacement more secure foundations. That building was replaced in 1941 by one across the street on the east side of Centre Street with the entrance at 125 White Street, officially named the Manhattan Detention Complex, though still referred to colloquially as &quot;The Tombs&quot;.

==Park conversion==
The park is located on the block bordered by Lafayette Street, Leonard Street, Centre Street, and White Street, and sits between the three city courthouses: the Criminal Court, Civil Court, and Family Court.

In 1960, the New York City Board of Estimate transferred the former site of Collect Pond to the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation for conversion into a park. Originally named &quot;Civil Court Park&quot; because of its proximity to the surrounding courthouses, it was renamed &quot;Collect Pond Park&quot; under Commissioner Henry J. Stern to represent the location&#x27;s history.

In 2006, the city received funding for a renovation of Collect Pond Park, using federal-relief funds distributed after the September 11 attacks. The park was closed for a total reconstruction in 2011. The granite foundation of The Tombs was uncovered in 2012, leading to a partial stop-work order pending archaeological investigation. The rebuilt park reopened in May 2014, with a pool evocative of the former Collect Pond. The project had cost $4.6 million. Although the park was popular among residents and visitors, the pool had to be drained and repaired within months of the park&#x27;s reopening; it was refilled in 2015.

It is still possible to ascertain the rough boundaries of Collect Pond and original topography in the elevations of the streets in the area, with the lowest elevation being Centre Street which runs in the approximate center of the former pond.

In 2020, the Italian-Argentine sculptor Luciano Garbati&#x27;s work &quot;Medusa With the Head of Perseus&quot; (2008), a seven-foot-tall representation of Medusa carrying Perseus&#x27;s head, was installed in the center of the park as part of the NYC Parks Department&#x27;s public art program. Garbati&#x27;s work, a reversal of Cellini&#x27;s &quot;Perseus with the Head of Medusa&quot;, an Italian Renaissance bronze, was reimagined by MeToo movement advocates as a symbol of feminist triumph. 

==References==
==External links==
*Collect Pond Park on Google maps
*Collect Pond Video
*Collect Pond Park — New York City Department of Parks &amp; Recreation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5146020" start="0" end="12" title="Collect Pond" label="Collect Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146020" start="17" end="33" title="Collect Pond" label="Fresh Water Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q15324" start="41" end="60" title="Body of water" label="body of fresh water"/>
<link wikidata="Q866332" start="76" end="85" title="Chinatown, Manhattan" label="Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="89" end="104" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="106" end="119" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="175" end="184" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013338" start="202" end="235" title="New York City water supply system" label="New York City water supply system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146020" start="338" end="355" title="Collect Pond" label="Collect Pond Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="692" end="697" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q468415" start="750" end="756" title="Eastern oyster" label="oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152199" start="763" end="769" title="midden" label="midden"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="783" end="793" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="794" end="809" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q29925" start="898" end="908" title="salt marsh" label="salt marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777019" start="947" end="953" title="meadow" label="meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="1007" end="1019" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q212862" start="1120" end="1130" title="East River" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="1304" end="1310" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q223308" start="1406" end="1419" title="New Amsterdam" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282870" start="2043" end="2055" title="ice rink" label="skating rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754811" start="2236" end="2254" title="The Old Brewery" label="Coulthards Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q508327" start="2256" end="2271" title="Nicholas Bayard" label="Nicholas Bayard"/>
<link wikidata="Q385557" start="2279" end="2293" title="slaughterhouse" label="slaughterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q211578" start="2379" end="2388" title="Tanning (leather)" label="tanneries"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="2441" end="2458" title="German American" label="German immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127637" start="2472" end="2479" title="Clarkson Crolius" label="Crolius"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="2687" end="2698" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q578827" start="2708" end="2718" title="John Fitch (inventor)" label="John Fitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q178193" start="2852" end="2861" title="steamboat" label="steamboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="2870" end="2884" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874394" start="3000" end="3012" title="paddle wheel" label="paddle wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q192496" start="3071" end="3084" title="Robert Fulton" label="Robert Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q283676" start="3086" end="3106" title="Robert R. Livingston (chancellor)" label="Robert R. Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147519" start="3126" end="3148" title="New York Court of Chancery" label="Chancellor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785439" start="3299" end="3313" title="Fulton’s Folly" label="Fulton’s Folly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="3322" end="3333" title="Seine River" label="Seine River"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3337" end="3343" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q336191" start="4188" end="4198" title="wastewater" label="wastewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="4283" end="4292" title="Water pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q264764" start="4334" end="4362" title="Pierre Charles L&amp;#x27;Enfant" label="Pierre Charles L&amp;#x27;Enfant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4716" end="4721" title="Canal Street (Manhattan)#History" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q152810" start="4787" end="4795" title="landfill" label="landfill"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="4823" end="4835" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="4865" end="4879" title="reclaimed land" label="reclaimed land"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="4957" end="4964" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q339062" start="4985" end="4998" title="decomposition" label="decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139766" start="5061" end="5072" title="storm sewer" label="storm sewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170449" start="5207" end="5210" title="mud" label="mud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367" start="5258" end="5266" title="mosquito" label="mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046751" start="5281" end="5295" title="Water stagnation" label="stagnant pools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141610" start="5421" end="5436" title="Croton Aqueduct" label="Croton Aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144561" start="5470" end="5481" title="Five Points, Manhattan" label="Five Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q201759" start="5501" end="5505" title="slum" label="slum"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="5991" end="6003" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769545" start="6058" end="6067" title="The Tombs" label="The Tombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062314" start="6088" end="6101" title="Centre Street (Manhattan)" label="Centre Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q942387" start="6249" end="6262" title="John Haviland" label="John Haviland"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="6313" end="6322" title="mausoleum" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="6943" end="6951" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q846451" start="6952" end="6960" title="Caisson (engineering)" label="caissons"/>
<link wikidata="Q570309" start="6978" end="6985" title="bedrock" label="bedrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769545" start="7239" end="7266" title="Manhattan Detention Complex" label="Manhattan Detention Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592949" start="7398" end="7414" title="Lafayette Street" label="Lafayette Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062314" start="7432" end="7445" title="Centre Street (Manhattan)" label="Centre Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013152" start="7514" end="7528" title="New York City Criminal Court" label="Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013141" start="7575" end="7606" title="New York City Board of Estimate" label="New York City Board of Estimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894232" start="7658" end="7706" title="New York City Department of Parks and Recreation" label="New York City Department of Parks and Recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728701" start="7902" end="7916" title="Henry Stern (New York politician)" label="Henry J. Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="8083" end="8103" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="8673" end="8683" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056744" start="8847" end="8864" title="Italian-Argentine" label="Italian-Argentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q160730" start="8990" end="8996" title="Medusa" label="Medusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q130832" start="9006" end="9013" title="Perseus" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q557141" start="9110" end="9120" title="public art" label="public art"/>
<link wikidata="Q190116" start="9165" end="9172" title="Benvenuto Cellini" label="Cellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q599034" start="9186" end="9217" title="Perseus with the Head of Medusa" label="Perseus with the Head of Medusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="9228" end="9247" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q42133786" start="9274" end="9288" title="MeToo movement" label="MeToo movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="9314" end="9322" title="Feminism" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894232" start="9443" end="9493" title="New York City Department of Parks &amp;amp; Recreation" label="New York City Department of Parks &amp;amp; Recreation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291952" wikidata="Q643172" url="?curid=291952" title="Masjed Soleyman">
<text>Masjed Soleyman () is a city in the Central District of Masjed Soleyman County, Khuzestan province, Iran, serving as capital of both the county and the district.

== History ==
The city of Masjed Soleyman is among the ancient cities of the early Mesopotamian empire of Elam which was originally known as Assak, but was changed to Parsomash by the early Achemenids. In 1955, Roman Ghirshman discovered evidence of human inhabitation dating to 10,000 years ago in Pepdeh cave in vicinity of the current city of Lali, making it one of the oldest inhabited sites in the Khuzestan plain. Ghirshman&#x27;s excavations in the area of Masjed Soleyman led him to believe that Parsomash (present-day Masjed Soleyman) was the oldest capital of the Achaemenid Kingdom.

The remains of an ancient fire-temple known locally as Sar-masjid and attributed to the legendary pre-historic king Houshang, and the ruins of an Achaemenid palace known locally as Bard- Neshandeh which is known as the birthplace of Teispes, grandfather of Cyrus the Great are among the archaeological ruins in this city. Under the Seleucids and Ashkanians the city of Masjed Soleyman remained an important city.

During the Sassanid period canals and weir-bridges were built, resulting into the cultivation of tobacco and cereals in the region. The ruins of such edifices can be seen in the Tembi region, Godar Landar and Dow-Paloon region (near Izeh); however, following the Muslim conquest of Iran, many of the ancient monolithic structures of the region were demolished and the region was ruled by rulers imposed by the Umayyad Caliphs and remained relatively obscure, until the Qajar era when it became a center for the tar trade and its name was changed to Tol-Ghor, with its borders being limited from the Karun river&#x27;s Western bank to the tar springs; however, with the advent of the discovery of oil in the region, this city was named Jahangiri, but after the first oil well began production it was renamed Maydan-Nafton. In 1924, the National Council of Iran through an edict from Mohammad Reza Pahlavi officially changed the city&#x27;s name to Masjed Soleyman.

=== Masjed Soleyman in the 20th century ===
Masjed Soleyman regained importance with the discovery of oil and the erecting of the first oil well in the middle east by D&#x27;Arcy&#x27;s concession. In 1900, he agreed to fund a search for oil and minerals in Persia headed by Wolff, Ketabchee and Cotte, although D&#x27;Arcy never visited Persia himself. Negotiations with the reigning monarch Mozaffar al-Din Shah Qajar began in 1901, and with the offer of £20,000 (£ million today), for a sixty-year concession to explore for oil—later, the D&#x27;Arcy concession—was secured in May, covering , and stipulated that D&#x27;Arcy would have the oil rights to the entire country except for five provinces in Northern Iran.

In exchange, the Iranian government was given 16% of the oil company&#x27;s annual profits, an agreement that would remain in effect until the Iranian Revolution. After the D&#x27;Arcy concession, the British government became much more concerned with the stability of Iran because of their reliance on the country&#x27;s vast oil reserves.

=== Constitutional Revolution ===
Ḥossain Qolī Khan Haft Lang was appointed superintendent (nāẓem) of the Baḵtīārīs by the Shah in 1862 and head of the tribe (īlḵān) in 1867. He was the first recipient of this title, and in the tribe he became known by the surname Īlḵānī. In 1882 the Shah caused him to be murdered and replaced by his brother Emām Qolī Khan, surnamed Ḥājī Īlḵānī.

From then almost without interruption until the abolition of the title khan in 1956, the successive heads of the tribe were descendants of one or the other of the two brothers. The Haft Lang tribe played a significant role; particularly during the advent of the country&#x27;s Constitutional Revolution (1905–1907). This event largely succeeded as a result of the Bakhtari tribal coalition military campaign led by Ali-Gholi Khan, Sardar Asaad II, a chieftain of the Haft-lang tribe and his brother Najaf Qoli Khan Bakhtiari- Saad ad-Daula (also referred to as Samsam-os Saltane) whom in 1909 marched up to the gates of Tehran, and eventually deposed Mohammad Ali Shah Qajar (r. 1907–1909).

This event led to the abdication of Mohammad Ali Shah Qajar (r. 1907–1909) in 1909, and his exile to Russia. This incident secured Saad ad-Daula the position of Prime Minister in the period that followed the abdication of the Qajar Shah. Nonetheless, with Russian backing, the Shah would attempt to regain his throne in 1911 by landing with a coalition of forces at Astarabad . However, his efforts to reclaim his throne would bear no fruit. In this sense, the Bakhtiaris played a critical role in saving the revolution from the Qajar forces.

=== Pahlavi era === 
With the expansion of Bakhtiari influence, influential policy makers (particularly in Tehran) began to worry regarding the potential Bakhtiari takeover of Persia&#x27;s affairs. Prior to this point, the Bakhtiari had largely remained within their own territorial boundaries. In February 1921, the said policy makers instigated a coup by which Reza Pahlavi the commander of the entire Cossack Brigade which was based in Qazvinordered his troops to march towards Tehran and seized the capital.

He forced the dissolution of the government and installed Zia ol Din Tabatabaee as the new prime minister. In 1925, Reza Pahlavi was appointed as the legal monarch of Iran by the decision of Iran&#x27;s constituent assembly. The assembly deposed Ahmad Shah Qajar, the last Shah of the Qajar dynasty, and amended Iran&#x27;s 1906 constitution to allow selection of Reza Pahlavi as the Shah of Iran. The Bakhtiari influence in Iranian politics thus waned, but they would continue to play an important role within the early 20th century politics of Iran. Reza Shah Pahlavi (r. 1925–1941) made the destruction of the Bakhtiari influence his mission; moreover, the existence of oil on Bakhtiari territory further motivated the Pahlavi monarch to undermine the autonomy of the tribe and force its population to adhere to the commands of the central government.

Reza Shah Pahlavi would eventually execute a few noteworthy tribal leaders to crush Bakhtiari autonomy and maintain control over the tribe. Amongst the executed Khans was Mohammad Reza Khan (Sardar-e-Fateh), whose son later became the Pahlavi Prime Minister Shapour Bakhtiar. The latter event was a turning point for Bakhtiari and their rise within Iranian politics.

=== Discovery of oil in the early 20th century===
In the late 19th century Britain&#x27;s Royal Navy, under the leadership of Sir Winston Churchill decided to shift its fuel source from coal to oil; therefore the British admiralty and the War office became the de facto force behind the British government&#x27;s quest for oil. During the 1890s, research and reports were collected by the British foreign office indicating that Persia had great oil potential.

The British Foreign office selected William Knox D&#x27;Arcy, a millionaire investor, and provided him with the reports, promising him greater wealth and governmental support if he invested in the excavation of oil. D&#x27;Arcy agreed and sent out representatives to Tehran to win a concession that would give him the exclusive rights to prospect for oil in Persia. On 16 April 1901 negotiations commenced between D&#x27;Arcy&#x27;s representatives and the Qajar monarch Mozzafar al-Din Shah over a potential oil concession.[4]

On 28 May 1901, Shah Mozzafar al-Din signed an 18 article concession which exclusively gave D&#x27;Arcy the rights to prospect, explore, exploit, transport and sell natural gas, petroleum, asphalt and mineral waxes in Persia.[7] This concession also granted D&#x27;Arcy these rights for a 60-year period, and it covered an area of 1,242,000 square kilometers.[8] or roughly three quarters of the country.

In 1902, a drilling team under George B. Reynolds was sent to Chiah Surkh near the current Iran-Iraq border and in 1904 discovered oil; however, he and his team suffered much hardship and the venture had put a strain on D&#x27;arcy&#x27;s funds in as such that he had already spent £160,000, and was overdrawn at Lloyds Bank by £177,000. In 1905, the British Admiralty fearing the possible selling of the concession to its rivals in the Middle east convinced D&#x27;Arcy through an elaborate ruse to seek financial support from Burmah Oil Company Ltd., and in 1905 the Concession Syndicate was established which was later renamed as the Anglo Persian Oil Co. in 1909.[18]

The infusion of capital provided by Burmah Oil allowed for the exploration of oil to continue; however, drilling operations shifted to southwestern Persia, and all drilling equipment was shipped to a new drilling site at Masjed Soleyman.[19] Once again Reynolds encountered problems in this region with hostile tribes and the local population.

Reynolds often had to pay them a high fee and guarantee them a share of profits in order to protect the concession.[20] In 1907,due to no success in findings, D&#x27;Arcy sold off the majority of his shares to Burmah Oil for £203,067 cash and £900,000 in shares, allowing Burmah to become the major shareholder of the company.[15]. At 4:00 am on 26 May 1908, commercial quantities of oil were struck at the Masjed Soleyman site and a fifty-foot gusher of petroleum shot up the no. 1 drilling rig.[22]

In April 1909, D&#x27;Arcy was appointed a director of the newly founded Anglo-Persian Oil Company (APOC), which would later become British Petroleum (BP). By 1911, APOC had run a pipeline from the oil field in Masjed Soleyman to a refinery at Abadan.

==Demographics==
=== Ethnicity ===
The city of Masjed Soleyman is home to a large Bakhtiyari population of the Haft-lang tribe. The Bakhtiaris occupy the mountain tract in South-West Persia lying roughly between longitudes 31 to 34 N and 48 40&#x27; to 51 E, bound on the south by the plains of Khuzistan and on the north by the districts of Chahar Mahal, Faridan, and Khonsar where the central Iranian Plateau blends into the great southern mountain range. Bakhtiaris were semi-nomadic, and their livelihood depended on the survival of their herds of sheep, cattle, and horses. The four main tribal divisions of Haft Lang are Duraki, Babadi, Bakhtiarwand, and Dinaruni, who are then divided into lesser clans.

===Population===
At the time of the 2006 National Census, the city&#x27;s population was 106,121 in 22,393 households. The following census in 2011 counted 103,369 people in 24,577 households. The 2016 census measured the population of the city as 100,497 people in 26,502 households.

== Climate ==
At Masjed-Soleyman, the summers are long, sweltering, arid, and clear and the winters are cool, dry, and mostly clear. Over the course of the year, the temperature typically varies from 45 °F to 112 °F and is rarely below 38 °F or above 117 °F. The best time of year to visit Masjed-Soleyman is from mid-September to late October. Masjed Soleyman is classified as having a hot semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;BSh&quot;).


== Notable people ==
* Ali-Qoli Khan Bakhtiari (1856–1917), a chieftain of the Bakhtiari Haft Lang tribe and one of the primary figures of the Persian Constitutional Revolution
* Bibi Maryam Bakhtiari (1874–1937), revolutionary and activist of the Iranian Constitutional Revolution who was the daughter of Hossein Gholi Khan Bakhtiari,and the sister of Ali-Qoli Khan Bakhtiari 
* Soraya Esfandiary-Bakhtiary (1932–2001), Queen of the Imperial State of Iran and second wife of Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi
*Bahman Ala&#x27;eddin (Masood Bakhtiari) (1940–2006), musician, music historian, teacher and renown singer in the Bakhtiari dialect.
* Frank Nezhadpournia (1971–), Anglo Iranian Pilot, Karate Master, Author. The first Iranian to volunteer for military service in Iran after receiving a Presidential Invite.
* Bijan Allipour (1949–), Iranian business executive. former CEO of NISOC.
* Mehran Karimi Nasseri (1945–2022), Iranian refugee who lived in the departure lounge of Terminal One in Charles de Gaulle Airport from 26 August 1988 until July 2006
* Habib Far Abbasi (1997–), footballer
* Mohsen Rezaei (1954–), Iranian politician, economist and former military commander
*Laleh Bakhtiar, author and former professor at the University of Chicago, who wrote a feminist re-interpretation of the Koran.
*Rostam Amir Bakhtiar, Chief of Imperial Protocol (1953–1979).
*Abbasgholi Bakhtiar, Minister of Industries &amp; Mines (1979).
*Abdolhamid Bakhtiar, Majles Deputy.
*Abolhassan Bakhtiar, Iranian Ambassador to Canada (1979).
*Agha Khan Bakhtiar, Minister of Labor (1957–1958), Head of the National Iranian Oil Company.
*Gholam-Reza Bakhtiar, Sardar Bakhtiar, Deputy Governor of Esfahan.
*Rudi Bakhtiar, former CNN and FOX TV news anchor and journalist.
*Shahpour Bakhtiar, politician and Prime Minister of Iran (1979).
*Teymur Bakhtiar, Iranian general and head of Savak.
*Behnoosh Bakhtiari, Iranian actress.
*David Bakhtiari, NFL player and offensive tackle for the Green Bay Packers.
*Behrouz Bakhtiar Successful businessman and owner of Crosskeys Vineyards
*Gholam-Hossein Bakhtiari (Sardar Mohtashem), Minister of War (1911–13, 1918).
*Pezhman Bakhtiari, poet (1900–1974).
*Shaghayegh Dehghan, Iranian television actress, half Bakhtiari.
*Khalil Esfandiary-Bakhtiary, Iranian Ambassador to West Germany (1952–1961).
*Mirza Hideyatu&#x27;llah Ashtiani Bakhtiari (d.1892), Iran&#x27;s finance minister during the Qajar period.
*Eman Mobali, football player.
*Zargham Saltaneh, Ebrahim, commander and instrumental figure in the Constitutional Revolution of 1909.
*Nasir Khan, Sardar Jang, Governor of Yazd.
*Niloufar Bakhtiar Bakhtiari, founder of NBB Design London, Interior Architecture.
*Bahram Akasheh, Iran&#x27;s leading experts on earthquakes

== MasjedSoleyman Municipality == 

Masjed Soleyman Municipality is a public non-governmental organization that was founded in 1960 and manages the city of Masjed Soleyman. The highest executive authority of this organization is the mayor of Masjed Soleyman, who is elected by the Islamic Council of Masjed Soleyman. The current mayor of Masjed Soleyman is Mohammad Khosravi. 

== History ==
Masjed Soleyman Municipality became a member of the International Union of Municipalities by a decision of the Organization of the Union of Municipalities of Iran and was established on March 12, 1960. Ali Asghar Nouri Fayazi was registered as the first mayor of Masjed Soleyman in 1960.

== Arrests in Masjed Soleyman Municipality ==
The Public Prosecutor and Islamic Revolution of Masjed Soleyman city reported on July 7, 2023, the arrest of a member of the Islamic Council of Masjed Soleyman city. In the continuation of the preliminary investigation regarding the financial corruption case of Masjed Soleyman municipality, the prosecutor of this city announced the arrest of the head of the Islamic Council of the city on August 10, 2023. The former supervisor of Masjed Soleyman Municipality and two other members of the Islamic Council of Masjed Soleyman were also arrested and sent to prison between 13 and 21 September. 

5 substitute members of Masjed Soleyman Islamic Council were introduced by the decision of the Dispute Resolution and Grievance Handling Board of Khuzestan Province Councils on October 24, 2023 instead of the 5 previously arrested members.

== List of mayors ==
At the beginning of the establishment of Masjed Soleyman municipality, the position of mayor was introduced by the center (Tehran), and with the establishment of state and provincial associations, the mayor was appointed or removed by the vote of the city association.

From 1960 to before the 1979 revolution, the mayors of Masjed Soleyman are as follows.

After the revolution of 1979 until now, the following people have been appointed to the position of the municipality of Masjed Soleyman.
==See also==


== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q643172" start="0" end="15" title="Masjed Soleyman" label="Masjed Soleyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060890" start="36" end="52" title="Central District (Masjed Soleyman County)" label="Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278711" start="56" end="78" title="Masjed Soleyman County" label="Masjed Soleyman County"/>
<link wikidata="Q241119" start="80" end="89" title="Khuzestan province" label="Khuzestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="100" end="104" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="737" end="747" title="Achaemenid" label="Achaemenid"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="2395" end="2401" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606684" start="2412" end="2417" title="Henry Drummond Wolff" label="Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417681" start="2419" end="2428" title="Kitabgi" label="Ketabchee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142803" start="2449" end="2460" title="William Knox D&amp;#x27;Arcy" label="D&amp;#x27;Arcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q467021" start="2530" end="2556" title="Mozaffar al-Din Shah Qajar" label="Mozaffar al-Din Shah Qajar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203093" start="2679" end="2701" title="D&amp;#x27;Arcy concession" label="D&amp;#x27;Arcy concession"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="3001" end="3019" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="3059" end="3077" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368440" start="3860" end="3885" title="Persian Constitutional Revolution" label="Constitutional Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q981700" start="4109" end="4122" title="Saad ad-Daula" label="Saad ad-Daula"/>
<link wikidata="Q355603" start="4234" end="4257" title="Mohammad Ali Shah Qajar" label="Mohammad Ali Shah Qajar"/>
<link wikidata="Q355603" start="4311" end="4334" title="Mohammad Ali Shah Qajar" label="Mohammad Ali Shah Qajar"/>
<link wikidata="Q981700" start="4406" end="4419" title="Saad ad-Daula" label="Saad ad-Daula"/>
<link wikidata="Q188155" start="4641" end="4650" title="Astarabad" label="Astarabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q182921" start="5885" end="5902" title="Reza Shah Pahlavi" label="Reza Shah Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q182921" start="6189" end="6206" title="Reza Shah Pahlavi" label="Reza Shah Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q471787" start="6447" end="6463" title="Shapour Bakhtiar" label="Shapour Bakhtiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152847" start="8266" end="8277" title="Lloyds Bank" label="Lloyds Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q865030" start="8481" end="8504" title="Burmah Oil Company Ltd." label="Burmah Oil Company Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q267380" start="9546" end="9571" title="Anglo-Persian Oil Company" label="Anglo-Persian Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="9605" end="9622" title="BP" label="British Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118481" start="9703" end="9713" title="Abadan Refinery" label="a refinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q63049" start="9717" end="9723" title="Abadan, Iran" label="Abadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q798284" start="9858" end="9868" title="Bakhtiari people" label="Bakhtiaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="11111" end="11132" title="hot semi-arid climate" label="hot semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="11134" end="11163" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q282258" start="11208" end="11231" title="Ali-Qoli Khan Bakhtiari" label="Ali-Qoli Khan Bakhtiari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958512" start="11364" end="11385" title="Bibi Maryam Bakhtiari" label="Bibi Maryam Bakhtiari"/>
<link wikidata="Q225993" start="11565" end="11592" title="Soraya Esfandiary-Bakhtiary" label="Soraya Esfandiary-Bakhtiary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11824" end="11843" title="Frank Nezhadpournia" label="Frank Nezhadpournia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18327968" start="11998" end="12012" title="Bijan Allipour" label="Bijan Allipour"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="12057" end="12060" title="CEO" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963239" start="12064" end="12069" title="NISOC" label="NISOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q357951" start="12073" end="12094" title="Mehran Karimi Nasseri" label="Mehran Karimi Nasseri"/>
<link wikidata="Q64743916" start="12241" end="12257" title="Habib Far Abbasi" label="Habib Far Abbasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q545979" start="12280" end="12293" title="Mohsen Rezaei" label="Mohsen Rezaei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937382" start="12364" end="12378" title="Laleh Bakhtiar" label="Laleh Bakhtiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="12415" end="12436" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12492" end="12512" title="Rostam Amir Bakhtiar" label="Rostam Amir Bakhtiar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12555" end="12574" title="Abbasgholi Bakhtiar" label="Abbasgholi Bakhtiar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12620" end="12639" title="Abdolhamid Bakhtiar" label="Abdolhamid Bakhtiar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12657" end="12676" title="Abolhassan Bakhtiar" label="Abolhassan Bakhtiar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12716" end="12734" title="Agha Khan Bakhtiar" label="Agha Khan Bakhtiar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12810" end="12847" title="Gholam-Reza Bakhtiar, Sardar Bakhtiar" label="Gholam-Reza Bakhtiar, Sardar Bakhtiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376924" start="12878" end="12891" title="Rudi Bakhtiar" label="Rudi Bakhtiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="12900" end="12903" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="12908" end="12911" title="Fox News Channel" label="FOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q471787" start="12944" end="12961" title="Shahpour Bakhtiar" label="Shahpour Bakhtiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13561063" start="12978" end="13000" title="Prime Minister of Iran" label="Prime Minister of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381611" start="13010" end="13025" title="Teymur Bakhtiar" label="Teymur Bakhtiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q953108" start="13055" end="13060" title="Savak" label="Savak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893916" start="13063" end="13081" title="Behnoosh Bakhtiari" label="Behnoosh Bakhtiari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231066" start="13101" end="13116" title="David Bakhtiari" label="David Bakhtiari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="13118" end="13121" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="13158" end="13175" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13178" end="13194" title="Behrouz Bakhtiar" label="Behrouz Bakhtiar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13252" end="13295" title="Gholam-Hossein Bakhtiari (Sardar Mohtashem)" label="Gholam-Hossein Bakhtiari (Sardar Mohtashem)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13331" end="13348" title="Pezhman Bakhtiari" label="Pezhman Bakhtiari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481198" start="13369" end="13387" title="Shaghayegh Dehghan" label="Shaghayegh Dehghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452594" start="13434" end="13461" title="Khalil Esfandiary Bakhtiary" label="Khalil Esfandiary-Bakhtiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398899" start="13621" end="13632" title="Eman Mobali" label="Eman Mobali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368440" start="13720" end="13745" title="Persian Constitutional Revolution" label="Constitutional Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13756" end="13779" title="Nasir Khan, Sardar Jang" label="Nasir Khan, Sardar Jang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13800" end="13827" title="Niloufar Bakhtiar Bakhtiari" label="Niloufar Bakhtiar Bakhtiari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842835" start="13883" end="13897" title="Bahram Akasheh" label="Bahram Akasheh"/>
<link wikidata="Q643172" start="14099" end="14114" title="Masjed Soleyman" label="Masjed Soleyman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14300" end="14317" title="Mohammad Khosravi" label="Mohammad Khosravi"/>
<link wikidata="Q241119" start="15411" end="15429" title="Khuzestan province" label="Khuzestan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="15650" end="15656" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="15821" end="15836" title="Iranian Revolution" label="1979 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="15895" end="15913" title="Iranian Revolution" label="revolution of 1979"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291953" wikidata="Q4914301" url="?curid=291953" title="Bingo (card game)">
<text>Bingo (also bango) is a card game named by analogy to the game bingo. The game is played with a bridge deck of 52 cards. 

== Rules ==
The dealer gives each player a number of cards (typically five), which are held in the hand or placed face-down in front of the player. The dealer places the same number of cards face-down in the center of the table.

A round of play consists of betting, followed by the dealer turning over one of the center cards, so that it is facing-up. Any card in a player&#x27;s hand that has the same rank value as the rank of the center card just turned are now revealed and discarded. The discards can be placed face-up in front of the player.

Betting rounds continue until a player has all of the cards knocked from their hand. In analogy to regular bingo, the first player to realize their hand is empty says &quot;bingo&quot; and claims the pot. If no player is knocked out after all the center cards have been revealed, then all of the players reveal their remaining cards. A winner can be determined by adding the rank values of cards remaining in the hand.

In determining value, jacks are valued at 11, queens, at 12, kings at 13, and aces at either 1 or 15, depending on whether the players have agreed that high rank wins or low rank wins. The game can also be played with cards having blackjack value, with all face cards given value of 10 and the ace having value of either 1 or 11.

==Variations==
In &quot;Sixty Six Bingo&quot; each player gets six cards and there are six common cards. Instead of betting each round, there are betting rounds before any common cards are turned over, after the first two cards are turned over, after the third and fourth cards are turned over and after the fifth and sixth cards are turned over. If no player claims the pot by being knocked out, then the pot is split between high hand and low hand. If a player&#x27;s remaining cards include an ace, then it is possible to be both high hand and low hand.

Another variation gives each player five cards face down, and ten common cards are to be placed in the center of the table, face down. The dealer will turn over the first common card and call it out. If a player has the same rank in their hand, they will then discard. The dealer will continue to call out each card until all of the common cards have been turned face up. The player that is able to discard all five cards, calls bingo and wins the hand.

==See also==
*Road trip bingo

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4914301" start="0" end="5" title="Bingo (card game)" label="Bingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914301" start="12" end="17" title="Bingo (card game)" label="bango"/>
<link wikidata="Q142714" start="24" end="33" title="card game" label="card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q878160" start="63" end="68" title="Bingo (U.S.)" label="bingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q188966" start="96" end="102" title="Contract bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q228044" start="1324" end="1333" title="blackjack" label="blackjack"/>
<link wikidata="Q378907" start="1387" end="1390" title="ace (card)" label="ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q107524317" start="2451" end="2466" title="Road trip bingo" label="Road trip bingo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291961" wikidata="Q390370" url="?curid=291961" title="Windermere">
<text>Windermere or Lake Windermereis a ribbon lake in Cumbria, England, and part of the Lake District. It is the largest lake in England by length, area, and volume, but considerably smaller than the largest Scottish lochs and Northern Irish loughs.

The lake is about in length and at its widest, has a maximum depth of , and has an elevation of above sea level. Its outflow is the River Leven, which drains into Morecambe Bay. The lake is in the administrative council area of Westmorland and Furness and the historic county of Westmorland, with the lake forming part of the boundary between the historic counties of Westmorland and Lancashire. It has been one of the country&#x27;s most popular places for holidays and summer homes since the arrival of the Kendal and Windermere Railway&#x27;s branch line in 1847. The Freshwater Biological Association was established on the shore of Windermere in 1929 and much of the early work on lake ecology, freshwater biology and limnology was conducted here.

==Etymology==

The word &#x27;Windermere&#x27; is thought to translate as &quot;&#x27;Winand or Vinand&#x27;s lake&#x27;... The specific has usually been identified with an Old Swedish personal name &#x27;Vinandr&#x27;, genitive singular &#x27;Vinandar&#x27;&quot;... although &quot;the personal noun is of very restricted distribution even in Sweden.&quot; Another possibility is that it refers to a &quot;Continental Germanic personal noun, &#x27;Wīnand&#x27;...Since this name could not have been current until the 12th century, the fact that the Old Norse genitive singular &#x27;-ar-&#x27; has been added to it, it would suggest that Old Norse was still a living language in the area at that time.&quot;
Alternative spellings may be &#x27;Wynhendermere&#x27; and &#x27;Wynenderme&#x27;
The second element is Old English &#x27;mere&#x27;, meaning &#x27;lake&#x27; or &#x27;pool&#x27;. It was known as &quot;Winander Mere&quot; or &quot;Winandermere&quot; until at least the 19th century.

Its name suggests it is a mere, a lake that is broad in relation to its depth, but despite the name this is not the case for Windermere, which in particular has a noticeable thermocline, distinguishing it from typical meres. Until the 19th century, the term &quot;lake&quot; was, indeed, not much used by or known to the native inhabitants of the area, who referred to it as Windermere/Winandermere Water, or (in their dialect) Windermer Watter. The name Windermere or Windermer was used of the parish that had clearly taken its name from the water. The poet Norman Nicholson comments on the use of the phrase &#x27;Lake Windermere&#x27;: &quot;a certain excuse for the tautology can be made in the case of Windermere, since we need to differentiate between the lake and the town, though it would be better to speak of &#x27;Windermere Lake&#x27; and Windermere Town&#x27;, but no one can excuse such ridiculous clumsiness as &#x27;Lake Derwentwater&#x27; and &#x27;Lake Ullswater.&quot;

The extensive parish included most of Undermilbeck (that is, excepting Winster and the part of Crook chapelry that lay west of the Gilpin, which were part of Kirkby Kendal parish), Applethwaite, Troutbeck and Ambleside-below-Stock, that is, the part of Ambleside that lay south of Stock Beck. The parish church was at Bowness in Undermilbeck.

==Geography==

Windermere is long and narrow, like many other ribbon lakes, and lies in a steep-sided pre-glacial river valley that has become deepened by successive glaciations. The current lake was formed after the Last Glacial Maximum during the retreat of the British and Irish Ice Sheet some time between 17,000 and 14,700 years ago, just before the start of the Windermere Interstadial. The lake water was sourced from the meltwater of retreating ice in the catchment, which receded up the Troutbeck valley and up the valleys that now contain the rivers Rothay and Brathay. There were at least nine ice retreat phases, indicated by buried recessional moraines. The lake has two separate basins – north and south – with different characteristics influenced by the geology. This consists of hard volcanic rocks in the north basin and softer shales in the south.

The lake is drained from its southernmost point by the River Leven. It is replenished by the rivers Brathay, Rothay, Trout Beck, Cunsey Beck and several other lesser streams. The lake is largely surrounded by foothills of the Lake District which provide pleasant low-level walks; to the north and northeast are the higher fells of central Lakeland.

There is debate as to whether the stretch of water between Newby Bridge and Lakeside at the southern end of the lake should be considered part of Windermere, or a navigable stretch of the River Leven. This affects the stated length of the lake, which is long if measured from the bridge at Newby Bridge, or if measured from Lakeside. The lake varies in width up to a maximum of , and covers an area of . With a maximum depth of and an elevation above sea level of , the lowest point of the lake bed is well below sea level.

There is only one town or village directly on the lakeshore, Bowness-on-Windermere, as the village of Windermere does not directly touch the lake and the centre of Ambleside is to the north of Waterhead. The village of Windermere is about 20 minutes&#x27; walk from Millerground, the nearest point on the lakeshore. It did not exist before the arrival of the railway in 1847. The station was built in an area of open fell and farmland in the township of Applethwaite. The nearest farm was Birthwaite, which gave its name to the station and the village that began to grow up near it. In about 1859, the residents began to call their new village by the name of Windermere, much to the chagrin of the people of Bowness, which had been the centre of the parish of Windermere for many centuries. Since 1907 the two places have been under one council and, although there are still two separate centres, the area between is largely built up, albeit bordering on woodland and open fields. Windermere railway station is a hub for train and bus connections to the surrounding areas and is from the Waterbus jetty. There is a regular train service to Oxenholme on the West Coast Main Line, where there are fast trains to Edinburgh, Glasgow, Manchester Airport, Birmingham and London.

===Islands===
The lake contains eighteen islands. By far the largest is the privately owned Belle Isle opposite Bowness. It is around a kilometre in length, and . Its older name was Lang Holme, and 800 years ago it was the centre of the manor of Windermere and later, in effect, of a moiety of the barony of Kendal.

The other islands or &quot;holmes&quot; are considerably smaller. The word &quot;holme&quot; or &quot;holm&quot; means small island or islet and comes from Old Norse &quot;holmr&quot; (as in Stockholm). The island of Lady Holme is named after the chantry that formerly stood there and in former centuries was sometimes called St Mary Holme or just Mary Holme. The remaining islands are Bee Holme (the insular status of which depends on the water level), Blake Holme, Crow Holme, Birk or Birch Holme (called Fir Holme on Ordnance Survey maps), Grass Holme, Lilies of the Valley (East, and West), Ling Holme (a rocky hump with a few trees and a growth of ling), Hawes Holme, Hen Holme (also rocky and sometimes known as chair and Table Island from some old flags or slabs of stone that were formerly found there), Maiden Holme (the smallest island, with just one tree), Ramp Holme (variously called Roger Holme and Berkshire Island at different times in its history), Rough Holme, Snake Holme, Thompson Holme (the second largest), Silver Holme.

==Local government==

Before 1974, the lake lay wholly within the county of Westmorland; however, the historic county boundary between Lancashire and Westmorland runs down the western shore of the lake and also along about of the southern section of the eastern shore. Anyone crossing the lake from east to west on the Windermere Ferry thus travels from the historic county of Westmorland to that of Lancashire.

Local government reorganisation in 1974 placed Windermere and its shores within the district of South Lakeland in the non-metropolitan county of Cumbria. Since April 2023, Cumbria no longer exists for administrative purposes and the lake falls entirely within Westmorland and Furness administrative area. Most planning matters concerned with the lake are, however, the responsibility of the Lake District National Park Authority.

==Boating==

=== Steamer and launches ===


Passenger services operate along the whole length of the lake, from Lakeside railway station, on the Lakeside and Haverthwaite heritage steam railway at the southern end of the lake, to Waterhead Bay near Ambleside in the north. Intermediate stops are made at Bowness and, by smaller launches only, at Brockhole. Some boats only operate part of the route, or operate out and back cruises, whilst others run the whole distance. 

These services date back to the former Furness Railway, who built the Lakeside branch, and were at one time operated by British Rail, the former state-owned rail operator. Since privatisation, three of the original large railway boats are operated by Windermere Lake Cruises Ltd, along with a fleet of smaller and more modern launches. Three of the original four boats survive: the MV &quot;Tern&quot; of 1891, the MV &quot;Teal&quot; of 1936, and the MV &quot;Swan&quot; of 1938. The fourth, MV &quot;Swift&quot; of 1900, which was converted from steam to diesel in 1956, was broken up at Lakeside in 1998. Her rudder and only one propeller are displayed at Bowness. Although often described as &quot;steamers&quot;, all are now diesel motor vessels. &quot;Tern&quot; and &quot;Swift&quot; were built with steam engines, but converted to diesel power in the 1950s.

===Ferries===
The Windermere Ferry, a vehicle-carrying cable ferry, runs across the lake from Ferry Nab on the eastern side of the lake to Far Sawrey on the western side of the lake. This service forms part of the B5285. There are also two summer only passenger ferries that cross the lake. One crosses from Lakeside station to Fell Foot Park at the southern end of the lake, whilst the other links Bowness with Far Sawrey.

===Boat clubs===

There are five large boating clubs based around the lake: the South Windermere Sailing Club, Windermere Motor Boat Racing Club, the Lake District Boat Club, the Royal Windermere Yacht Club, and the Windermere Cruising Association. The Royal Windermere Yacht Club maintains a set of turning marks on the lake, which are also used by the Windermere Cruising Association. The Lake District Boat Club is a family orientated club open to all (owning a boat is not essential), with premises located in Bowness the club house has views of the lake and surrounding fells. The LDBC also run a full programme of both social and racing events. The Windermere Cruising Association organises the popular Winter Series. This event benefits from not being hindered by the large waves, caused by gales, that often lead to sea racing being cancelled. The WCA also have a full calendar of summer races which are open to all abilities.

At the south end of the lake is South Windermere Sailing Club, based at Fell Foot park on the east shore. It was started in 1961 as a family sailing club and has been the starting point for many successful British dinghy racing competitors including British, European and world champions. The notoriously fluky wind on the lake has proved a successful training ground in learning to read the fast-changing wind. SWSC celebrated its 50th anniversary in 2011 and has developed a strong junior section under the coaching of Julie Tomkinson who in 2011 was honoured with an RYA Community Award for Outstanding Contribution.

In 2015 Lakeland Rowing club set up a base at Fell Foot Park. The club grew quickly and has now separated from the Northern section of the club (based at Derwent water) and has taken the name Windermere Rowing Club. The club is small in comparison to the more established clubs in the country but is continually growing with the number of both members and boats constantly increasing.

The Ferry House Regatta was the subject of a painting by Thomas Allom and in Fisher&#x27;s Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1837 this was illustrated in the poem by Letitia Elizabeth Landon.

===Speed records===
On Friday 13 June 1930, Sir Henry Segrave broke the world water speed record on Windermere in his boat, Miss England II at an average speed of . On the third run over the course, off Belle Grange, the boat capsized. Segrave&#x27;s mechanic, Victor Helliwell drowned, but Segrave was rescued by support boats. He died a short time later of his injuries. Segrave was one of the few people in history who have held the world land speed record and water speed record simultaneously.

Racer Norman Buckley set several world water speed records on Windermere in the 1950s.

===Speed limits===
For many years, powerboating and water-skiing have been popular activities on the lake. In March 2000, the Lake District National Park Authority controversially introduced a bylaw setting a speed limit for all powered craft on the lake, in addition to three existing speed limits for all craft on the upper, lower, and middle sections of the lake. The bylaw came into force in 2000, but there was a five-year transition period and the new speed limits were only enforced from 29 March 2005. The bylaws on the lake were reviewed and renewed in 2008. Despite the speed limits people continue to use powerboats on the lake, both legally and illegally.

===Windermere Steamboat Museum===
Windermere Steamboat Museum is located on Rayrigg Road in Bowness, and included a collection of vintage steam boats dating back to 1850, five sailing boats (the oldest built in 1780), two dugout canoes, as well as information about &quot;Swallows and Amazons&quot; and the history of racing boats. The museum was closed in 2006 for refurbishment and re-opened, considerably enlarged, in March, 2019 as the Windermere Jetty: Museum of Boats, Steam and Stories.

The long popularity of steam launches on Windermere has even given its name to the Windermere kettle, a steam-powered tea urn.

===Windermere water bus===
In 2005, the Windermere Management Strategy identified the potential for water bus services on the lake. In 2009, the Lake District National Park Authority commissioned a detailed study into the demand for such services. In July 2009, it was announced that Windermere Lake Cruises would be operating additional stops around the lake. In January 2012, the Park Authority launched a consultation on further expansion of the water bus service.

==Swimming==
===Great North Swim===
On Saturday 13 September 2008, Windermere hosted the inaugural Great North Swim, a open water swim involving 2,200 swimmers. The second annual swim took place on 12 and 13 September 2009, with 6,000 swimmers, making this the largest open water swim in the UK.

===Three Lakes Challenge===
The Three Lakes Challenge (or Loch, Lake, Llyn) is a challenge first completed by a 5-person relay with Sam Plum, Jason Betley, Helen Gibbs, Helen Liddle, and Debbie Taylor on 3–4 July 2015 under English Channel rules. The course involves swimming the length of Loch Awe in Scotland (), then driving to the Lake District and swimming the length of Windermere (), and finally driving to Wales and swimming the length of Bala Lake (). This challenge is intended as the swimming equivalent of the National Three Peaks Challenge.

==Sewage release==
In 2021, it was reported that the sewage-treatment plant in Ambleside legally discharged sewage into Windermere for 1,719 hours during 2020 (equivalent to 71 out of 365 days), and that private septic tanks from residential dwellings, holiday homes and caravan sites also released sewage into the lake. A 26 year old Windermere resident, Zoology Undergraduate Matthew Staniek, made national news by suggesting the lake could become &quot;ecologically dead&quot;, with the growth of blue-green algae, and microscopic organisms being incorrectly described as &quot;toxic as cobra venom&quot;. However, beyond the resident&#x27;s speculation, there was little evidence of this being true, with ecologists and subsequent studies showing pollution levels better than suggested, and localized to smaller areas of the lake.

In July 2022, the Love Windermere partnership was created to tackle challenges in the lake. Nutrients, climate change, more extreme weather patterns and the seasonal variations of the tourist population are all predicted to put the lake and its water quality under increasing pressure in the coming years.

In 2023, it was reported that data from the Environment Agency showed that United Utilities released sewage from storm overflows into the lake for 246 days in 2022. In 2024, United Utilities was fighting in court to keep secret its data on the treated sewage it discharges into Windermere, claiming first that it “was not environmental information” and then that it was “internal communication” and therefore not subject to disclosure.

==Popular culture==
William Wordsworth, one of the Lake Poets, described the view of Windermere from the crest of a hill in &quot;The Prelude&quot;, Book IV:

Standing alone, as from a rampart’s edge,I overlooked the bed of Windermere,Like a vast river, stretching in the sun.With exultation, at my feet I sawLake, islands, promontories, gleaming bays,A universe of Nature’s fairest formsProudly revealed with instantaneous burst,Magnificent, and beautiful, and gay.

Dove&#x27;s Nest, at the foot of Wansfell, was the home for a while in 1830 of the poet Felicia Hemans and her family. This is recorded in the text to Lydia Sigourney&#x27;s poem 

Oscar Wilde began working on his first hit play, &quot;Lady Windermere&#x27;s Fan&quot; (1892), during a summer visit to the Lake District in 1891. A series of children&#x27;s books by Arthur Ransome, &quot;Swallows and Amazons&quot; and its sequels &quot;Swallowdale&quot;, &quot;Winter Holiday&quot;, &quot;Pigeon Post&quot; and &quot;The Picts and the Martyrs&quot;, involve school holiday adventures in the 1930s around a fictional lake derived from a combination of Windermere and Coniston Water. The fictional lake resembles Windermere, but the surrounding hills and fells resemble those of Coniston Water. The BBC made a television series &quot;Swallows and Amazons&quot; in 1962; parts of this were filmed at the boathouse of Huyton Hill Preparatory School (now Pullwood House) on the northwestern shore.

Hollywood film comedian Stan Laurel was a frequent visitor to the lake at Windermere as a child. Born in Ulverston in 1890, his grandmother, uncle and aunt would take him and his cousins on excursions by train into the Lake District, visiting Flookburgh, Sawrey and Windermere.

The lake gave its name to a group of 300 Jewish boys, the &quot;Windermere Boys&quot;, who survived Auschwitz and settled at Troutbeck Bridge near Windermere in 1945, thanks to the help of Leonard G. Montefiore. This refugee rescue was dramatised as &quot;The Windermere Children&quot; broadcast on the BBC in 2020 for the 75th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz.

Legends of female centaurs in Windermere served as the basis for Archie Fisher&#x27;s 1976 song &quot;The Witch of the West-Mer-Lands&quot;, which was later covered by Stan Rogers. Fisher cites &quot;tales of antlered women with bodies of deer seen wading in the shallows of the lakes in the moonlight&quot; as the inspiration for his song. &quot;Apparently deer used to swim across the shallow end of Lake Windermere and weeds got caught in their antlers and observers, probably wandering home from a local hostelry, took them to be these mythical creatures.&quot;

Windermere is a location used in the 1994 fighting game &quot;Tekken&quot;. Belle Isle features in the fifth book of Joseph Delaney&#x27;s &quot;Spook&#x27;s&quot; series, &quot;The Spooks Mistake&quot;; published in 2008. Rather than the large house, though, Belle Isle plays host to a folly which is used by the Water Witches in the area. In November 2009, several scenes were shot on Windermere for the ITV soap opera &quot;Coronation Street&quot;, featuring the newlyweds Gail and Joe on their honeymoon. 
Windermere and the surrounding countryside is the setting for mystery novelist Elizabeth George&#x27;s 2012 book &quot;Believing the Lie&quot;, the 17th in the Inspector Lynley series.

Some people believe that there may be a lake monster, similar to the one alleged to live in Loch Ness, and in 2011 anomalous photos were taken of the supposed creature; it has been affectionately nicknamed &quot;Bownessie&quot;.

In 2017, some scenes from the 2018 live action film &quot;Peter Rabbit&quot; were filmed in Windermere and Ambleside, with the Peter Rabbit heritage being strongly linked to the area.

Taylor Swift mentions &quot;Windermere peaks&quot; and Wordsworth in her song, &quot;The Lakes,&quot; included as a bonus track on her 2020 album, &quot;Folklore&quot;. She writes:Take me to the lakes where all the poets went to dieI don&#x27;t belong, and my beloved, neither do youThose Windermere peaks look like a perfect place to cryI&#x27;m setting off, but not without my muse
==Bibliography==

==Notes==
== References ==
==External links==

*Windermere on Lake District National Park Authority website
*Windermere on Visitcumbria.com
*The Three Lakes Challenge
*Lake Windermere Depth Map
*Top 10 Astonishing Facts about Lake Windermere </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q390370" start="0" end="10" title="Windermere" label="Windermere"/>
<link wikidata="Q390370" start="14" end="29" title="Windermere" label="Lake Windermere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623499" start="34" end="45" title="ribbon lake" label="ribbon lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q23066" start="49" end="56" title="Cumbria" label="Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="83" end="96" title="Lake District" label="Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752950" start="195" end="243" title="List of lakes and lochs of the United Kingdom" label="largest Scottish lochs and Northern Irish loughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650512" start="378" end="389" title="River Leven, Cumbria" label="River Leven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866414" start="409" end="422" title="Morecambe Bay" label="Morecambe Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q110536353" start="474" end="497" title="Westmorland and Furness" label="Westmorland and Furness"/>
<link wikidata="Q23326" start="525" end="536" title="Westmorland" label="Westmorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="630" end="640" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738696" start="755" end="784" title="Kendal and Windermere Railway" label="Kendal and Windermere Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503114" start="817" end="850" title="Freshwater Biological Association" label="Freshwater Biological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229532" start="932" end="944" title="lake ecosystem" label="lake ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306816" start="946" end="964" title="freshwater biology" label="freshwater biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q165838" start="969" end="978" title="limnology" label="limnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1813" end="1824" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q13586859" start="1831" end="1835" title="Mere (lake)" label="mere"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="1857" end="1861" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q13586859" start="2019" end="2023" title="Mere (lake)" label="mere"/>
<link wikidata="Q849599" start="2167" end="2178" title="thermocline" label="thermocline"/>
<link wikidata="Q13593014" start="2552" end="2568" title="Norman Nicholson" label="Norman Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q841606" start="2663" end="2672" title="tautology (rhetoric)" label="tautology"/>
<link wikidata="Q934551" start="2930" end="2942" title="Derwentwater" label="Derwentwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973568" start="2964" end="2973" title="Ullswater" label="Ullswater"/>
<link wikidata="Q106682046" start="3263" end="3273" title="Stock Ghyll" label="Stock Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623499" start="3388" end="3399" title="ribbon lake" label="ribbon lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979625" start="3543" end="3563" title="Last Glacial Maximum" label="Last Glacial Maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741484" start="3694" end="3717" title="Allerød oscillation" label="Windermere Interstadial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541003" start="3822" end="3831" title="Troutbeck, South Lakeland" label="Troutbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155531" start="3886" end="3892" title="River Rothay" label="Rothay"/>
<link wikidata="Q899624" start="3897" end="3904" title="River Brathay" label="Brathay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650512" start="4248" end="4259" title="River Leven, Cumbria" label="River Leven"/>
<link wikidata="Q899624" start="4293" end="4300" title="River Brathay" label="Brathay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155531" start="4302" end="4308" title="River Rothay" label="Rothay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455863" start="4310" end="4320" title="Trout Beck" label="Trout Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194370" start="4322" end="4333" title="Cunsey Beck" label="Cunsey Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421955" start="4515" end="4519" title="fell" label="fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017287" start="4602" end="4614" title="Newby Bridge" label="Newby Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801145" start="4619" end="4627" title="Lakeside, Cumbria" label="Lakeside"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="4994" end="5003" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q895483" start="5129" end="5150" title="Bowness-on-Windermere" label="Bowness-on-Windermere"/>
<link wikidata="Q119936" start="5159" end="5180" title="Windermere, Cumbria (town)" label="village of Windermere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530403" start="6049" end="6075" title="Windermere railway station" label="Windermere railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="6278" end="6287" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="6289" end="6296" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8694" start="6298" end="6316" title="Manchester Airport" label="Manchester Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="6318" end="6328" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="6333" end="6339" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q815851" start="6434" end="6444" title="Belle Isle (Windermere)" label="Belle Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q895483" start="6454" end="6461" title="Bowness-on-Windermere" label="Bowness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6894585" start="6626" end="6632" title="Moiety title" label="moiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863025" start="6640" end="6656" title="barony of Kendal" label="barony of Kendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="6815" end="6824" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="6850" end="6859" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q575842" start="6906" end="6913" title="chantry" label="chantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23326" start="7779" end="7790" title="Westmorland" label="Westmorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="7838" end="7848" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16903525" start="8022" end="8038" title="Windermere Ferry" label="Windermere Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138494" start="8061" end="8076" title="historic counties of England" label="historic county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428514" start="8212" end="8226" title="South Lakeland" label="South Lakeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q769603" start="8234" end="8257" title="non-metropolitan county" label="non-metropolitan county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23066" start="8261" end="8268" title="Cumbria" label="Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q110536353" start="8376" end="8399" title="Westmorland and Furness" label="Westmorland and Furness"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="8507" end="8534" title="Lake District National Park" label="Lake District National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479174" start="8659" end="8683" title="Lakeside railway station, England" label="Lakeside railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479172" start="8692" end="8740" title="Lakeside and Haverthwaite Railway" label="Lakeside and Haverthwaite heritage steam railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q391805" start="8796" end="8805" title="Ambleside" label="Ambleside"/>
<link wikidata="Q895483" start="8851" end="8858" title="Bowness-on-Windermere" label="Bowness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394642" start="9059" end="9074" title="Furness Railway" label="Furness Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="9140" end="9152" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q54890051" start="9271" end="9298" title="Windermere Lake Cruises" label="Windermere Lake Cruises Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q58213012" start="9402" end="9421" title="SY Tern" label="MV &amp;quot;Tern&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q205451" start="9652" end="9661" title="propeller" label="propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q16903525" start="9905" end="9921" title="Windermere Ferry" label="Windermere Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287097" start="9942" end="9953" title="cable ferry" label="cable ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136806" start="10026" end="10036" title="Far Sawrey" label="Far Sawrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837007" start="10101" end="10106" title="B5285 road" label="B5285"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442432" start="10215" end="10229" title="Fell Foot Park" label="Fell Foot Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q895483" start="10286" end="10293" title="Bowness-on-Windermere" label="Bowness"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022029" start="10423" end="10456" title="Windermere Motor Boat Racing Club" label="Windermere Motor Boat Racing Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q16877448" start="10462" end="10485" title="Lake District Boat Club" label="Lake District Boat Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375020" start="10491" end="10518" title="Royal Windermere Yacht Club" label="Royal Windermere Yacht Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937302" start="10528" end="10559" title="Windermere Cruising Association" label="Windermere Cruising Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278203" start="11462" end="11475" title="dinghy racing" label="dinghy racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q478756" start="11818" end="11821" title="Royal Yachting Association" label="RYA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131981" start="12312" end="12324" title="Thomas Allom" label="Thomas Allom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760518" start="12412" end="12436" title="Letitia Elizabeth Landon" label="Letitia Elizabeth Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451869" start="12487" end="12500" title="Henry Segrave" label="Henry Segrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859067" start="12563" end="12578" title="Miss England II" label="Miss England II"/>
<link wikidata="Q913270" start="12881" end="12898" title="land speed record" label="land speed record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420845" start="12903" end="12921" title="water speed record" label="water speed record"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12945" end="12959" title="Norman Buckley (powerboater)" label="Norman Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q622416" start="13062" end="13071" title="powerboat" label="powerboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q472827" start="13079" end="13091" title="water-skiing" label="water-skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q679847" start="13220" end="13225" title="bylaw" label="bylaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024129" start="13730" end="13757" title="Windermere Steamboat Museum" label="Windermere Steamboat Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q672938" start="13968" end="13988" title="Swallows and Amazons" label="Swallows and Amazons"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14136" end="14188" title="Windermere Jetty: Museum of Boats, Steam and Stories" label="Windermere Jetty: Museum of Boats, Steam and Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q659600" start="14214" end="14226" title="steam launch" label="steam launch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024135" start="14274" end="14291" title="Windermere kettle" label="Windermere kettle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643" start="14419" end="14428" title="water bus" label="water bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q54890051" start="14603" end="14626" title="Windermere Lake Cruises" label="Windermere Lake Cruises"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600062" start="14887" end="14903" title="Great Swim" label="Great North Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="15309" end="15324" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368230" start="15375" end="15383" title="Loch Awe" label="Loch Awe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335466" start="15532" end="15541" title="Bala Lake" label="Bala Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810095" start="15607" end="15637" title="National Three Peaks Challenge" label="National Three Peaks Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q386300" start="15852" end="15863" title="septic tank" label="septic tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="16140" end="16156" title="Cyanobacteria" label="blue-green algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381011" start="16827" end="16845" title="Environment Agency" label="Environment Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q503038" start="16858" end="16874" title="United Utilities" label="United Utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q503038" start="16957" end="16973" title="United Utilities" label="United Utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="17240" end="17258" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q583338" start="17271" end="17281" title="Lake Poets" label="Lake Poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242779" start="17350" end="17361" title="The Prelude" label="The Prelude"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968079" start="17721" end="17729" title="Wansfell" label="Wansfell"/>
<link wikidata="Q272537" start="17776" end="17790" title="Felicia Hemans" label="Felicia Hemans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4418695" start="17839" end="17854" title="Lydia Sigourney" label="Lydia Sigourney"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="17869" end="17880" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469224" start="17924" end="17950" title="Lady Windermere&amp;#x27;s Fan" label="Lady Windermere&amp;#x27;s Fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q515845" start="18054" end="18068" title="Arthur Ransome" label="Arthur Ransome"/>
<link wikidata="Q672938" start="18076" end="18096" title="Swallows and Amazons" label="Swallows and Amazons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506429" start="18125" end="18136" title="Swallowdale" label="Swallowdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512165" start="18150" end="18164" title="Winter Holiday" label="Winter Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193316" start="18178" end="18189" title="Pigeon Post" label="Pigeon Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757051" start="18206" end="18231" title="The Picts and the Martyrs" label="The Picts and the Martyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126099" start="18355" end="18369" title="Coniston Water" label="Coniston Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q19650535" start="18521" end="18541" title="Swallows and Amazons (TV series)" label="Swallows and Amazons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5951507" start="18603" end="18633" title="Huyton Hill Preparatory School" label="Huyton Hill Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="18683" end="18692" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q72869" start="18707" end="18718" title="Stan Laurel" label="Stan Laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q979357" start="18788" end="18797" title="Ulverston" label="Ulverston"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="18902" end="18915" title="Lake District" label="Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q662167" start="18926" end="18936" title="Flookburgh" label="Flookburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136806" start="18938" end="18944" title="Sawrey" label="Sawrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="19062" end="19071" title="Auschwitz" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q29440404" start="19087" end="19103" title="Troutbeck Bridge" label="Troutbeck Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q75850309" start="19151" end="19172" title="Leonard G. Montefiore" label="Leonard G. Montefiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q83888685" start="19218" end="19241" title="The Windermere Children" label="The Windermere Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="19265" end="19268" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281937" start="19400" end="19420" title="Archie Fisher" label="Archie Fisher&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025760" start="19503" end="19514" title="Stan Rogers" label="Stan Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q846224" start="19944" end="19957" title="fighting game" label="fighting game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142893" start="19964" end="19970" title="Tekken (video game)" label="Tekken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481988" start="20019" end="20033" title="Joseph Delaney" label="Joseph Delaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375442" start="20047" end="20059" title="Spook&amp;#x27;s" label="Spook&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q180174" start="20189" end="20194" title="folly" label="folly"/>
<link wikidata="Q674608" start="20308" end="20311" title="ITV (TV channel)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q945030" start="20329" end="20346" title="Coronation Street" label="Coronation Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q236727" start="20491" end="20507" title="Elizabeth George" label="Elizabeth George"/>
<link wikidata="Q984207" start="20572" end="20588" title="Inspector Lynley" label="Inspector Lynley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187704" start="20638" end="20650" title="lake monster" label="lake monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q49658" start="20690" end="20699" title="Loch Ness Monster" label="Loch Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q27964337" start="20886" end="20898" title="Peter Rabbit (film)" label="Peter Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261586" start="20955" end="20967" title="Peter Rabbit" label="Peter Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="21013" end="21025" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q98759054" start="21098" end="21107" title="The Lakes (song)" label="The Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q97620733" start="21166" end="21174" title="Folklore (Taylor Swift album)" label="Folklore"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291965" wikidata="Q232211" url="?curid=291965" title="First Intermediate Period of Egypt">
<text>The First Intermediate Period, described as a &#x27;dark period&#x27; in ancient Egyptian history, spanned approximately 125 years, c. 2181–2055 BC, after the end of the Old Kingdom. It comprises the Seventh (although this is mostly considered spurious by Egyptologists), Eighth, Ninth, Tenth, and part of the Eleventh Dynasties. The concept of a &quot;First Intermediate Period&quot; was coined in 1926 by Egyptologists Georg Steindorff and Henri Frankfort.

Very little monumental evidence survives from this period, especially from the beginning of the era. The First Intermediate Period was a dynamic time in which rule of Egypt was roughly equally divided between two competing power bases. One of the bases was at Heracleopolis in Lower Egypt, a city just south of the Faiyum region, and the other was at Thebes, in Upper Egypt. It is believed that during that time, temples were pillaged and violated, artwork was vandalized, and the statues of kings were broken or destroyed as a result of the postulated political chaos. The two kingdoms would eventually come into conflict, which would lead to the conquest of the north by the Theban kings and to the reunification of Egypt under a single ruler, Mentuhotep II, during the second part of the Eleventh Dynasty. This event marked the beginning of the Middle Kingdom of Egypt.

==History==
===Events leading to the First Intermediate Period===
The fall of the Old Kingdom is often described as a period of chaos and disorder by some literature in the First Intermediate Period, but mostly by the literature of successive eras of ancient Egyptian history. The causes that brought about the downfall of the Old Kingdom are numerous, but some are merely hypothetical. One reason that is often quoted is the extremely long reign of Pepi II, the last major pharaoh of the 6th Dynasty. He ruled from his childhood until he was very elderly, possibly in his 90s, but the length of his reign is uncertain. He outlived many of his anticipated heirs, thereby creating problems with succession. Thus, the regime of the Old Kingdom disintegrated amidst this disorganization. Another major problem was the rise in power of the provincial nomarchs. Towards the end of the Old Kingdom the positions of the nomarchs had become hereditary, so families often held onto the position of power in their respective provinces. As these nomarchs grew increasingly powerful and influential, they became more independent from the king. They erected tombs in their own domains and often raised armies. The rise of these numerous nomarchs inevitably created conflicts between neighboring provinces, often resulting in intense rivalries and warfare between them. A third reason for the dissolution of centralized kingship that is mentioned was the low levels of the Nile inundation which may have been caused by a drier climate, resulting in lower crop yields bringing about famine across ancient Egypt; see 4.2 kiloyear event. There is however no consensus on this subject. According to Manning, there is no relationship with low Nile floods.
&quot;State collapse was complicated, but unrelated to Nile flooding history.&quot;

===The Seventh and Eighth Dynasties at Memphis===

The Seventh and Eighth Dynasties are often overlooked because very little is known about the rulers of these two periods. Manetho, a historian and priest from the Ptolemaic era, describes 70 kings who ruled for 70 days. This is almost certainly an exaggeration meant to describe the disorganization of the kingship during this time period. The Seventh Dynasty may have been an oligarchy comprising powerful officials of the Sixth Dynasty based in Memphis who attempted to retain control of the country. The Eighth dynasty rulers, claiming to be the descendants of the Sixth Dynasty kings, also ruled from Memphis. Little is known about these two dynasties since very little textual or architectural evidence survives to describe the period. However, a few artifacts have been found, including scarabs that have been attributed to king Neferkare II of the Seventh Dynasty, as well as a green jasper cylinder of Syrian influence which has been credited to the Eighth Dynasty. Also, a small pyramid believed to have been constructed by King Ibi of the Eighth Dynasty has been identified at Saqqara. Several kings, such as Iytjenu, are only attested once and their position remains unknown.

===Rise of the Heracleopolitan kings===

Sometime after the obscure reign of the Seventh and Eighth Dynasty kings a group of rulers arose in Heracleopolis in Lower Egypt. These kings comprise the Ninth and Tenth Dynasties, each with nineteen listed rulers. The Heracleopolitan kings are conjectured to have overwhelmed the weak Memphite rulers to create the Ninth Dynasty, but there is virtually no archaeology elucidating the transition, which seems to have involved a drastic reduction in population in the Nile Valley.

The founder of the Ninth Dynasty, Akhthoes or Akhtoy, is often described as an evil and violent ruler, most notably in Manetho&#x27;s writing. Possibly the same as Wahkare Khety I, Akhthoes was described as a king who caused much harm to the inhabitants of Egypt, was seized with madness, and was eventually killed by a crocodile. This may have been a fanciful tale, but Wahkare is listed as a king in the Turin Canon. Kheti I was succeeded by Kheti II, also known as Meryibre. Little is certain of his reign, but a few artifacts bearing his name survive. It may have been his successor, Kheti III, who would bring some degree of order to the Delta, though the power and influence of these Ninth Dynasty kings was seemingly insignificant compared to the Old Kingdom pharaohs.

A distinguished line of nomarchs arose in Siut (or Asyut), a powerful and wealthy province in the south of the Heracleopolitan kingdom. These warrior princes maintained a close relationship with the kings of the Heracleopolitan royal household, as evidenced by the inscriptions in their tombs. These inscriptions provide a glimpse at the political situation that was present during their reigns. They describe the Siut nomarchs digging canals, reducing taxation, reaping rich harvests, raising cattle herds, and maintaining an army and fleet. The Siut province acted as a buffer state between the northern and southern rulers, and the Siut princes would bear the brunt of the attacks from the Theban kings.

===Ankhtifi ===

The South was dominated by warlords, the best-known of whom is Ankhtifi, whose tomb was discovered in 1928 at Mo’alla, 30 km south of Luxor. He was a nomarch or provincial governor of the nome based at Hierakonpolis, but he then expanded to the south and conquered a second nome centred on Edfu. He then tried to expand to the north to conquer the nome centred on Thebes, but was unsuccessful, as they refused to come out and fight.

His tomb is highly decorated and contains an extremely informative autobiography in which he paints a picture of Egypt riven by hunger and famine from which he, the great Ankhtifi, had rescued them. ‘I gave bread to the hungry and did not allow anyone to die’. This economic disaster is much debated by modern commentators: it seems that every ruler made similar claims. But it seems clear that for all practical purposes, Ankhtifi was the ruler and there was no higher power to whom he owed allegiance. The unity of Egypt had broken down.

===Rise of the Theban kings===
It has been suggested that an invasion of Upper Egypt occurred contemporaneously with the founding of the Heracleopolitan kingdom, which would establish the Theban line of kings, constituting the Eleventh and Twelfth Dynasties. This line of kings is believed to have been descendants of Intef, who was the nomarch of Thebes, often called the &quot;keeper of the Door of the South&quot;. He is credited for organizing Upper Egypt into an independent ruling body in the south, although he himself did not appear to have tried to claim the title of king. However, his successors in the Eleventh and Twelfth Dynasties would later do so for him. One of them, Intef II, begins the assault on the north, particularly at Abydos.

By around 2060 BC, Intef II had defeated the governor of Nekhen, allowing further expansion south, toward Elephantine. His successor, Intef III, completed the conquest of Abydos, moving into Middle Egypt against the Heracleopolitan kings. The first three kings of the Eleventh Dynasty (all named Intef) were, therefore, also the last three kings of the First Intermediate Period and would be succeeded by a line of kings who were all called Mentuhotep. Mentuhotep II, also known as Nebhepetra, would eventually defeat the Heracleopolitan kings around 2033 BC and unify the country to continue the Eleventh Dynasty, bringing Egypt into the Middle Kingdom.

==The Ipuwer Papyrus==
The emergence of what is considered literature by modern standards seems to have occurred during the First Intermediate Period, with a flowering of new literary genres in the Middle Kingdom. A particularly important piece is the Ipuwer Papyrus, often called the &quot;Lamentations&quot; or &quot;Admonitions of Ipuwer&quot;, which although not dated to this period by modern scholarship may refer to the First Intermediate Period and record a decline in international relations and a general impoverishment in Egypt.

== The art and architecture of the First Intermediate Period==
The First Intermediate Period in Egypt was generally divided into two main geographical and political regions, one centered at Memphis and the other at Thebes. The Memphite kings, although weak in power, held on to the Memphite artistic traditions that had been in place throughout the Old Kingdom. This was a symbolic way for the weakened Memphite state to hold on to the vestiges of glory in which the Old Kingdom had reveled. On the other hand, the Theban kings, physically isolated from Memphis (the capital of Egypt in the Old Kingdom) and the Memphite center of art, were forced to develop their own &quot;Pre-Unification Theban Style&quot; of art to fulfill their kingly duty of creating order out of chaos through art.

There is not much known about the style of art from the North (centered in Heracleopolis) because not much is known about the Heracleopolitan kings: little information is provided detailing their rule on monuments from the North. However, much is known about the Pre-Unification Theban Style, as the Theban kings of the Pre-Unification Eleventh Dynasty used art to reinforce the legitimacy of their rule, and many royal workshops were created, forming a distinctive Upper Egyptian style of art different from the Old Kingdom canon.

Reliefs from the Pre-Unification Theban style of art consist primarily of either high raised relief or deep sunk relief with incised details. Figures depicted have narrow shoulders and a high small of the back, with rounded limbs and a lack of musculature in males; males also sometimes are shown with rolls of fat (a characteristic that originated in the Old Kingdom to portray mature males) and have angular breasts and, while the female breast is more angular or pointed or is shown through a long gentle curve with no nipple (in other periods, the female breast is depicted as curved). Facial features characteristic of this style include a large eye, which is outlined with a band of relief meant to represent eye paint. The band meets the outer eye corner and this line usually runs back to the ear. The eyebrow above the eye is mostly flat; it does not mimic the shape of the eyelid. A deep incision is used in the creation of the broad nose, and the ear is both large and oblique.
An example of Pre-Unification Theban reliefs is the Stela of the Gatekeeper Maati, a limestone stela from the reign of Mentuhotep II, ca. 2051-2030 BCE. In this stela, Maati is seated at an offering table with a jar of sacred oils in his left hand, and the text surrounding him references other figures from his life, such as the treasurer Bebi and the ancestor of the ruling Intef family, demonstrating the close bonds that tie together rulers and followers in Theban society during the First Intermediate Period. 

Strong facial features and the round modeling of limbs is also seen in statues, as seen in the &quot;Limestone Statue of the Steward Mery,&quot; from the 11th Dynasty of the First Intermediate Period, also under the reign of Mentuhotep II.

Males with pronounced, angular breasts portrayed with rolls of fat, as well as females with angular or pointed breasts are seen in the collection of &quot;Limestone Reliefs of High Official Tjetji.&quot; The &quot;Limestone Relief of High Official Tjetji&quot; contains 14 horizontal lines of text at the top of the relief, with an account of Tjetji&#x27;s life. Five vertical columns on the right of the relief dictate an elaborate offering formula particular to the First Intermediate Period. Tjetji faces right with two smaller males on the left that are most likely official staff. Tjetji himself is depicted as a mature official with a pronounced breast, rolls of fat on his torso, and a calf-length kilt. The officials shown on the left are more youthful and wear shorter kilts, symbolizing that they are less mature and active. The depiction of the female figure specific to the First Intermediate Period is also seen in the &quot;Limestone Relief of High Official Tjetji;&quot; in the image provided, the angular breast can be seen. 

The building projects of the Heracleopolitan kings in the North were very limited. Only one pyramid believed to belong to King Merikare (2065–2045 BC) is mentioned to be somewhere at Saqqara. Also, private tombs that were built during the time pale in comparison to the Old Kingdom monuments, in quality and size. There are still relief scenes of servants making provisions for the deceased as well as the traditional offering scenes which mirror those of the Old Kingdom Memphite tombs. However, they are of a lower quality and are much simpler than their Old Kingdom parallels. Wooden rectangular coffins were still being used, but their decorations became more elaborate during the rule of the Heracleopolitan kings. New Coffin Texts were painted on the interiors, providing spells and maps for the deceased to use in the afterlife.

Artworks that survived from the Theban Period show that the artisans took on new interpretations of traditional scenes. They employed the use of bright colors in their paintings and changed and distorted the proportions of the human figure. This distinctive style was especially evident in the rectangular slab stelae found in the tombs at Naga el-Deir. In terms of royal architecture, the Theban kings of the early eleventh dynasty constructed rock cut tombs called saff tombs at El-Tarif on the west bank of the Nile. This new style of mortuary architecture consisted of a large courtyard with a rock-cut colonnade at the far wall. Rooms were carved into the walls facing the central courtyard where the deceased were buried, allowing for multiple people to be buried in one tomb. The undecorated burial chambers may have been due to the lack of skilled artists in the Theban kingdom.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q232211" start="4" end="29" title="First Intermediate Period of Egypt" label="First Intermediate Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="73" end="86" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q177819" start="170" end="181" title="Old Kingdom of Egypt" label="Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q721801" start="200" end="207" title="seventh Dynasty" label="Seventh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400616" start="272" end="278" title="eighth dynasty of Egypt" label="Eighth"/>
<link wikidata="Q728449" start="280" end="285" title="Ninth dynasty of Egypt" label="Ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q429981" start="287" end="292" title="Tenth dynasty of Egypt" label="Tenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q719634" start="310" end="318" title="Eleventh dynasty of Egypt" label="Eleventh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077793" start="319" end="328" title="List of Egyptian dynasties" label="Dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q85792822" start="334" end="384" title="Periodization of Ancient Egypt" label="concept of a &amp;quot;First Intermediate Period&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q72238" start="421" end="437" title="Georg Steindorff" label="Georg Steindorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q958310" start="442" end="457" title="Henri Frankfort" label="Henri Frankfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q249480" start="720" end="733" title="Herakleopolis Magna" label="Heracleopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q463871" start="737" end="748" title="Lower Egypt" label="Lower Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q203299" start="775" end="781" title="Faiyum" label="Faiyum"/>
<link wikidata="Q101583" start="811" end="817" title="Thebes, Egypt" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q203751" start="822" end="833" title="Upper Egypt" label="Upper Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q296439" start="1206" end="1219" title="Mentuhotep II" label="Mentuhotep II"/>
<link wikidata="Q191324" start="1308" end="1331" title="Middle Kingdom of Egypt" label="Middle Kingdom of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q177819" start="1416" end="1427" title="Old Kingdom" label="Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198" start="1784" end="1791" title="Pepi II Neferkare" label="Pepi II"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="1808" end="1815" title="pharaoh" label="pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q269979" start="1823" end="1834" title="Sixth dynasty of Egypt" label="6th Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q732358" start="2181" end="2188" title="nomarch" label="nomarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="2267" end="2277" title="hereditary" label="hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519552" start="2793" end="2808" title="Flooding of the Nile" label="Nile inundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133621" start="2841" end="2854" title="Climate change (general concept)" label="drier climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q889514" start="2875" end="2885" title="crop yield" label="crop yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="2902" end="2908" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291515" start="2935" end="2953" title="4.2 kiloyear event" label="4.2 kiloyear event"/>
<link wikidata="Q174380" start="3329" end="3336" title="Manetho" label="Manetho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="3370" end="3383" title="Ptolemaic Kingdom" label="Ptolemaic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="3584" end="3593" title="oligarchy" label="oligarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442735" start="4000" end="4007" title="Scarab (artifact)" label="scarabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q551470" start="4042" end="4054" title="Neferkare II" label="Neferkare II"/>
<link wikidata="Q201175" start="4098" end="4104" title="jasper" label="jasper"/>
<link wikidata="Q878607" start="4117" end="4123" title="Syrian" label="Syrian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4195" end="4202" title="Qakare Ibi#Pyramid complex" label="pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q373513" start="4245" end="4248" title="Qakare Ibi" label="Ibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192134" start="4294" end="4301" title="Saqqara" label="Saqqara"/>
<link wikidata="Q889653" start="4326" end="4333" title="Iytjenu" label="Iytjenu"/>
<link wikidata="Q249480" start="4536" end="4549" title="Herakleopolis Magna" label="Heracleopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q592925" start="5082" end="5097" title="Wahkare Khety I" label="Wahkare Khety I"/>
<link wikidata="Q168745" start="5238" end="5247" title="Nile crocodile" label="crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q622770" start="5324" end="5335" title="Turin Canon" label="Turin Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13140741" start="5362" end="5370" title="Meryibre Khety" label="Kheti II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691303" start="5506" end="5515" title="Kheti III" label="Kheti III"/>
<link wikidata="Q29962" start="5737" end="5741" title="Siut" label="Siut"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="6131" end="6136" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="6148" end="6156" title="taxation" label="taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q220098" start="6447" end="6455" title="Warlord" label="warlords"/>
<link wikidata="Q592368" start="6483" end="6491" title="Ankhtifi" label="Ankhtifi"/>
<link wikidata="Q719639" start="7635" end="7642" title="Twelfth dynasty of Egypt" label="Twelfth"/>
<link wikidata="Q571686" start="7713" end="7718" title="Intef the Elder" label="Intef"/>
<link wikidata="Q313869" start="8080" end="8088" title="Intef II" label="Intef II"/>
<link wikidata="Q192268" start="8139" end="8145" title="Abydos, Egypt" label="Abydos"/>
<link wikidata="Q278988" start="8205" end="8211" title="Nekhen" label="Nekhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q284009" start="8254" end="8265" title="Elephantine" label="Elephantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q316274" start="8282" end="8291" title="Intef III" label="Intef III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179139" start="8589" end="8599" title="Mentuhotep (disambiguation)" label="Mentuhotep"/>
<link wikidata="Q296439" start="8601" end="8614" title="Mentuhotep II" label="Mentuhotep II"/>
<link wikidata="Q191324" start="9002" end="9016" title="Middle Kingdom of Egypt" label="Middle Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474863" start="9056" end="9070" title="Ipuwer Papyrus" label="Ipuwer Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715" start="9535" end="9542" title="Memphis, Egypt" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q296439" start="11777" end="11790" title="Mentuhotep II" label="Mentuhotep II"/>
<link wikidata="Q571686" start="12007" end="12046" title="Intef the Elder" label="the ancestor of the ruling Intef family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428264" start="13547" end="13558" title="Pyramid of Merikare" label="one pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q518143" start="13586" end="13594" title="Merikare" label="Merikare"/>
<link wikidata="Q192134" start="13642" end="13649" title="Saqqara" label="Saqqara"/>
<link wikidata="Q532105" start="14183" end="14195" title="Coffin Texts" label="Coffin Texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377541" start="14602" end="14612" title="slab stela" label="slab stela"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14636" end="14648" title="Naga el-Deir" label="Naga el-Deir"/>
<link wikidata="Q286169" start="14777" end="14785" title="El-Tarif" label="El-Tarif"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="14810" end="14814" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q657100" start="14903" end="14912" title="colonnade" label="colonnade"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291966" wikidata="Q6388386" url="?curid=291966" title="Ken Roberts (author)">
<text>Ken Roberts (born 1946) is a Canadian librarian and children&#x27;s writer who lives in Nanaimo, BC. 

==Biography==
Ken Roberts is the former Chief Librarian of the Hamilton Public Library. His hobby is writing.
Ken Roberts has taught Public Library Children&#x27;s Services at UBC, Children&#x27;s Literature at Simon Fraser University and Storytelling/Puppetry at the University of Lethbridge.
He has been Storyteller in Residence for the Vancouver School Board and Games Master for the World Improvisation Championships. Ken Roberts was also a two-time All-American distance runner, having attended UCLA as an undergraduate and both McMaster University and UWO for master&#x27;s degrees.

== Awards/recognitions ==
Ken Roberts has won a CanPro award for television writing and co-wrote a comedic play for adults (Suspect) that received a very positive review in Variety and has played regularly, with performances on three continents.

His book &quot;Past Tense&quot; was nominated for the prestigious Governor General&#x27;s Award for Children&#x27;s Literature in 1994. He has also been a finalist for the Christie Book Award and for the Canadian Children&#x27;s Book of the Year. His book &quot;The Thumb in the Box&quot; received a starred review in &quot;The Horn Book&quot;. Another children&#x27;s novel, &quot;Hiccup Champion of the World&quot;, has been translated into a number of languages.

Ken won the Canadian Association of Public Libraries&#x27; Outstanding Service Award in 2001 and the Hamilton Public Library system won the Ontario Library Association&#x27;s President&#x27;s Award for Exceptional Achievement in 2002.

Ken is a past president of the Canadian Library Association.

==Works==
*&quot;Crazy Ideas&quot; - 1984
*&quot;Pop Bottles&quot; - 1987
*&quot;Hiccup Champion of the World&quot; - 1988
*&quot;Jacques Cartier&quot; - 1988
*&quot;Nothing Wright&quot; - 1991
*&quot;Past Tense&quot; - 1994 (nominated for a Governor General&#x27;s Award)
*&quot;The Thumb in the Box&quot; - 2001
*&quot;Thumb on a Diamond&quot; - 2006
*&quot;Thumb and the Bad Guys&quot; - 2010

==References==
==External links==
*Hamilton Public Library website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6388386" start="0" end="11" title="Ken Roberts (author)" label="Ken Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="29" end="37" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q182436" start="38" end="47" title="librarian" label="librarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131539" start="52" end="74" title="children&amp;#x27;s writer" label="children&amp;#x27;s writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645111" start="166" end="189" title="Hamilton Public Library (Ontario)" label="Hamilton Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="603" end="607" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q632891" start="637" end="656" title="McMaster University" label="McMaster University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="661" end="664" title="UWO" label="UWO"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="866" end="873" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q283256" start="1006" end="1035" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030288" start="1419" end="1459" title="Canadian Library Association" label="Canadian Association of Public Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094827" start="1547" end="1574" title="Ontario Library Association" label="Ontario Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405766" start="1947" end="1976" title="1994 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291967" wikidata="Q942955" url="?curid=291967" title="Milonga (music)">
<text>Milonga is a musical genre that originated in the Río de la Plata areas of Argentina, Uruguay, and the Brazilian state of Rio Grande do Sul. It is considered a precursor of the tango.

&quot;Milonga is an excited habanera.&quot; The original habanera divided into four pulses, in a standard two-four where every note was stressed. In becoming milonga, though, all four notes turned strong, as tempo was doubled. The strength of the first beat weakened the fourth giving an almost waltz-like feel to milonga: one-two-three (four), one-two-three (four).
Habanera is a slower, more explicit sounding &quot;one&quot;, two, &quot;three&quot;-four. At least one modern tango pianist believes the polka influenced the speeding up of the milonga. According to milonga composer and one of the most famous &quot;payadores&quot; of his time, Gabino Ezeiza, the milonga derives from various African rhythms such as candombe, and Argentine milonga was particularly popular among Afro-Argentines in Buenos Aires at the turn of the 20th century.

Over time, dance steps and other musical influences were added, eventually contributing to the creation of tango.

==Notable artists==
Artists known for their milonga compositions and interpretations include Roberto Firpo, Angel D&#x27;Agostino, Pedro Maffia, Pedro Laurenz, Ángel Villoldo, Francisco Canaro, Rodolfo Biagi, Jorge Drexler, Juan d&#x27;Arienzo, Edgardo Donato, Gabino Ezeiza, Aníbal Troilo, Lucio Demare, Domingo Federico, Angel Vargas, Mariano Mores, Alfredo Zitarrosa, Francisco Lomuto, Astor Piazzolla and Carlos Di Sarli. These artists are from the early years and the Golden era of tango. Los Moonlights released a song entitled &quot;Milonga de pelo largo&quot; (Milonga of long hair) on their debut LP, Moonlights.

In Rio Grande do Sul, &quot;milonga&quot; is an important regional genre and it is part of the repertoire of many gaucho musical groups and interpreters, not to be confused with the Argentinean gauchos. It also continues to influence other genres of the modern gaucho music. José Cláudio Machado&#x27;s &quot;Milonga Abaixo de Mau Tempo&quot;, Renato Borghetti&#x27;s &quot;Milonga para as Missões&quot; and Jayme Caetano Braun&#x27;s &quot;Bochincho&quot; are examples of the traditional rio-grandense form of &quot;milonga&quot;, while Vitor Ramil&#x27;s &quot;Ramilonga&quot; and Bebeto Alves&#x27;s &quot;Milonga Orientao&quot; are examples of modern form of this genre.

Argentine composer and pianist Fernando Otero has based many of his orchestral and chamber works on this rhythm, creating compositions for Symphonic Orchestra, String Quartet and Jazz Combos. 
Kevin Johansen is a modern Argentine rock artist who has a number of songs that combine folkloric and pop music with a milonga rhythm.

==See also==
*Argentine tango
*Chamarrita
*Milonga (dance event)
*Tango (dance)
*Tango music
*Vals

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q942955" start="0" end="7" title="Milonga (music)" label="Milonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q35827" start="50" end="65" title="Río de la Plata" label="Río de la Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="75" end="84" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="86" end="93" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="122" end="139" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q338450" start="177" end="182" title="Tango (dance)" label="tango"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775526" start="213" end="221" title="habanera (music)" label="habanera"/>
<link wikidata="Q466944" start="306" end="329" title="staccatissimo" label="every note was stressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="690" end="695" title="polka" label="polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955539" start="802" end="811" title="payador" label="payadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393468" start="831" end="844" title="Gabino Ezeiza" label="Gabino Ezeiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033073" start="903" end="911" title="candombe" label="candombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088284" start="966" end="981" title="Afro-Argentines" label="Afro-Argentines"/>
<link wikidata="Q338450" start="1139" end="1144" title="Tango (dance)" label="tango"/>
<link wikidata="Q517143" start="1240" end="1253" title="Roberto Firpo" label="Roberto Firpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q386391" start="1255" end="1276" title="Angel D&amp;#x27;Agostino" label="Angel D&amp;#x27;Agostino"/>
<link wikidata="Q369514" start="1278" end="1290" title="Pedro Maffia" label="Pedro Maffia"/>
<link wikidata="Q360386" start="1292" end="1305" title="Pedro Laurenz" label="Pedro Laurenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268448" start="1307" end="1321" title="Ángel Villoldo" label="Ángel Villoldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q526424" start="1323" end="1339" title="Francisco Canaro" label="Francisco Canaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q974754" start="1341" end="1354" title="Rodolfo Biagi" label="Rodolfo Biagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q543506" start="1356" end="1369" title="Jorge Drexler" label="Jorge Drexler"/>
<link wikidata="Q512104" start="1371" end="1390" title="Juan d&amp;#x27;Arienzo" label="Juan d&amp;#x27;Arienzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q656025" start="1392" end="1406" title="Edgardo Donato" label="Edgardo Donato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393468" start="1408" end="1421" title="Gabino Ezeiza" label="Gabino Ezeiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q381843" start="1423" end="1436" title="Aníbal Troilo" label="Aníbal Troilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11689767" start="1438" end="1450" title="Lucio Demare" label="Lucio Demare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812772" start="1452" end="1468" title="Domingo Federico" label="Domingo Federico"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1470" end="1482" title="Angel Vargas" label="Angel Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590062" start="1484" end="1497" title="Mariano Mores" label="Mariano Mores"/>
<link wikidata="Q203413" start="1499" end="1516" title="Alfredo Zitarrosa" label="Alfredo Zitarrosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383464" start="1518" end="1534" title="Francisco Lomuto" label="Francisco Lomuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q172505" start="1536" end="1551" title="Astor Piazzolla" label="Astor Piazzolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042863" start="1556" end="1571" title="Carlos Di Sarli" label="Carlos Di Sarli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683421" start="1641" end="1655" title="Los Moonlights" label="Los Moonlights"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="1773" end="1790" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="1884" end="1890" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="gaucho"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2045" end="2065" title="José Cláudio Machado" label="José Cláudio Machado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932615" start="2114" end="2130" title="Renato Borghetti" label="Renato Borghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163298" start="2178" end="2197" title="Jayme Caetano Braun" label="Jayme Caetano Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="2259" end="2272" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="rio-grandense"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937200" start="2308" end="2319" title="Vitor Ramil" label="Vitor Ramil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2353" end="2365" title="Bebeto Alves" label="Bebeto Alves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444857" start="2477" end="2491" title="Fernando Otero" label="Fernando Otero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107947" start="2639" end="2653" title="Kevin Johansen" label="Kevin Johansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25116" start="2789" end="2804" title="Argentine tango" label="Argentine tango"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069474" start="2806" end="2816" title="Chamarrita" label="Chamarrita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338948" start="2818" end="2839" title="Milonga (dance event)" label="Milonga (dance event)"/>
<link wikidata="Q338450" start="2841" end="2854" title="Tango (dance)" label="Tango (dance)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14390274" start="2856" end="2867" title="Tango music" label="Tango music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509521" start="2869" end="2873" title="Vals Criollo" label="Vals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291968" wikidata="Q3428839" url="?curid=291968" title="Rex Murphy">
<text>Robert Rex Rafael Murphy (March 1947 – 9 May 2024) was a Canadian commentator and author, primarily on Canadian political and social matters. He was the regular host of CBC Radio One&#x27;s &quot;Cross Country Checkup&quot;, a nationwide call-in show, for 21 years before stepping down in September 2015. He wrote for the &quot;National Post&quot; and had a YouTube channel called &quot;RexTV&quot;.

==Early life and education==
Murphy was born in March 1947 in Carbonear, in the Dominion of Newfoundland. Like all British subjects born in Newfoundland prior to its union with Canada in 1949, Murphy became a natural-born Canadian citizen under the &quot;Newfoundland Terms of Union&quot; and an amendment to the &quot;Canadian Citizenship Act&quot;, passed in 1949. Murphy grew up in Placentia, 105 kilometres west of St. John&#x27;s, and is the second of five children of Harry and Marie Murphy. He graduated from Memorial University of Newfoundland with a degree in Education in 1966. In 1968, he studied law for a year at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, as a Rhodes scholar. Returning to Newfoundland, he began a master&#x27;s degree in English, but did not complete it.

== Early career ==
Murphy first came to national attention in 1965, while attending Memorial University, during a nationally covered speech in Lennoxville, Quebec. Murphy characterized Newfoundland Premier Joey Smallwood&#x27;s governing style as dictatorial and proclaimed his legislature&#x27;s recent announcement of free tuition as a sham as it only covered the first year of a degree program. Smallwood warned the undergraduate student in a news conference not to return. Murphy did return, and was elected President of Memorial University Student Council. Smallwood&#x27;s administration followed through with its promise – students were awarded both free tuition and an additional $50 monthly living allowance for those residing in St. John&#x27;s ($100 for those living in the outports).

Murphy won a Progressive Conservative nomination in 1975. However, he abandoned it due to lack of funds. Instead, he went to work as special assistant to PC leader and Premier Frank Moores.

Murphy later switched parties in the 1980s and served two years as chief researcher for the provincial Liberal caucus before running for provincial office twice, as a Liberal. He stood for election in the 1985 general election in the riding of Placentia, and came in second, losing by 146 votes to William G. Patterson. The next year, he stood for election in a by-election in the riding of St. John&#x27;s East. This time he came in third, behind the successful New Democratic Party candidate, Gene Long, and the Progressive Conservative candidate, Shannie Duff.

== Canadian Broadcasting Corporation ==
Murphy was a frequent presence on the various branches of the CBC. In the 1970s, he worked as an interviewer on &quot;Here and Now&quot; which aired on CBC Radio in Newfoundland, and in Toronto, on the current affairs program &quot;Up Canada!&quot;

He returned to CBC in the 1990s and had regular commentary segments entitled &quot;Point of View&quot; on &quot;The National&quot;, CBC Television&#x27;s flagship nightly news program. He was also the regular host of CBC Radio One&#x27;s &quot;Cross Country Checkup&quot;, a nationwide call-in show, starting in 1994 and continuing for 21 years.

In 2004, he and nine other prominent Canadians participated in the production and the defence of a Great Canadian on the CBC Television program &quot;The Greatest Canadian&quot;. Murphy, advocating for former prime minister Pierre Trudeau, guided his candidate to third place in the final vote.

Murphy retired from &quot;Cross Country Checkup&quot; on 20 September 2015, and continued his commentary segments on &quot;The National&quot; until 28 June 2017.

After receiving several public complaints in 2014, the CBC&#x27;s ombudsman investigated claims that Murphy may have been in conflict of interest by criticizing opponents of the Alberta oil sands in his &quot;Point of View&quot; segments while receiving money from the oil industry for paid speeches. In the final report and after an investigation, the CBC&#x27;s ombudsman, Esther Enkin, did not say whether Murphy&#x27;s speeches presented a conflict of interest but did conclude that &quot;since taking money leads to a perception of a conflict of interest, CBC management might want to consider, in the review they are undertaking, whether even with disclosure, it is appropriate for CBC news and current affairs staff to get paid for their speaking engagements.&quot;

== Subsequent work ==
Murphy wrote a column for the Saturday edition of &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot; newspaper until January 2010, when the &quot;Globe&quot; cancelled the column and Murphy moved to the &quot;National Post&quot;, for which he continued to write until his death.

In October 2019, he launched &quot;RexTV&quot;, his own YouTube channel, in which he interviewed prominent figures in politics, business, academia, journalism, science and culture who might be ignored or misrepresented by the mainstream media.

== Views ==
In 2009, Murphy criticized the Liberal Party for proposing &quot;green&quot; policy responses to global warming. In 2020, Murphy criticized the Justin Trudeau–led Liberal government&#x27;s response to the COVID-19 pandemic for creating a system in which the government is &quot;without opposition, free to gush money wherever it wishes, in whatever amounts it chooses, to whomever it favours.&quot; In 2021, Murphy published a column calling the government &quot;the worst Canadian government ever.&quot;

Murphy argued that climate change is &quot;a sub-branch of climate politics&quot;. He criticized former US Vice President Al Gore&#x27;s opposition to the Alberta oil sands and in a 2013 column, called the industry &quot;a dazzling and profitable engineering endeavor of which all Canadians should be proud&quot;.

== Death ==
Murphy died from cancer on 9 May 2024 in Toronto, at the age of 77.

== Honours ==
In June 2008, Murphy was awarded an Honorary Doctor of Laws degree from the University of Waterloo. He was awarded honorary doctorates of letters by Memorial, St. Thomas, and Nipissing universities. In June 2013, he was awarded the Honorary Fellowship of the Canadian Institute of Management.

==See also==
* List of newspaper columnists

==References==
==External links==

*Rex Murphy profile at cbc.ca
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3428839" start="0" end="24" title="Rex Murphy" label="Robert Rex Rafael Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009037" start="169" end="182" title="CBC Radio One" label="CBC Radio One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188262" start="196" end="217" title="Cross Country Checkup" label="Cross Country Checkup"/>
<link wikidata="Q622812" start="238" end="250" title="Talk show" label="call-in show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812075" start="328" end="341" title="National Post" label="National Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937956" start="463" end="472" title="Carbonear, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Carbonear"/>
<link wikidata="Q38610" start="481" end="505" title="Dominion of Newfoundland" label="Dominion of Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143629" start="656" end="683" title="Newfoundland Act" label="Newfoundland Terms of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029865" start="720" end="744" title="Canadian Citizenship Act" label="Canadian Citizenship Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607939" start="786" end="795" title="Placentia, Newfoundland" label="Placentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082" start="820" end="835" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895354" start="917" end="952" title="Memorial University of Newfoundland" label="Memorial University of Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q973884" start="1027" end="1049" title="St Edmund Hall, Oxford" label="St Edmund Hall, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="1056" end="1070" title="Rhodes Scholarship" label="Rhodes scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q672089" start="1312" end="1323" title="Lennoxville" label="Lennoxville"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="1325" end="1331" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240356" start="1354" end="1374" title="Premier of Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q365496" start="1375" end="1389" title="Joey Smallwood" label="Joey Smallwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042046" start="1954" end="1962" title="Newfoundland outport" label="outports"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399535" start="1979" end="2003" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Progressive Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q510174" start="2142" end="2154" title="Frank Moores" label="Frank Moores"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366492" start="2249" end="2267" title="Liberal Party of Newfoundland and Labrador" label="provincial Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586465" start="2362" end="2383" title="1985 Newfoundland general election" label="1985 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200304" start="2401" end="2410" title="Placentia-St. Mary&amp;#x27;s" label="Placentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20984531" start="2455" end="2475" title="William G. Patterson" label="William G. Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="2519" end="2530" title="by-election" label="by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588664" start="2548" end="2568" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s East (provincial electoral district)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345043" start="2620" end="2640" title="Newfoundland and Labrador New Democratic Party" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962906" start="2652" end="2661" title="Gene Long" label="Gene Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399535" start="2671" end="2695" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Progressive Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488802" start="2707" end="2719" title="Shannie Duff" label="Shannie Duff"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="2824" end="2827" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413021" start="3124" end="3136" title="The National (CBC)" label="The National"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="3144" end="3158" title="CBC Television" label="CBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009037" start="3229" end="3242" title="CBC Radio One" label="CBC Radio One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188262" start="3256" end="3277" title="Cross Country Checkup" label="Cross Country Checkup"/>
<link wikidata="Q622812" start="3298" end="3310" title="Talk show" label="call-in show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999819" start="3509" end="3530" title="The Greatest Canadian" label="The Greatest Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8619" start="3583" end="3597" title="Pierre Trudeau" label="Pierre Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q211067" start="3943" end="3963" title="conflict of interest" label="conflict of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q297322" start="4004" end="4013" title="oil sands" label="oil sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="4670" end="4688" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812075" start="4803" end="4816" title="National Post" label="National Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099714" start="5275" end="5289" title="Justin Trudeau" label="Justin Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873580" start="5336" end="5353" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Canada" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="5656" end="5670" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="5741" end="5758" title="US Vice President" label="US Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="5759" end="5766" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q754632" start="5792" end="5809" title="Alberta oil sands" label="Alberta oil sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="6123" end="6145" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030184" start="6306" end="6338" title="Canadian Institute of Management" label="Canadian Institute of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630426" start="6356" end="6384" title="List of newspaper columnists" label="List of newspaper columnists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291971" wikidata="Q65224" url="?curid=291971" title="Monetary reform">
<text>Monetary reform is any movement or theory that proposes a system of supplying money and financing the economy that is different from the current system.

Monetary reformers may advocate any of the following, among other proposals:

* A return to the gold standard (or silver standard or bimetallism).
* Abolition of central bank support of the banking system during periods of crisis and/or the enforcement of full reserve banking for the privately owned banking system to remove the possibility of bank runs, possibly combined with sovereign money issued and controlled by the government or a central bank under the direction of the government. There is an associated debate within Austrian School whether free banking or full reserve banking should be advocated but regardless Austrian School economists such as Murray Rothbard support ending central bank bail outs (&quot;ending the Fed&quot;).
* The issuance of interest-free credit by a government-controlled and fully owned central bank. Such interest-free but repayable loans could be used for public infrastructure and productive private investment. This proposal seeks to avoid debt-free money causing inflation.
* The issuance of social credit – &quot;debt-free&quot; or &quot;pure&quot; money issued directly from the Treasury – rather than the sourcing of fresh money from a central bank in the form of interest-bearing bonds. Maurice Reckitt said the community would issue its own credit, enabling goods to be sold below cost.
* The international monetary reform by proposing the development of a world central bank managed jointly by all member countries in the world. The world central bank then issues a real international currency that coexists with the national currency of each member country and can be converted to each other at an exchange rate that follows the fundamentals of each country called &quot;auto-balancing&quot;. The international currency is only for crosborder transactions between member countries, while domestic transactions continue to use their respective national currencies.

==Common targets for reform==
Of all the aspects of monetary policy, certain topics reoccur as targets for reform:

===Reserve requirements===
Banks typically make loans to customers by crediting new demand deposits to the account of the customer. This practice, which is known as fractional reserve banking, permits the total supply of credit to exceed the liquid legal reserves of the bank. The amount of this excess is expressed as the &quot;reserve ratio&quot; and is limited by government regulators not to exceed a level which they deem adequate to ensure the ability of banks to meet their payment obligations. Under this system, which is currently practiced throughout the world, the money supply varies with the quantity of legal reserves and the amount of credit issuance by banks.

Several major historical examples of financial regulatory reform occurred in the 20th century relating to fractional-reserve banking, made in response to the Great Depression and the many bank runs following the crash of 1929. These reforms included the creation of deposit insurance (such as the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation) to mitigate against the danger of bank runs. Countries have also implemented legal reserve requirements which impose minimum reserve requirements on banks. Mainstream economists believe that these monetary reforms have made sudden disruptions in the banking system less frequent.

Walter Block argued fractional reserve banking inherently artificially lowers real interest rates and leads to business cycles propagated by excessive capital investment and subsequent contraction. A small number of critics, such as Michael Rowbotham, equate the practice to counterfeiting, because banks are granted the legal right to issue new loans while charging interest on the money thus created. Rowbotham argues that this concentrates wealth in the banking sector with various pernicious effects.
===Money creation by the central bank===
Wright Patman objected to governments paying interest for the use of money which the central bank creates &quot;out of nothing&quot;. These critics claim that this system causes economic activity to depend on the actions of privately owned banks, which are motivated by self-interest rather than by any explicit social purpose or obligation.

===International organizations and developing nations===
Michael Hudson criticised existing global financial institutions such as the World Bank and International Monetary Fund for reinforcing debt dependency. The attempt by weak Third World governments to service external debt with the sale of valuable hard and soft commodities on world markets is seen by some to be destructive of local cultures, destroying local communities and their environment.

== Arguments for reform ==
Among the arguments for a transition to full-reserve banking or sovereign money are as follows:

* Money are created when a loan is made and this money disappear when the loan is paid down. The central banks cannot control the money supply when private banks are creating credit money. Credit money can be converted to reserve money in various ways so that there is no practical limit to the amount of credit money that can be created by private banks. This increases the risk of economic crises, unemployment, and bank bailouts or bank runs.

* Less than 6% of the money in circulation in the world is coins and bank notes, the rest originates from bank credit, carrying interest. This interest allows banks to earn rents from the mere fact that money exist. Reformers do not think it fair that the whole society is paying rents to the banks just for having money to circulate.

* The total amount of public and private debt in the world is now between two and three times the amount of broad money in circulation. This is a result of the accumulated compound interest of credit money. This counterintuitive fact makes it virtually impossible to repay all debt. The mathematical consequence is that somebody will have to go bankrupt even if they have done nothing wrong. It seems unfair that somebody will become destitute as a consequence of the money system rather than because of their own reckless behavior.

* It is not only individual persons and businesses that go bankrupt as a consequence of the fact that there is more debt than money in circulation. Many states have gone bankrupt and some states have done so many times. The debt problem is particularly severe for developing countries that have debt in foreign currencies. The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank have been promoting loans to resource-rich developing countries for the expressed purpose of promoting economic growth in these countries, yet these loans were denominated in foreign currencies and most of the money were used for paying transnational entrepreneurs without ever entering the local economy. These countries have been forced to sell off national assets in order to service the debt. Also a number of countries in the European Union are affected when a large part of the money circulating in the country originates from banks in other member countries. The spiraling, unpayable national debt has led to social chaos and even war in some cases.

* A major part of all new credit money that is created is spent on changing the ownership of existing assets rather than creating new assets. This process inflates the prices of assets, including real estate, factories, land, and intellectual rights. This makes living unnecessarily costly for everybody. It contributes to growing inequality and it makes the economy unstable because of the creation of asset bubbles.

* The exponentially increasing debt in society can only be serviced as long as the rate of economic growth exceeds the interest rate. This creates an imperative for perpetual growth in production and consumption. This leads to overconsumption and overexploitation of resources. The technological progress in labor-saving technologies has not given us more leisure as we expected, because of the necessary growth in consumption.

* The unpayable debt leads to bankruptcies of homeowners and foreclosure of their homes. This allows banks to replace their virtual assets in the form of money created &#x27;out of thin air&#x27; with physical assets in the form of real estate. In 1968, a court in Minnesota decided that this practice was unconstitutional because the process by which the bank had created money from nothing was fraudulent (see First National Bank of Montgomery v. Daly).

== Arguments against reform ==
Among the arguments for keeping the current system of money creation based on the credit theory of money or fractional reserve banking are as follows:

* Switching to an untested banking system that differs from that of other countries would lead to a situation of extreme uncertainty.
* A reform would make it difficult for the central bank to implement a monetary policy that secures price stability.
* The creation of money free of debt would make it difficult for the central bank to later reduce the money supply.
* The central bank would quite likely be subjected to political pressures for producing more money for whatever purpose is high on the political agenda. Giving in to such pressures would lead to inflation.
* The finance sector would be weakened because its profit is reduced.
* A reform would not offer complete protection against financial crises abroad.
* A reform would lead to an unhealthy concentration of power at the central bank. Critics doubt that the central bank can determine the required money supply better than the private banks can.
* The central bank may have to provide credit to commercial banks and accept the accompanying risk.
* A sovereign money system would stimulate the creation of shadow banking and alternative means of payment.
* In the traditional banking system, the central bank controls the interest rate while the money supply is determined by the market. In a sovereign money system, the central bank controls the money supply while the market controls the interest rate. In the traditional system, the need for investments determines the amount of credit that is issued. In a sovereign money system, the amount of saving determines the investments. This change of influences will generate a new and different system with its own dynamics and possible instabilities. The interest rate may fluctuate as well as the liquidity. It is not certain that the market will find an equilibrium where the liquidity is sufficient for the needs of the real economy and full employment.

==Alternative money systems==

===Government Control vs Central Bank independence===
To regulate credit creation, some countries have created a currency board, or granted independence to their central bank. The Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Federal Reserve, and the Bank of England are examples where the central bank is explicitly given the power to set interest rates and conduct monetary policy independent of any direct political interference or direction from the central government. This may enable the setting of interest rates to be less susceptible to political interference and thereby assist in combating inflation (or debasement of the currency) by allowing the central bank to more effectively restrict the growth of M3.

However, given that these policies do not address the more fundamental issues inherent in fractional reserve banking, many suggest that only more radical monetary reform such as government directly taking over central banks such as the China or Swiss models can promote positive economic or social change. Although central banks may appear to control inflation, through periodic bank rescues and other means, they may inadvertently be forced to increase the money supply (and thereby debase the currency) to save the banking system from bankruptcy or collapse during periodic bank runs, thereby inducing moral hazard in the financial system, making the system susceptible to economic bubbles.

===International monetary reform===
Theorists such as Robert Mundell (and more radical thinkers such as James Robertson) see a role for global monetary reform as part of a system of global institutions alongside the United Nations to provide global ecological management and move towards world peace, with Robert Mundell in particular advocating the revived use of gold as a stabilising factor in the international financial system. Henry Liu of the &quot;Asia Times Online&quot; argues that monetary reform is an important part of a move towards post-autistic economics.

While some mainstream economists favour monetary reforms to reduce inflation and currency risk and to increase efficiency in the allocation of financial capital, the idea of all-encompassing reform for green or peace objectives is typically espoused by those on the left-wing of the subject and those associated with the anti-globalization movement.

===Social credit and the provision of debt-free money directly from government===
Still other radical reform proposals emphasise monetary, tax and capital budget reform which empowers government to direct the economy toward sustainable solutions which are not possible if government spending can only be financed with more government debt from the private banking system. In particular, a number of monetary reformers, such as Michael Rowbotham, Stephen Zarlenga and Ellen Brown, support the restriction or banning of fractional-reserve banking (characterizing it as an illegitimate banking practice akin to embezzlement) and advocate the replacement of fractional-reserve banking with government-issued debt-free fiat currency issued directly from the Treasury rather than from the quasi-government Federal Reserve. Austrian commentator Gary North has sharply criticized these views in his writings.

Alternatively, some monetary reformers such as those in the social credit movement, support the issuance of repayable interest-free credit from a government-owned central bank to fund infrastructure and sustainable social projects. This social credit movement flourished briefly in the early 20th century, but then became marginalized. In Canada, it was an important political movement that ruled Alberta through nine legislatures between 1935 and 1971, and also won many seats in Québec. It died out in the 1980s.

Both these groups (those who advocate the replacement of fractional-reserve banking with debt-free government-issued fiat, and those who support the issuance of repayable interest-free credit from a government-owned central bank) see the provision of interest-free money as a way of freeing the working populace from the bonds of &quot;debt slavery&quot; and facilitating a transformation of the economy away from environmentally damaging consumerism and towards sustainable economic policies and environment-friendly business practices.

===Examples of government issued debt-free money===
Some governments have experimented in the past with debt-free government-created money independent of a bank. The American Colonies used the &quot;Colonial Scrip&quot; system prior to the Revolution, much to the praise of Benjamin Franklin. The paper money of Pennsylvania maintained its value for forty years.

Abraham Lincoln used interest-free money created by the government to help the Union win the American Civil War. Since greenbacks were not limited by gold, they fueled wartime prosperity among farmers and industrial growth.

===Local barter, local currency===
Paul Hawken suggests wholesale reform of money and currency, based on ideas from green economics or Natural Capitalism, would be beneficial. These include the ideas of soft currency, barter and the local service economy.

Local currency systems can operate within small communities, outside of government systems, and use specially printed notes or tokens called scrips for exchange. Barter takes this further by swapping goods and services directly; a compromise being the Local Exchange Trading Systems (LETS) scheme: a formalised system of community-based economics that records members&#x27; mutual credit in a central location.

===Commodity money===
Newt Gingrich called for a commission on returning to a hard currency or asset-backed currency, which is often argued to be an antidote to inflation. This may involve using commodity money such as money backed by the gold, silver or both, commodities which supporters argue possess unique properties: their extraordinary malleability, their strong resistance to forgery, their character as stable and impervious to decay, and their inherently limited supply.

Digital means are also now possible to allow trading in hard currencies such as gold, and some believe a new free market will emerge in money production and distribution, as the internet allows renewed decentralisation and competition in this area, eroding the central government&#x27;s and bankers&#x27; old monopoly control of the means of exchange.

===Free banking===
Kevin Dowd favours permitting competing banks to issue private banknotes whilst also eliminating the central bank&#x27;s role as lender of last resort. He describes a gold standard as a &quot;natural choice.&quot;

==See also==
* List of monetary reformers
* Money creation
* Credit theory of money
* Money as Debt
* Criticisms of debt
* Criticism of fractional-reserve banking
* Full-reserve banking
* Criticism of the Federal Reserve
* Monetary reform in Britain
* Monetary reform in the United States
* Money Free movement
* Swiss sovereign-money initiative, 2018
* Modern Monetary Theory
* Seignorage
* &quot;Money as Debt&quot; three-film series
* Universal basic income
==References==
==Further reading==
*&quot;The Mystery of Banking&quot;, Murray Rothbard
*&quot;The Ethics of Money Production&quot;, Jörg Guido Hülsmann (2008), Ludwig von Mises Institute
*&quot;100% Money and the Public Debt&quot;, Irving Fisher (public domain)

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q65224" start="0" end="15" title="Monetary reform" label="Monetary reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368" start="78" end="83" title="money" label="money"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="250" end="263" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860864" start="268" end="283" title="silver standard" label="silver standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q745405" start="287" end="298" title="bimetallism" label="bimetallism"/>
<link wikidata="Q649151" start="410" end="430" title="full reserve banking" label="full reserve banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899024" start="533" end="548" title="sovereign money" label="sovereign money"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="594" end="606" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q203411" start="683" end="698" title="Austrian School" label="Austrian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453396" start="707" end="719" title="free banking" label="free banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q649151" start="723" end="743" title="full reserve banking" label="full reserve banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q203411" start="779" end="794" title="Austrian School" label="Austrian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q297079" start="814" end="829" title="Murray Rothbard" label="Murray Rothbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375894" start="875" end="889" title="End the Fed" label="ending the Fed"/>
<link wikidata="Q182076" start="930" end="936" title="credit (finance)" label="credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="980" end="992" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756412" start="1190" end="1203" title="social credit" label="social credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q10756188" start="1279" end="1287" title="Treasury" label="Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="1337" end="1349" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793433" start="1389" end="1404" title="Maurice Reckitt" label="Maurice Reckitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="2122" end="2137" title="monetary policy" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123642" start="2351" end="2377" title="fractional reserve banking" label="fractional reserve banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058762" start="2515" end="2528" title="reserve ratio" label="reserve ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="3021" end="3037" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q806663" start="3051" end="3059" title="bank run" label="bank run"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="3075" end="3088" title="crash of 1929" label="crash of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q376935" start="3129" end="3146" title="deposit insurance" label="deposit insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345065" start="3160" end="3197" title="Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation" label="Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058762" start="3282" end="3302" title="reserve requirements" label="reserve requirements"/>
<link wikidata="Q27718" start="3480" end="3492" title="Walter Block" label="Walter Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q179179" start="3563" end="3577" title="interest rates" label="interest rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563296" start="3713" end="3730" title="Michael Rowbotham" label="Michael Rowbotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="3755" end="3769" title="counterfeiting" label="counterfeiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376636" start="4026" end="4039" title="Wright Patman" label="Wright Patman"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="4111" end="4123" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q956284" start="4426" end="4440" title="Michael Hudson (economist)" label="Michael Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="4503" end="4513" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="4518" end="4545" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="4599" end="4610" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q649151" start="4890" end="4910" title="full-reserve banking" label="full-reserve banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899024" start="4914" end="4929" title="sovereign money" label="sovereign money"/>
<link wikidata="Q842206" start="5077" end="5089" title="money supply" label="money supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q114380" start="5330" end="5345" title="Financial crisis" label="economic crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="5347" end="5359" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q44312" start="5365" end="5378" title="Bailout" label="bank bailouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q806663" start="5382" end="5390" title="bank run" label="bank run"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972003" start="5838" end="5849" title="broad money" label="broad money"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092023" start="6434" end="6442" title="sovereign default" label="bankrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="6528" end="6548" title="Developing country" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550762" start="6559" end="6585" title="Debt of developing countries" label="debt in foreign currencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="6591" end="6618" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="6627" end="6637" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="7069" end="7083" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="7229" end="7242" title="national debt" label="national debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q207781" start="7699" end="7712" title="Economic bubble" label="asset bubbles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174091" start="7942" end="7957" title="overconsumption" label="overconsumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="8174" end="8186" title="Bankruptcy" label="bankruptcies"/>
<link wikidata="Q231710" start="8205" end="8216" title="foreclosure" label="foreclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="8376" end="8387" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515622" start="8450" end="8466" title="Constitutionality" label="unconstitutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057865" start="8556" end="8597" title="First National Bank of Montgomery v. Daly" label="First National Bank of Montgomery v. Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410855" start="8714" end="8736" title="credit theory of money" label="credit theory of money"/>
<link wikidata="Q123642" start="8740" end="8766" title="fractional reserve banking" label="fractional reserve banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="8961" end="8973" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="8989" end="9004" title="monetary policy" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q351258" start="9018" end="9033" title="price stability" label="price stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q13576850" start="9041" end="9058" title="money creation" label="creation of money"/>
<link wikidata="Q842206" start="9137" end="9149" title="money supply" label="money supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="9157" end="9169" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="9346" end="9355" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q114380" start="9482" end="9498" title="Financial crisis" label="financial crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q962143" start="9859" end="9873" title="shadow banking" label="shadow banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q179179" start="9975" end="9988" title="interest rate" label="interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11832699" start="10500" end="10509" title="Market liquidity" label="liquidity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10625" end="10637" title="Economy#Range" label="real economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q496819" start="10804" end="10818" title="currency board" label="currency board"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="10853" end="10865" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494550" start="10871" end="10898" title="Reserve Bank of New Zealand" label="Reserve Bank of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506724" start="10904" end="10929" title="Reserve Bank of Australia" label="Reserve Bank of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="10935" end="10950" title="Federal Reserve" label="Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="10960" end="10975" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="10999" end="11011" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320217" start="11163" end="11181" title="central government" label="central government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="11310" end="11319" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="11368" end="11380" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q842206" start="11424" end="11426" title="money supply" label="M3"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="11744" end="11756" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q842206" start="11887" end="11899" title="money supply" label="money supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q44454" start="12033" end="12045" title="moral hazard" label="moral hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q207781" start="12104" end="12119" title="economic bubble" label="economic bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q219721" start="12177" end="12191" title="Robert Mundell" label="Robert Mundell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408382" start="12227" end="12242" title="James Robertson (activist)" label="James Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="12339" end="12353" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="12372" end="12382" title="ecological" label="ecological"/>
<link wikidata="Q238651" start="12411" end="12422" title="world peace" label="world peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q219721" start="12429" end="12443" title="Robert Mundell" label="Robert Mundell"/>
<link wikidata="Q727162" start="12579" end="12596" title="Asia Times Online" label="Asia Times Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q279112" start="12670" end="12693" title="post-autistic economics" label="post-autistic economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="12763" end="12772" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542397" start="12777" end="12790" title="currency risk" label="currency risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q615445" start="12807" end="12817" title="efficiency (economics)" label="efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897397" start="12839" end="12856" title="financial capital" label="financial capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="12962" end="12971" title="left-wing" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q191442" start="13017" end="13044" title="anti-globalization movement" label="anti-globalization movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q16633572" start="13493" end="13509" title="Stephen Zarlenga" label="Stephen Zarlenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051417" start="13514" end="13525" title="Ellen Brown" label="Ellen Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q157833" start="13655" end="13667" title="embezzlement" label="embezzlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q240532" start="13761" end="13774" title="fiat currency" label="fiat currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q10756188" start="13800" end="13808" title="Treasury" label="Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q203411" start="13864" end="13884" title="Austrian School" label="Austrian commentator"/>
<link wikidata="Q194219" start="13885" end="13895" title="Gary North (economist)" label="Gary North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756412" start="14009" end="14022" title="social credit" label="social credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326543" start="14303" end="14334" title="Canadian social credit movement" label="an important political movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518382" start="14340" end="14353" title="Alberta Social Credit Party" label="ruled Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586286" start="14388" end="14392" title="Alberta general election, 1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597317" start="14430" end="14436" title="List of Social Credit/Créditistes MPs" label="Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="14681" end="14693" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165988" start="14801" end="14813" title="debt slavery" label="debt slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q89640" start="14904" end="14915" title="consumerism" label="consumerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029329" start="15203" end="15217" title="Colonial Scrip" label="Colonial Scrip"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="15244" end="15254" title="American Revolution" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="15278" end="15295" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="15368" end="15383" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="15461" end="15479" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442418" start="15628" end="15639" title="Paul Hawken" label="Paul Hawken"/>
<link wikidata="Q598188" start="15709" end="15724" title="green economics" label="green economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245576" start="15728" end="15746" title="Natural Capitalism" label="Natural Capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421756" start="15796" end="15809" title="soft currency" label="soft currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q484830" start="15811" end="15817" title="barter (economics)" label="barter"/>
<link wikidata="Q112730899" start="15832" end="15847" title="service economy" label="service economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570153" start="15850" end="15864" title="Local currency" label="Local currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902809" start="15991" end="15996" title="scrip" label="scrip"/>
<link wikidata="Q484830" start="16012" end="16018" title="Barter (economics)" label="Barter"/>
<link wikidata="Q179941" start="16102" end="16132" title="Local Exchange Trading Systems" label="Local Exchange Trading Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154594" start="16171" end="16196" title="community-based economics" label="community-based economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011781" start="16224" end="16237" title="mutual credit" label="mutual credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q182788" start="16284" end="16297" title="Newt Gingrich" label="Newt Gingrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421756" start="16340" end="16353" title="hard currency" label="hard currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="16423" end="16432" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="16501" end="16505" title="Gold standard" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860864" start="16507" end="16513" title="Silver standard" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q745405" start="16517" end="16521" title="Bimetallism" label="both"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="16605" end="16617" title="malleability" label="malleability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332286" start="16646" end="16653" title="forgery" label="forgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q10836209" start="16744" end="16757" title="Electronic money" label="Digital means"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="16922" end="16930" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320217" start="17005" end="17023" title="central government" label="central government"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="17053" end="17061" title="monopoly" label="monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11105360" start="17077" end="17094" title="means of exchange" label="means of exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209302" start="17116" end="17126" title="Kevin Dowd" label="Kevin Dowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817463" start="17245" end="17266" title="lender of last resort" label="lender of last resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628997" start="17346" end="17372" title="List of monetary reformers" label="List of monetary reformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13576850" start="17375" end="17389" title="Money creation" label="Money creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410855" start="17392" end="17414" title="Credit theory of money" label="Credit theory of money"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179831" start="17417" end="17430" title="Money as Debt" label="Money as Debt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17433" end="17451" title="Fractional-reserve banking#Commentary" label="Criticisms of debt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17454" end="17493" title="Fractional-reserve banking#Commentary" label="Criticism of fractional-reserve banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q649151" start="17496" end="17516" title="Full-reserve banking" label="Full-reserve banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q288835" start="17519" end="17551" title="Criticism of the Federal Reserve" label="Criticism of the Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142389" start="17554" end="17580" title="Monetary reform in Britain" label="Monetary reform in Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q501958" start="17583" end="17619" title="Monetary reform in the United States" label="Monetary reform in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q18167326" start="17622" end="17641" title="Money Free movement" label="Money Free movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q48931351" start="17644" end="17682" title="Swiss sovereign-money initiative, 2018" label="Swiss sovereign-money initiative, 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q496647" start="17685" end="17707" title="Modern Monetary Theory" label="Modern Monetary Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q478641" start="17710" end="17720" title="Seignorage" label="Seignorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179831" start="17729" end="17742" title="Money as Debt" label="Money as Debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q678522" start="17769" end="17791" title="Universal basic income" label="Universal basic income"/>
<link wikidata="Q297079" start="17864" end="17879" title="Murray Rothbard" label="Murray Rothbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q72190" start="17925" end="17944" title="Jörg Guido Hülsmann" label="Jörg Guido Hülsmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q312739" start="18025" end="18038" title="Irving Fisher" label="Irving Fisher"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291972" wikidata="Q871272" url="?curid=291972" title="Fajita">
<text>A fajita (; ), in Tex-Mex cuisine, is any stripped grilled meat, optionally served with stripped peppers and onions usually served on a flour or corn tortilla. The term originally referred to skirt steak, the cut of beef first used in the dish. Popular alternatives to skirt steak include chicken and other cuts of beef, as well as vegetables instead of meat. In restaurants, the meat is usually cooked with onions and bell peppers. Popular condiments include shredded lettuce, sour cream, guacamole, salsa, pico de gallo, shredded cheese, refried beans, and diced tomatoes. &quot;Tacos de arrachera&quot; is applied to the northern Mexican variant of the dish.


==Etymology==
&quot;Fajita&quot; is a Tex-Mex or Tejano diminutive term for little strips of meat cut from the beef skirt, the most common cut used to make fajitas. The word &quot;fajita&quot; is not known to have appeared in print until 1971, according to the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot;. (The word &quot;faja&quot; is Spanish for &quot;strip&quot;, or &quot;belt&quot;, from the Latin &quot;fascia&quot;, &quot;band&quot;.) Although &quot;fajita&quot; originally referred to these strips of beef skirt, fajitas now are made with a variety of fillings, including vegetarian options, such as green/red/yellow peppers, onions, chilies, and jalapeño peppers.

==History==
Skirt steak is one of the most popular cuts of beef for grilling in Latin America. It is called &quot;entraña&quot; in Argentina, Chile and Uruguay, &quot;fraldinha&quot; in Brazil, and &quot;arrachera&quot; in Mexico.

The first culinary evidence of fajitas with the cut of meat, the cooking style (directly on a campfire or on a grill), and the Spanish nickname comes from the 1930s in the ranch lands of South and West Texas. Skirt steak was one of several scrap meats offered to &quot;vaqueros&quot; (cowboys) when cattle were slaughtered to feed ranch hands during roundups. In September 1969, Sonny Falcón, an Austin meat market manager, operated the first commercial fajita taco concession stand at a rural 16 de septiembre celebration in Kyle, Texas. During that same year, Otilia Garza introduced fajitas at the Round-Up Restaurant in Pharr, Texas. Garza is credited with adding the signature sizzling plate presentation of fajitas after being served &quot;queso flameado&quot; (melted Mexican cheese) on a cast-iron plate in Acapulco.

The style was popularized by various businesses, such as Ninfa&#x27;s in Houston, the Hyatt Regency in Austin, and numerous restaurants in San Antonio. In southern Arizona, the term was unknown except as a cut of meat until the 1990s, when Mexican fast food restaurants started using the word in their marketing. In later years, fajitas became popular at American casual dining restaurants as well as in home cooking.

In many restaurants, the fajita meat and vegetables are brought to the table sizzling loudly on a metal platter or skillet, along with warmed tortillas and condiments, such as guacamole, pico de gallo, queso, salsa, shredded cheese or sour cream.

==See also==
* Antojitos
* Burrito
* Taco
* Fajitagate, a California political scandal

==References==
==External links==

* Encyclopedia of American Food and Drink version of fajita origins
* Cookeryonline - Fajita Page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q871272" start="2" end="8" title="Fajita" label="fajita"/>
<link wikidata="Q29359" start="18" end="25" title="Tex-Mex" label="Tex-Mex"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990" start="59" end="63" title="meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q201959" start="97" end="104" title="Capsicum" label="peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="109" end="115" title="onions" label="onions"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642411" start="136" end="158" title="tortilla" label="flour or corn tortilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q643995" start="192" end="203" title="skirt steak" label="skirt steak"/>
<link wikidata="Q864693" start="289" end="296" title="Chicken (food)" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051651" start="307" end="319" title="cuts of beef" label="cuts of beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="332" end="341" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="408" end="413" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548030" start="419" end="430" title="bell pepper" label="bell pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q83193" start="469" end="476" title="lettuce" label="lettuce"/>
<link wikidata="Q840171" start="478" end="488" title="sour cream" label="sour cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q207968" start="490" end="499" title="guacamole" label="guacamole"/>
<link wikidata="Q249114" start="501" end="506" title="salsa (sauce)" label="salsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q177564" start="508" end="521" title="pico de gallo" label="pico de gallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="532" end="538" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q596215" start="540" end="553" title="refried beans" label="refried beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="565" end="571" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q45321045" start="713" end="719" title="Tejano" label="Tejano"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="931" end="956" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q643995" start="1167" end="1177" title="skirt steak" label="beef skirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="1412" end="1425" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="1736" end="1741" title="ranch" label="ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393494" start="1751" end="1756" title="South Texas" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358102" start="1761" end="1771" title="West Texas" label="West Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="2058" end="2074" title="Mexican_War_of_Independence" label="16 de septiembre"/>
<link wikidata="Q277669" start="2090" end="2101" title="Kyle, Texas" label="Kyle, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q982364" start="2188" end="2200" title="Pharr, Texas" label="Pharr, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q81398" start="2379" end="2387" title="Acapulco" label="Acapulco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038598" start="2447" end="2459" title="Ninfa&amp;#x27;s" label="Ninfa&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="2463" end="2470" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425063" start="2476" end="2489" title="Hyatt" label="Hyatt Regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="2493" end="2499" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="2529" end="2540" title="San Antonio, Texas" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="2554" end="2561" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q81799" start="2638" end="2647" title="fast food" label="fast food"/>
<link wikidata="Q207968" start="2985" end="2994" title="guacamole" label="guacamole"/>
<link wikidata="Q177564" start="2996" end="3009" title="pico de gallo" label="pico de gallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578908" start="3011" end="3016" title="Chile con queso" label="queso"/>
<link wikidata="Q249114" start="3018" end="3023" title="salsa (sauce)" label="salsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="3034" end="3040" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q840171" start="3044" end="3054" title="sour cream" label="sour cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q772542" start="3072" end="3081" title="Antojitos" label="Antojitos"/>
<link wikidata="Q390823" start="3084" end="3091" title="Burrito" label="Burrito"/>
<link wikidata="Q191655" start="3094" end="3098" title="Taco" label="Taco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431394" start="3101" end="3111" title="Fajitagate" label="Fajitagate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291973" wikidata="Q1768515" url="?curid=291973" title="The Voyage of the Beagle">
<text>The Voyage of the Beagle is the title most commonly given to the book written by Charles Darwin and published in 1839 as his Journal and Remarks, bringing him considerable fame and respect. This was the third volume of &quot;The Narrative of the Voyages of H.M. Ships Adventure and Beagle&quot;, the other volumes of which were written or edited by the commanders of the ships. &quot;Journal and Remarks&quot; covers Darwin&#x27;s part in the second survey expedition of the ship HMS &quot;Beagle&quot;. Due to the popularity of Darwin&#x27;s account, the publisher reissued it later in 1839 as Darwin&#x27;s Journal of Researches, and the revised second edition published in 1845 used this title. A republication of the book in 1905 introduced the title &quot;The Voyage of the &quot;Beagle&quot;&quot;, by which it is now best known.

&quot;Beagle&quot; sailed from Plymouth Sound on 27 December 1831 under the command of Captain Robert FitzRoy. While the expedition was originally planned to last two years, it lasted almost five—&quot;Beagle&quot; did not return until 2 October 1836. Darwin spent most of this time exploring on land (three years and three months on land; 18 months at sea). The book is a vivid travel memoir as well as a detailed scientific field journal covering biology, geology, and anthropology that demonstrates Darwin&#x27;s keen powers of observation, written at a time when Western Europeans were exploring and charting the whole world. Although Darwin revisited some areas during the expedition, for clarity the chapters of the book are ordered by reference to places and locations rather than by date.

Darwin&#x27;s notes made during the voyage include comments hinting at his changing views on the fixity of species. On his return, he wrote the book based on these notes, at a time when he was first developing his theories of evolution through common descent and natural selection. The book includes some suggestions of his ideas, particularly in the second edition of 1845.

==Context==
In May 1826 two ships left Plymouth to survey the southern coasts of South America. The senior officer of the expedition was Phillip Parker King, Commander and Surveyor of HMS &quot;Adventure&quot;, and under his orders Pringle Stokes was Commander and Surveyor of HMS &quot;Beagle&quot;. In August 1828 Stokes died after shooting himself. In December Robert FitzRoy was given command of the ship and continued the survey. In January 1830 FitzRoy noted in his journal the need for expertise in mineralogy or geology, on a future expedition he would &quot;endeavour to carry out a person qualified to examine the land; while the officers, and myself, would attend to hydrography.&quot; Both ships returned to Plymouth in August 1830. King was in poor health, and retired from the Navy (he moved back to his home in Australia in 1832).

In August 1831, while &quot;Beagle&quot; was being readied, FitzRoy&#x27;s offer of a place for a self-funded naturalist was raised with University of Cambridge professors. Henslow passed it on to Darwin who was well qualified and, enthused by reading Humboldt&#x27;s &quot;Personal Narrative&quot;, was on a short study tour with geologist Adam Sedgwick in preparation for a planned visit with friends to Tenerife. Darwin read the letters when he got home, and was eager to join the voyage.

===Darwin&#x27;s diary / journal===
On board the ship, Darwin began a day-to-day record of activities in the form of a diary, which he commonly called &quot;my Journal&quot;. Darwin wrote entries, in ink, while on the ship or when staying for a period in a house on shore. When travelling on land, he left the manuscript on the ship, and made pencil notes in pocket books to record details of his excursions along with his field notes on geology and natural history. He then wrote up his diary entries from these notes or from memory, sometimes several weeks after the event.

Pages 1 and 2, dated 16 December 1831, outline events from Darwin arriving home on 29 August to his arrival at Devonport on 24 October. From page 3 onwards he adopts a consistent layout, with month, the year and place in a heading at the top, page number in a top corner, and the day of the month in the margin at each entry. After delays and false starts due to weather, they set off on 27 December. Darwin suffered seasickness, and his entry for that date starts &quot;I am now on the 5th of Jan.y writing the memoranda of my misery for the last week&quot;.

In April, a month after reaching South America, he wrote to his sister Caroline that he was struggling to write letters, partly due to &quot;writing everything in my journal&quot;. A few weeks later at Botafogo, tired and short of time, he sent her &quot;in a packet, my commonplace Journal.— I have taken a fit of disgust with it &amp; want to get it out of my sight, any of you that like may read it.— a great deal is absolutely childish: Remember however this, that it is written solely to make me remember this voyage, &amp; that it is not a record of facts but of my thoughts&quot;. He invited criticisms. In reply, his sister Catherine praised his &quot;interesting and entertaining&quot; descriptions, &quot;Susan read the Journal aloud to Papa, who was interested, and liked it very much&quot;. His Wedgwood relatives had asked to see it at Maer Hall. Darwin left that &quot;entirely in your hands.— I suspect the first part is abominaly childish, if so do not send it to Maer.— Also, do not send it by the Coach, (it may appear ridiculous to you) but I would as soon loose a piece of my memory as it.— I feel it is of such consequence to my preserving a just recollection of the different places we visit.&quot;

By 14 July 1833 Darwin had sent more of his diary. On 28 October Caroline gave the requested critical assessment – in the first part Darwin had &quot;probably from reading so much of Humboldt, got his phraseology &amp; occasionly made use of the kind of flowery french expressions which he uses, instead of your own simple straight forward &amp; far more agreeable style. I have no doubt you have without perceiving it got to embody your ideas in his poetical language &amp; from his being a foreigner it does not sound unnatural in him&quot;. However, &quot;the greatest part I liked exceedingly &amp; could find no fault&quot;. In July 1834, Darwin agreed that these points were &quot;perfectly just&quot;, and continued to update his diary carefully.

As &quot;Beagle&quot; headed homewards in April 1836, Darwin told Caroline that FitzRoy too was busy with writing &quot;the account of the Voyage&quot;. This &quot;Book&quot; might be &quot;rather diffuse&quot;, but otherwise good: &quot;his style is very simple &amp; excellent. He has proposed to me, to join him in publishing the account, that is, for him to have the disposal &amp; arranging of my journal &amp; to mingle it with his own. Of course I have said I am perfectly willing, if he wants materials; or thinks the chit-chat details of my journal are any ways worth publishing. He has read over the part, I have on board, &amp; likes it.&quot; Darwin asked his family about this idea, but would be aware the custom of the Navy was that the captain had a right to first use of papers.

===Journal and remarks===
Soon after Darwin&#x27;s return, he was at a party hosted by Fanny and Hensleigh Wedgwood for their relatives on 4 December 1836. They agreed to review his journal. The physician and travel writer Henry Holland looked at some pages and &quot;thought that it would not be worth while to publish it alone, as it would be partly going over the same ground with the Captain&quot;, leaving Darwin &quot;more perplexed&quot; but &quot;becoming rather inclined to the plan of mixing up long passages with Capt Fitzroy.&quot; He would &quot;go on with the geology and let the journal take care of itself&quot;, but Emma Wedgwood did not think Holland &quot;any judge as to what is amusing or interesting&quot;, and like Catherine thought it should be published by itself, not &quot;mixed up with Capt. FitzRoy&#x27;s&quot;. Fanny and Hensleigh found the &quot;Journal so interesting, that it is quite difficult to stop to criticize&quot;. Though &quot;not in general a good reader of travels&quot;, he &quot;found no part of yours tedious.&quot; They had &quot;read a great deal of it aloud too&quot; as a more severe test, and concluded it had &quot;more variety and a greater number of interesting portions&quot; than other travel books, &quot;the less it is mixed up with the Captains the better.&quot; 

After advice from Broderip, FitzRoy wrote on 30 December that &quot;One volume might be for King—another for you—and a third for me. The profits if any, to be divided into three equal portions—What think you of such a plan?&quot; Darwin agreed, and began work on his volume. In March he told Fox &quot;I am now hard at work and give up every thing else for it. Our plan is as follows.— Capt. FitzRoy writes two volumes, out of the materials collected during both the last voyage under Capt. King to T. del Fuego and during our circumnavigation.— I am to have the third volume, in which I intend giving a kind of journal of a naturalist, not following however always the order of time, but rather the order of position.— The habits of animals will occupy a large portion, sketches of the geology, the appearance of the country, and personal details will make the hodge-podge complete.— Afterwards I shall write an account of the geology in detail, and draw up some Zoological papers.— So that I have plenty of work, for the next year or two, and till that is finished I will have no holidays.&quot;

==Publication of FitzRoy&#x27;s narrative and Darwin&#x27;s book== 
Darwin reorganised his diary, trimmed parts, and incorporated scientific material from his field notes. He passed his writing to the publisher Henry Colburn, and in August 1837 had the first proofs back from the printer. Henslow helped check them; on 4 November, Darwin wrote to him that &quot;If I live till I am eighty years old I shall not cease to marvel at finding myself an author&quot;. Part of it was printed, &quot;the smooth paper and clear type has a charming appearance, and I sat the other evening gazing in silent admiration at the first page of my own volume, when I received it from the printers!&quot;

FitzRoy had to edit King&#x27;s account of the first voyage, adding extracts from the journal of the previous captain of &quot;Beagle&quot; and his own journal when he took over, as well as write his own account of the second voyage. In mid-November 1837, he took offence that Darwin&#x27;s preface to volume III (and a similar preface to the first part of &quot;The Zoology&quot;) lacked, in his view, enough acknowledgement of the help given by FitzRoy and other officers; the problem was overcome. By the end of February 1838, King&#x27;s &quot;Narrative&quot; (volumes I) and Darwin&#x27;s &quot;Journal&quot; (volume III) had been printed, but FitzRoy was still hard at work on volume II.

The &quot;Narrative&quot; was completed and published as a four-volume set in May 1839, as the Narrative of the Surveying Voyages of His Majesty&#x27;s Ships Adventure and Beagle, &quot;describing their Examination of the Southern Shores of South America, and the Beagle&#x27;s Circumnavigation of the Globe, in three volumes&quot;. Volume one covers the first voyage under Commander Phillip Parker King, volume two is FitzRoy&#x27;s account of the second voyage. Darwin&#x27;s Journal and Remarks, 1832–1835 forms the third volume, and the fourth volume is a lengthy appendix. The publication was reviewed as a whole by Basil Hall in the July 1839 issue of the &quot;Edinburgh Review&quot;. 

Volume two includes FitzRoy&#x27;s &quot;Remarks with reference to the Deluge&quot; in which he recanted his earlier interest in the geological writings of Charles Lyell and his remarks to Darwin during the expedition that sedimentary features they saw &quot;could never have been effected by a forty days&#x27; flood&quot;, asserting his renewed commitment to a literal reading of the Bible. He had married on the ship&#x27;s return, and his wife was very religious.

Darwin&#x27;s contribution proved remarkably popular and the publisher, Henry Colburn of London, announced on 15 August a separate volume of Darwin&#x27;s text, published with a new title page as Journal of Researches into the Geology and Natural History of the various countries visited by H.M.S. Beagle. &quot;The Publishers‘ Circular&quot; of 2 September carried an advertisement for this volume, as well as a separate advertisement for the other volumes, as listed at William Broderip&#x27;s article in the &quot;Quarterly Review&quot;. This was apparently done without seeking Darwin&#x27;s permission or paying him a fee.

=== Second edition: changing ideas on evolution ===
The second edition of 1845 incorporated extensive revisions made in the light of interpretation of the field collections and developing ideas on evolution. This edition was commissioned by the publisher John Murray, who actually paid Darwin a fee of £150 for the copyright. The full title was modified to Journal of Researches into the Natural History and Geology of the countries visited during the voyage of H.M.S. Beagle round the world.

In the first edition, Darwin remarks in regard to the similarity of Galápagos wildlife to that on the South American continent, &quot;The circumstance would be explained, according to the views of some authors, by saying that the creative power had acted according to the same law over a wide area&quot;. (This was written in a reference to Charles Lyell&#x27;s ideas of &quot;centres of creation&quot;.) Darwin notes the gradations in size of the beaks of species of finches, suspects that species &quot;are confined to different islands&quot;, &quot;But there is not space in this work, to enter into this curious subject.&quot;

Later editions hint at his new ideas on evolution:
Considering the small size of these islands, we feel the more astonished at the number of their aboriginal beings, and at their confined range... within a period geologically recent the unbroken ocean was here spread out. Hence, both in space and time, we seem to be brought somewhat near to that great fact – that mystery of mysteries – the first appearance of new beings on this earth.
Speaking of the finches with their gradations in size of beaks, he writes &quot;one might really fancy that from an original paucity of birds in this archipelago, one species had been taken and modified for different ends.&quot;

In 1890, John Murray published an illustrated edition of the book, at the suggestion of the artist Robert Taylor Pritchett, who was already known for accompanying voyages of the RYS &quot;Wanderer&quot; and &quot;Sunbeam&quot;, and producing pictures used in books on these cruises. In his foreword to this edition of &quot;Journal and Researches&quot;, Murray said that most &quot;of the views given in this work are from sketches made on the spot by Mr. Pritchett, with Mr. Darwin&#x27;s book by his side&quot;, and the illustrations had been &quot;chosen and verified with the utmost care and pains&quot;.

==Contents – places Darwin visited==
For readability, the chapters of the book are arranged geographically rather than in an exact chronological sequence of places Darwin visited or revisited. The main headings (and in some cases subheadings) of each chapter give a good idea of where he went, but not the exact sequence. See second voyage of HMS &quot;Beagle&quot; for a detailed synopsis of Darwin&#x27;s travels. The contents list in the book also notes topics discussed in each chapter, not shown here for simplicity. Names and spellings are those used by Darwin. The list below is based on the &quot;Journal and Remarks&quot; of 1839.

*Preface
# Chapter I: St. Jago–Cape de Verde Islands (St. Paul&#x27;s Rocks, Fernando Noronha, 20 Feb.., Bahia, or San Salvador, Brazil, 29 Feb..)
# Chapter II: Rio de Janeiro
# Chapter III: Maldonado
# Chapter IV: Río Negro to Bahia Blanca
# Chapter V: Bahía Blanca
# Chapter VI: Bahia Blanca to Buenos Aires
# Chapter VII: Buenos Aires to St. Fe
# Chapter VIII: Banda Oriental
# Chapter IX: Patagonia
# Chapter X: Santa Cruz–Patagonia
# Chapter XI: Tierra del Fuego
# Chapter XII: The Falkland Islands
# Chapter XIII: Strait of Magellan
# Chapter XIV: Central Chile
# Chapter XV: Chiloe and Chonos Islands
# Chapter XVI: Chiloe and Concepcion
# Chapter XVII: Passage of Cordillera
# Chapter XVIII: Northern Chile and Peru
# Chapter XIX: Galapagos Archipelago
# Chapter XX: Tahiti and New Zealand
# Chapter XXI: Australia (Van Diemen&#x27;s Land)
# Chapter XXII: Coral Formations (Keeling or Cocos Islands)
# Chapter XXIII: Mauritius to England

In the second edition, the &quot;Journal of Researches&quot; of 1845, chapters VIII and IX were merged into a new chapter VIII on &quot;Banda Oriental and Patagonia&quot;, and chapter IX now included &quot;Santa Cruz, Patagonia and The Falkland Islands&quot;. After chapter X on Tierra del Fuego, chapter XI had the revised heading &quot;Strait of Magellan–Climate of the Southern Coasts&quot;. The following chapters were renumbered accordingly. Chapter XIV was given the revised heading &quot;Chiloe and Concepcion: Great Earthquake&quot;, and chapter XX had the heading &quot;Keeling Island:–Coral Formations&quot;, with the concluding chapter XXI keeping the heading &quot;Mauritius to England&quot;.

==Notes==
==Sources==
* Retrieved on 15 December 2006
*
* Retrieved on 30 April 2007
* (The Autobiography of Charles Darwin) Retrieved on 15 December 2006
* (The Autobiography of Charles Darwin) Retrieved on 15 December 2006
* Retrieved on 30 April 2007
* Retrieved on 15 December 2006
* 
* Retrieved on 15 December 2006

===Bibliography of original publications===
* &quot;Voyages of the Adventure and Beagle, Volume I&quot; – Retrieved on 30 April 2007
* &quot;Voyages of the Adventure and Beagle, Volume II&quot; – Retrieved on 15 December 2006
* &quot;Voyages of the Adventure and Beagle, Volume III&quot; – (&quot;The Voyage of the Beagle&quot;) Retrieved on 30 April 2007
* &quot;Voyages of the Adventure and Beagle, Appendix&quot; – Retrieved on 15 December 2006

* (&quot;The Voyage of the Beagle&quot;) Retrieved on 30 April 2007

* (&quot;The Voyage of the Beagle&quot;) Retrieved on 3 August 2014

==External links==

===Full texts===
* 
* &quot;The Voyage of the Beagle&quot; at LibriVox (audiobook library)
===Other resources===
* &quot;The Voyage of the Beagle&quot; and Darwin&#x27;s explorations – a multi-page synopsis with maps.
*Bright Sparcs – The Journal of Syms Covington, Assistant to Charles Darwin Esq. on the Second Voyage of HMS Beagle
*Charles Darwin&#x27;s Great Adventure: Voyage of the Beagle Without the Science </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="81" end="95" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564366" start="443" end="467" title="Second voyage of HMS Beagle" label="second survey expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q35926" start="480" end="502" title="HMS Beagle" label="HMS &amp;quot;Beagle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333061" start="868" end="882" title="Plymouth Sound" label="Plymouth Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q213756" start="932" end="946" title="Robert FitzRoy" label="Robert FitzRoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="1286" end="1293" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="1308" end="1320" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="1404" end="1421" title="Western world" label="Western Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="1742" end="1749" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582219" start="1828" end="1857" title="Inception of Darwin&amp;#x27;s theory" label="first developing his theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="1861" end="1870" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q333018" start="1879" end="1893" title="common descent" label="common descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="1898" end="1915" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="2050" end="2058" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338334" start="2148" end="2167" title="Phillip Parker King" label="Phillip Parker King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329478" start="2195" end="2220" title="HMS Aid (1809)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Adventure&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q800030" start="2243" end="2257" title="Pringle Stokes" label="Pringle Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q213756" start="2375" end="2389" title="Robert FitzRoy" label="Robert FitzRoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="2517" end="2527" title="mineralogy" label="mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="2531" end="2538" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q182468" start="2689" end="2700" title="hydrography" label="hydrography"/>
<link wikidata="Q703925" start="3031" end="3038" title="John Stevens Henslow" label="Henslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="3110" end="3118" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q350891" start="3199" end="3212" title="Adam Sedgwick" label="Adam Sedgwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q40846" start="3264" end="3272" title="Tenerife" label="Tenerife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245018" start="4039" end="4048" title="Devonport, Plymouth" label="Devonport"/>
<link wikidata="Q894624" start="4691" end="4699" title="Botafogo" label="Botafogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065078" start="5296" end="5314" title="Darwin–Wedgwood family" label="Wedgwood relatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276338" start="5338" end="5347" title="Maer Hall" label="Maer Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133240" start="7359" end="7377" title="Hensleigh Wedgwood" label="Hensleigh Wedgwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527156" start="7485" end="7498" title="Sir Henry Holland, 1st Baronet" label="Henry Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q242147" start="7895" end="7908" title="Emma Darwin" label="Emma Wedgwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568742" start="8606" end="8614" title="William Broderip" label="Broderip"/>
<link wikidata="Q435537" start="8880" end="8883" title="William Darwin Fox" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846305" start="9898" end="9911" title="Henry Colburn" label="Henry Colburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q375946" start="10738" end="10749" title="Zoology of the Voyage of H.M.S. Beagle" label="The Zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338334" start="11454" end="11473" title="Phillip Parker King" label="Phillip Parker King"/>
<link wikidata="Q280479" start="11691" end="11701" title="Basil Hall" label="Basil Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616695" start="11738" end="11754" title="Edinburgh Review" label="Edinburgh Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333" start="11920" end="11933" title="Charles Lyell" label="Charles Lyell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846305" start="12305" end="12318" title="Henry Colburn" label="Henry Colburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568742" start="12705" end="12721" title="William Broderip" label="William Broderip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441261" start="12750" end="12766" title="Quarterly Review" label="Quarterly Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232629" start="13117" end="13128" title="John Murray (publishing house)" label="John Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067387" start="13424" end="13442" title="Galápagos wildlife" label="Galápagos wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333" start="13697" end="13710" title="Charles Lyell" label="Charles Lyell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232629" start="14666" end="14677" title="John Murray (publishing house)" label="John Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917381" start="14756" end="14779" title="Robert Taylor Pritchett" label="Robert Taylor Pritchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5634271" start="14835" end="14859" title="HMS Sealark (1903)" label="RYS &amp;quot;Wanderer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018544" start="14864" end="14883" title="Sunbeam RYS (1874)" label="&amp;quot;Sunbeam&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564366" start="15593" end="15632" title="Second voyage of HMS Beagle" label="second voyage of HMS &amp;quot;Beagle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q108448" start="15930" end="15938" title="Santiago, Cape Verde" label="St. Jago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="15939" end="15960" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape de Verde Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q241357" start="15962" end="15983" title="Saint Peter and Paul Rocks" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q175057" start="15985" end="16001" title="Fernando de Noronha" label="Fernando Noronha"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="16013" end="16043" title="Salvador, Bahia" label="Bahia, or San Salvador, Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="16069" end="16083" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258" start="16099" end="16108" title="Maldonado, Uruguay" label="Maldonado"/>
<link wikidata="Q859548" start="16123" end="16132" title="Río Negro (Uruguay)" label="Río Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q54108" start="16162" end="16174" title="Bahía Blanca" label="Bahía Blanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="16233" end="16245" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q44244" start="16249" end="16255" title="Santa Fe, Argentina" label="St. Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q617103" start="16272" end="16286" title="Banda Oriental" label="Banda Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="16301" end="16310" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478566" start="16324" end="16334" title="Santa Cruz River (Argentina)" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q82601" start="16359" end="16375" title="Tierra del Fuego" label="Tierra del Fuego"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="16395" end="16411" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q48365" start="16428" end="16446" title="Strait of Magellan" label="Strait of Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="16470" end="16475" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q504449" start="16490" end="16496" title="Chiloé Island" label="Chiloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076210" start="16501" end="16515" title="Chonos Archipelago" label="Chonos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880" start="16542" end="16552" title="Concepción, Chile" label="Concepcion"/>
<link wikidata="Q605761" start="16580" end="16590" title="American Cordillera" label="Cordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="16627" end="16631" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q38095" start="16647" end="16668" title="Galápagos Islands" label="Galapagos Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q42000" start="16683" end="16689" title="Tahiti" label="Tahiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="16732" end="16754" title="Tasmania" label="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="16772" end="16777" title="Coral" label="Coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q36004" start="16790" end="16814" title="Cocos (Keeling) Islands" label="Keeling or Cocos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="16833" end="16842" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001494" start="17649" end="17684" title="The Autobiography of Charles Darwin" label="The Autobiography of Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001494" start="17719" end="17754" title="The Autobiography of Charles Darwin" label="The Autobiography of Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070969" start="18552" end="18560" title="LibriVox" label="LibriVox"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291975" wikidata="Q1760019" url="?curid=291975" title="Legio I Macriana liberatrix">
<text>Legio I &quot;Macriana liberatrix&quot; (Latin for &quot;First legion &quot;Macriana liberatrix&quot;&quot;; &quot;Macriana&quot; is a reference to its founder, Macer) was a Roman legion levied in Africa by the governor Lucius Clodius Macer in 68.

The purpose of the legion was to join forces with Legio III &quot;Augusta&quot; in support of the rebellion of Galba (governor of Hispania Terraconensis) against Emperor Nero. Nero eventually committed suicide and was replaced by Galba. But the new emperor looked at Macer with mistrust, fearing another rebellion against himself. Macer was killed in 69, the Year of the Four Emperors, and I &quot;Macriana liberatrix&quot; was disbanded. The emblem of the legion is unknown.

==See also==
* List of Roman legions

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1760019" start="0" end="33" title="Legio I Macriana liberatrix" label="Legio I &amp;quot;Macriana liberatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="174" end="186" title="Roman legion" label="Roman legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="197" end="203" title="Africa (province)" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q550616" start="220" end="240" title="Lucius Clodius Macer" label="Lucius Clodius Macer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434231" start="299" end="328" title="Legio III Augusta" label="Legio III &amp;quot;Augusta&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414" start="360" end="365" title="Galba" label="Galba"/>
<link wikidata="Q216791" start="379" end="401" title="Hispania Terraconensis" label="Hispania Terraconensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="419" end="423" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q470596" start="608" end="633" title="Year of the Four Emperors" label="Year of the Four Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334983" start="741" end="762" title="List of Roman legions" label="List of Roman legions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291978" wikidata="Q863534" url="?curid=291978" title="Walden">
<text>Walden (; first published as Walden; or, Life in the Woods) is an 1854 book by American transcendentalist writer Henry David Thoreau. The text is a reflection upon the author&#x27;s simple living in natural surroundings. The work is part personal declaration of independence, social experiment, voyage of spiritual discovery, satire, and—to some degree—a manual for self-reliance.

&quot;Walden&quot; details Thoreau&#x27;s experiences over the course of two years, two months, and two days in a cabin he built near Walden Pond amidst woodland owned by his friend and mentor Ralph Waldo Emerson, near Concord, Massachusetts.

Thoreau makes precise scientific observations of nature as well as metaphorical and poetic uses of natural phenomena. He identifies many plants and animals by both their popular and scientific names, records in detail the color and clarity of different bodies of water, precisely dates and describes the freezing and thawing of the pond, and recounts his experiments to measure the depth and shape of the bottom of the supposedly &quot;bottomless&quot; Walden Pond.

== Background ==

There has been much speculation as to why Thoreau went to live at the pond in the first place. E. B. White stated on this note, &quot;Henry went forth to battle when he took to the woods, and &quot;Walden&quot; is the report of a man torn by two powerful and opposing drives—the desire to enjoy the world and the urge to set the world straight&quot;, while Leo Marx noted that Thoreau&#x27;s stay at Walden Pond was an experiment based on his teacher Emerson&#x27;s &quot;method and of nature&quot; and that it was a &quot;report of an experiment in transcendental pastoralism&quot;.

Others have assumed Thoreau&#x27;s intention during his time at Walden Pond was &quot;to conduct an experiment: Could he survive, possibly even thrive, by stripping away all superfluous luxuries, living a plain, simple life in radically reduced conditions?&quot; He thought of it as an experiment in &quot;home economics&quot;. Although Thoreau went to Walden to escape what he considered &quot;over-civilization&quot;, and in search of the &quot;raw&quot; and &quot;savage delight&quot; of the wilderness, he also spent considerable amounts of his time reading and writing.

Thoreau used his time at Walden Pond (July 4, 1845 – September 6, 1847) to write his first book, &quot;A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers&quot; (1849). The experience later inspired &quot;Walden&quot;, in which Thoreau compresses the time into a single calendar year and uses passages of four seasons to symbolize human development.

By immersing himself in nature, Thoreau hoped to gain a more objective understanding of society through introspection. Simple living and self-sufficiency were Thoreau&#x27;s other goals. The whole project was inspired by transcendentalist philosophy, a central theme of the American Romantic Period.

==Organization==
Part memoir and part spiritual quest, &quot;Walden&quot; opens with the announcement that Thoreau spent two years at Walden Pond living a simple life without support of any kind. Readers are reminded that at the time of publication, Thoreau has returned to living among the civilized. The book is separated into several chapters, each of which focuses on specific themes:

Economy: In this first and longest chapter, Thoreau outlines his project: a two-year, two-month, and two-day stay at a cozy, &quot;tightly shingled and plastered&quot;, English-style 10 by 15 foot cottage in the woods near Walden Pond. He does this, he says, to illustrate the spiritual benefits of a simplified lifestyle. He easily supplies the four necessities of life (food, shelter, clothing, and fuel) with the help of family and friends, particularly his mother, his best friend, and Mr. and Mrs. Ralph Waldo Emerson. The latter provided Thoreau with a work exchange: he could build a small house and plant a garden if he cleared some land on the woodlot and did other chores while there. Thoreau meticulously records his expenditures and earnings, demonstrating his understanding of &quot;economy&quot;, as he builds his house and buys and grows food.

The house&#x27;s cost is and Thoreau gives &quot;the details because very few are able to tell exactly what their houses cost and fewer still, if any, the separate cost of the various materials which compose them&quot;:

Where I Lived, and What I Lived For: Thoreau recollects thoughts of places he stayed at before selecting Walden Pond, and quotes Roman philosopher Cato&#x27;s advice &quot;consider buying a farm very carefully before signing the papers&quot;. His possibilities included a nearby Hollowell farm (where the &quot;wife&quot; unexpectedly decided she wanted to keep the farm). Thoreau takes to the woods dreaming of an existence free of obligations and full of leisure. He announces that he resides far from social relationships that mail represents (post office) and the majority of the chapter focuses on his thoughts while constructing and living in his new home at Walden.

Reading: Thoreau discusses the benefits of classical literature, preferably in the original Greek or Latin, and bemoans the lack of sophistication in Concord evident in the popularity of unsophisticated literature. He also loved to read books by world travelers. He yearns for a time when each New England village will support &quot;wise men&quot; to educate and thereby ennoble the population.

Sounds: Thoreau encourages the reader to be &quot;forever on the alert&quot; and &quot;looking always at what is to be seen&quot;. Although truth can be found in literature, it can also be found in nature. In addition to self-development, developing one&#x27;s perception can also alleviate boredom. Rather than &quot;look[ing] abroad for amusement, to society and the theatre&quot;, Thoreau&#x27;s own life, including supposedly dull pastimes like housework, becomes a source of amusement that &quot;never ceases to be novel&quot;. Likewise, he obtains pleasure in the sounds that fill his cabin: church bells ringing, carriages rattling and rumbling, cows lowing, whip-poor-wills singing, owls hooting, frogs croaking, and cockerels crowing. &quot;All sound heard at the greatest possible distance,&quot; he contends &quot;produces one and the same effect&quot;.

Solitude: Thoreau reflects on the feeling of solitude. He explains how loneliness can occur even amongst companions if one&#x27;s heart is not open to them. Thoreau meditates on the pleasures of escaping society and the petty things that society entails (gossip, fights, etc.). He also reflects on his new companion, an old settler who arrives nearby and an old woman with great memory (&quot;memory runs back farther than mythology&quot;). Thoreau repeatedly reflects on the benefits of nature and of his deep communion with it and states that the only &quot;medicine he needs is a draught of morning air&quot;.

Visitors: Thoreau talks about how he enjoys companionship (despite his love for solitude) and always leaves three chairs ready for visitors. The entire chapter focuses on the coming and going of visitors, and how he has more comers in Walden than he did in the city. He receives visits from those living or working nearby and gives special attention to a French Canadian born woodsman named Alec Thérien. Unlike Thoreau, Thérien cannot read or write and is described as leading an &quot;animal life&quot;. He compares Thérien to Walden Pond itself. Thoreau then reflects on the women and children who seem to enjoy the pond more than men, and how men are limited because their lives are taken up.

The Bean-Field: Reflection on Thoreau&#x27;s planting and his enjoyment of this new job/hobby. He touches upon the joys of his environment, the sights and sounds of nature, but also on the military sounds nearby. The rest of the chapter focuses on his earnings and his cultivation of crops (including how he spends just under fifteen dollars on this).

The Village: The chapter focuses on Thoreau&#x27;s reflections on the journeys he takes several times a week to Concord, where he gathers the latest gossip and meets with townsmen. On one of his journeys into Concord, Thoreau is detained and jailed for his refusal to pay a poll tax to the &quot;state that buys and sells men, women, and children, like cattle at the door of its senate-house&quot;.
The Ponds: In autumn, Thoreau discusses the countryside and writes down his observations about the geography of Walden Pond and its neighbors: Flint&#x27;s Pond (or Sandy Pond), White Pond, and Goose Pond. Although Flint&#x27;s Pond is the largest, Thoreau&#x27;s favorites are Walden and White ponds, which he describes as lovelier than diamonds.

Baker Farm: While on an afternoon ramble in the woods, Thoreau gets caught in a rainstorm and takes shelter in the dirty, dismal hut of John Field, a penniless but hard-working Irish farmhand, and his wife and children. Thoreau urges Field to live a simple yet independent and fulfilling life in the woods, thereby freeing himself of employers and creditors. However, the Irishman will not give up his aspirations of luxury and the quest for the American dream.

Higher Laws: Thoreau discusses whether hunting wild animals and eating meat is necessary. He concludes that the primitive, carnal sensuality of humans drives them to kill and eat animals, and that a person who transcends this propensity is superior to those who cannot. (Thoreau eats fish and occasionally salt pork and woodchuck.) In addition to vegetarianism, he lauds chastity, work, and teetotalism. He also recognizes that Native Americans need to hunt and kill moose for survival in &quot;The Maine Woods&quot;, and eats moose on a trip to Maine while he was living at Walden. Here is a list of the laws that he mentions:

* One must love that of the wild just as much as one loves that of the good.
* What men already know instinctively is true humanity.
* The hunter is the greatest friend of the animal which is hunted.
* No human older than an adolescent would wantonly murder any creature which reveres its own life as much as the killer.
* If the day and the night make one joyful, one is successful.
* The highest form of self-restraint is when one can subsist not on other animals, but of plants and crops cultivated from the earth.

Brute Neighbors: This chapter is a simplified version of one of Thoreau&#x27;s conversations with William Ellery Channing, who sometimes accompanied Thoreau on fishing trips when Channing had come up from Concord. The conversation is about a hermit (Thoreau) and a poet (Channing) and how the poet is absorbed in the clouds while the hermit is occupied with the more practical task of getting fish for dinner and how in the end, the poet regrets his failure to catch fish. The chapter also mentions Thoreau&#x27;s interaction with a mouse that he lives with, a scene in which an ant battles a smaller ant, and his frequent encounters with cats.

House-Warming: After picking November berries in the woods, Thoreau adds a chimney, and finally plasters the walls of his sturdy house to stave off the cold of the oncoming winter. He also lays in a good supply of firewood and expresses affection for wood and fire.

Former Inhabitants; and Winter Visitors: Thoreau tells the stories of people who formerly lived in the vicinity of Walden Pond. Then, he talks about a few of the visitors he receives during the winter: a farmer, a woodchopper, and his best friend, the poet Ellery Channing.

Winter Animals: Thoreau amuses himself by watching wildlife during the winter. He relates his observations of owls, hares, red squirrels, mice, and various birds as they hunt, sing, and eat the scraps and corn he put out for them. He also describes a fox hunt that passes by.

The Pond in Winter: Thoreau describes Walden Pond as it appears during the winter. He says he has sounded its depths and located an underground outlet. Then, he recounts how 100 laborers came to cut great blocks of ice from the pond to be shipped to the Carolinas.

Spring: As spring arrives, Walden and the other ponds melt with powerful thundering and rumbling. Thoreau enjoys watching the thaw, and grows ecstatic as he witnesses the green rebirth of nature. He watches the geese winging their way north, and a hawk playing by itself in the sky. As nature is reborn, the narrator implies, so is he.

Conclusion: In the final chapter, Thoreau criticizes conformity: &quot;If a man does not keep pace with his companions, perhaps it is because he hears a different drummer. Let him step to the music which he hears, however measured or far away.&quot; By doing so, men may find happiness and self-fulfillment.

==Themes==


&quot;Walden&quot; emphasizes the importance of solitude, contemplation, and closeness to nature in transcending the &quot;desperate&quot; existence that, he argues, is the lot of most people. The book is not a traditional autobiography, but combines autobiography with a social critique of contemporary Western culture&#x27;s consumerist and materialist attitudes and its distance from and destruction of nature. Thoreau&#x27;s proximity to Concord society and his admiration for classical literature suggest that the book is not simply a criticism of society, but also an attempt to engage creatively with the better aspects of contemporary culture. There are signs of ambiguity, or an attempt to see an alternative side of something common. Some of the major themes that are present within the text are:

* Self-reliance: Thoreau constantly refuses to be in &quot;need&quot; of the companionship of others. Though he realizes its significance and importance, he thinks it unnecessary to &quot;always&quot; be in search for it. Self-reliance, to him, is economic and social and is a principle that in terms of financial and interpersonal relations is more valuable than anything. To Thoreau, self-reliance can be both spiritual as well as economic. Self-reliance was a key tenet of transcendentalism, famously expressed in Emerson&#x27;s essay &quot;Self-Reliance&quot;.
* Simplicity: Simplicity seems to be Thoreau&#x27;s model for life. Throughout the book, Thoreau constantly seeks to simplify his lifestyle: he patches his clothes rather than buy new ones, he minimizes his consumer activity, and relies on leisure time and on himself for everything.
* Progress: In a world where everyone and everything is eager to advance in terms of progress, Thoreau finds it stubborn and skeptical to think that any outward improvement of life can bring inner peace and contentment.
* The need for spiritual awakening: Spiritual awakening is the way to find and realize the truths of life which are often buried under the mounds of daily affairs. Thoreau holds the spiritual awakening to be a quintessential component of life. It is the source from which all of the other themes flow. 
* Man as part of nature
* Nature and its reflection of human emotions
* The state as unjust and corrupt
* Meditation: Thoreau was an avid meditator and often spoke about the benefits of meditating.
*Patience: Thoreau realizes that the methods he tries to employ at Walden Pond will not be instituted in the near future. He does not like compromise, so he must wait for change to occur. He does not go into isolation in the woods of Massachusetts for over two years for his own benefit. Thoreau wants to transform the world around him, but understands that it will take time.

== Style and analysis ==
&quot;Walden&quot; has been the subject of many scholarly articles. Book reviewers, critics, scholars, and many more have published literature on Thoreau&#x27;s &quot;Walden&quot;.

Thoreau carefully recounts his time in the woods through his writing in &quot;Walden&quot;. Critics have thoroughly analyzed the different writing styles that Thoreau uses. Critic Nicholas Bagnall writes that Thoreau&#x27;s observations of nature are &quot;lyrical&quot; and &quot;exact&quot;. Another critic, Henry Golemba, asserts that the writing style of &quot;Walden&quot; is very natural. Thoreau employs various styles of writing where his words are both intricate and simple at the same time. His word choice conveys a certain mood. For instance, when Thoreau describes the silence of nature, the reader may feel that serene moment as well. Thoreau continues to connect back to nature throughout the book because he wants to depict what he experienced and saw.

Many scholars have compared Thoreau to fellow transcendentalist writer Ralph Waldo Emerson. Although Emerson was 14 years his senior, much of Thoreau&#x27;s writing was influenced by Emerson. Critic John Brooks Moore examined the relationship between Thoreau and Emerson and the effects it had on their respective works. Moore claims that Thoreau did not simply mimic Emerson&#x27;s work, but he was actually the more dominant one in the relationship. Thoreau has learned from Emerson and some &quot;Emersonism&quot; can be found in his works, but Thoreau&#x27;s work is distinct from Emerson&#x27;s. Many critics have also seen the influence of Thomas Carlyle (a great influence on Emerson), particularly in Thoreau&#x27;s use of an extended clothing metaphor, which Carlyle had used in &quot;Sartor Resartus&quot; (1831).

Scholars have recognized &quot;Walden&quot; use of biblical allusions. Such allusions are useful tools to convince readers because the Bible is seen as a principal book of truth. According to scholar Judith Saunders, the signature biblical allusion identified in the book is, &quot;Walden was dead and is alive again.&quot; This is almost verbatim from Luke 15.11–32. Thoreau is personifying Walden Pond to further the story relevant to the Bible. He compares the process of death and rebirth of the pond to self-transformation in humans.
==Reception==

&quot;Walden&quot; enjoyed some success upon its release, but still took five years to sell 2,000 copies, and then went out of print until Thoreau&#x27;s death in 1862. Despite its slow beginnings, later critics have praised it as an American classic that explores natural simplicity, harmony, and beauty. The American poet, Robert Frost, wrote of Thoreau, &quot;In one book ... he surpasses everything we have had in America&quot;.

It is often assumed that critics initially ignored &quot;Walden&quot;, and that those who reviewed the book were evenly split or slightly more negative than positive in their assessment of it. But, researchers have shown that &quot;Walden&quot; actually was &quot;more favorably and widely received by Thoreau&#x27;s contemporaries than hitherto suspected&quot;. Of the 66 initial reviews that have been found so far, 46 &quot;were strongly favorable&quot;. Some reviews were rather superficial, merely recommending the book or predicting its success with the public; others were more lengthy, detailed, and nuanced with both positive and negative comments. Positive comments included praise for Thoreau&#x27;s independence, practicality, wisdom, &quot;manly simplicity&quot;, and fearlessness. Less than three weeks after the book&#x27;s publication, Thoreau&#x27;s mentor, Ralph Waldo Emerson, proclaimed, &quot;All American kind are delighted with &quot;Walden&quot; as far as they have dared to say.&quot;

On the other hand, the terms &quot;quaint&quot; or &quot;eccentric&quot; appeared in over half of the book&#x27;s initial reviews. Other terms critical of Thoreau included selfish, strange, impractical, privileged (or &quot;manor born&quot;), and misanthropic. One review compared and contrasted Thoreau&#x27;s form of living to communism, probably not in the sense of Marxism, but instead of communal living or religious communism. While valuing freedom from possessions, Thoreau was not communal in the sense of practicing sharing or of embracing community. So, communism &quot;is better than our hermit&#x27;s method of getting rid of encumbrance&quot;.

In contrast to Thoreau&#x27;s &quot;manly simplicity&quot;, nearly twenty years after Thoreau&#x27;s death Scottish author Robert Louis Stevenson judged Thoreau&#x27;s endorsement of living alone in natural simplicity, apart from modern society, to be a mark of effeminacy, calling it &quot;womanish solicitude; for there is something unmanly, something almost dastardly&quot; about the lifestyle. Poet John Greenleaf Whittier criticized what he perceived as the message in &quot;Walden&quot; that man should lower himself to the level of a woodchuck and walk on four legs. He said: &quot;Thoreau&#x27;s &quot;Walden&quot; is a capital reading, but very wicked and heathenish ... After all, for me, I prefer walking on two legs&quot;. Author Edward Abbey criticized Thoreau&#x27;s ideas and experiences at Walden in detail throughout his response to &quot;Walden&quot; called &quot;Down the River with Thoreau&quot;, written in 1980.

Today, despite these criticisms, &quot;Walden&quot; stands as one of America&#x27;s most celebrated works of literature. John Updike wrote of &quot;Walden&quot;, &quot;A century and a half after its publication, &quot;Walden&quot; has become such a totem of the back-to-nature, preservationist, anti-business, civil-disobedience mindset, and Thoreau so vivid a protester, so perfect a crank and hermit saint, that the book risks being as revered and unread as the Bible.&quot; The American psychologist B. F. Skinner wrote that he carried a copy of &quot;Walden&quot; with him in his youth, and eventually wrote &quot;Walden Two&quot; in 1945, a fictional utopia about 1,000 members who live together in a Thoreau-inspired community.

Kathryn Schulz has accused Thoreau of hypocrisy, misanthropy and being sanctimonious based on his writings in &quot;Walden&quot;, although this criticism has been perceived as highly selective.

==Adaptations==
===Video games===
The National Endowment for the Arts in 2012 bestowed Tracy Fullerton, game designer and professor at the University of Southern California&#x27;s Game Innovation Lab, with a $40,000 grant to create, based on the book, a first person, open world video game called &quot;Walden, a game&quot;, in which players &quot;inhabit an open, three-dimensional game world that will simulate the geography and environment of Walden Woods&quot;. The game production was also supported by grants from the National Endowment for the Humanities and was part of the Sundance New Frontier Story Lab in 2014. The game was released to critical acclaim on July 4, 2017, celebrating both the day that Thoreau went down to the pond to begin his experiment and the 200th anniversary of Thoreau&#x27;s birth. It was nominated for the Off-Broadway Award for Best Indie Game at the New York Game Awards 2018.

===Digitization and scholarship efforts===
Digital Thoreau, a collaboration among the State University of New York at Geneseo, the Thoreau Society, and the Walden Woods Project, has developed a fluid text edition of &quot;Walden&quot; across the different versions of the work to help readers trace the evolution of Thoreau&#x27;s classic work across seven stages of revision from 1846 to 1854. Within any chapter of &quot;Walden&quot;, readers can compare up to seven manuscript versions with each other, with the Princeton University Press edition, and consult critical notes drawn from Thoreau scholars, including Ronald Clapper&#x27;s dissertation &quot;The Development of Walden: A Genetic Text&quot; (1967) and Walter Harding&#x27;s &quot;Walden: An Annotated Edition&quot; (1995). Ultimately, the project will provide a space for readers to discuss Thoreau in the margins of his texts.

===Influence===
* The Dutch writer and psychiatrist Frederik van Eeden used the ideas from this book to create his own vision, back to the nature, at the commune Walden in the Netherlands in 1898.
* In the 1948 book &quot;Walden Two&quot; by behavioral psychologist B. F. Skinner the experimental Walden Two Community is mentioned as having the benefits of living in a place like Thoreau&#x27;s Walden, but &quot;with company&quot;.
* Jonas Mekas&#x27; 1968 film &quot;Walden&quot; is loosely inspired by the book.
* Jean Craighead George&#x27;s &quot;My Side of the Mountain&quot; trilogy (1959) draws heavily from themes expressed in &quot;Walden&quot;. Protagonist Sam Gribley is nicknamed &quot;Thoreau&quot; by an English teacher he befriends.
* Shane Carruth&#x27;s second film &quot;Upstream Color&quot; (2013) features &quot;Walden&quot; as a central item of its story, and draws heavily on the themes expressed by Thoreau.
* In 1962, William Melvin Kelley titled his first novel, &quot;A Different Drummer&quot;, after a famous quote from &quot;Walden&quot;: &quot;If a man does not keep pace with his companions, perhaps it is because he hears a different drummer.&quot; The quote, as well as another stanza from the book, appears as an epigraph in Kelley&#x27;s novel, which echoes Thoreau&#x27;s theme of individualism.
* The name of the gay men&#x27;s culture and news magazine &quot;Drum&quot;, which began publication in 1964, was inspired by the same quote, which appeared in every edition.
* The 1989 film &quot;Dead Poets Society&quot; heavily features an excerpt from &quot;Walden&quot; as a motif in the plot.
* The Finnish symphonic metal band Nightwish paraphrased the quote &quot;Rather than love, than money, than fame, give me truth&quot; on their 2011 song &quot;The Crow, the Owl and the Dove&quot; from the studio album &quot;Imaginaerum&quot;. They also make several references to &quot;Walden&quot; on their eighth studio album &quot;Endless Forms Most Beautiful&quot; of 2015, including in the song titled &quot;My Walden&quot; and in the song &quot;Alpenglow&quot;.
* The investment research firm Morningstar, Inc. was named for the last sentence in &quot;Walden&quot; by founder and CEO Joe Mansueto, and the &quot;O&quot; in the company&#x27;s logo is shaped like a rising sun.
* In the 2015 video game &quot;Fallout 4&quot;, which takes place in Massachusetts, there exists a location called Walden Pond, where the player can listen to an automated tourist guide detail Thoreau&#x27;s experience living in the wilderness. At the location there stands a small house which is said to be the same house Thoreau built and stayed in.
* Phoebe Bridgers references the book in her song &quot;Smoke Signals&quot;.
* In 2018, MC Lars and Mega Ran released a song called &quot;Walden&quot; where they discuss the book and its influence.
* In the 1997 episode &quot;Weight Gain 4000&quot; of &quot;South Park&quot;, Eric Cartman &quot;writes&quot; a prize-winning essay copied from &quot;Walden&quot;, replacing Thoreau&#x27;s name with his own.
* Professor Richard Primack from Boston University utilizes information from Thoreau&#x27;s &quot;Walden&quot; in climate change research.
* It is suggested that the genre of nature writing in American literature is derived from Thoreau&#x27;s &quot;Walden&quot;.

== References ==
==External links==

* &quot;Walden&quot; – Digitized copy of the first edition from the Internet Archive.
* 
* &quot;Walden: An Annotated Edition&quot; (hyperlinked TOC, footnotes and scholarly commentary). R. Lenat (ed.). Thoreau Society and Iowa State University project.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q331563" start="88" end="105" title="transcendentalism" label="transcendentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131149" start="113" end="132" title="Henry David Thoreau" label="Henry David Thoreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388421" start="276" end="293" title="social experiment" label="social experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="326" end="332" title="satire" label="satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341794" start="366" end="379" title="Self-sustainability" label="self-reliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023853" start="516" end="527" title="Walden Pond" label="Walden Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="575" end="594" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="601" end="608" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q483247" start="733" end="742" title="Phenomenon" label="phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q361617" start="1206" end="1217" title="E. B. White" label="E. B. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524037" start="1468" end="1476" title="Leo Marx" label="Leo Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="1562" end="1569" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056738" start="1676" end="1687" title="Pastorialism" label="pastoralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023853" start="1760" end="1771" title="Walden Pond" label="Walden Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q425694" start="2002" end="2016" title="home economics" label="home economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660610" start="2375" end="2417" title="A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers" label="A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q56092" start="2733" end="2746" title="Simple living" label="Simple living"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341794" start="2751" end="2767" title="self-sufficiency" label="self-sufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2888" end="2905" title="Romanticism#United States" label="American Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180081" start="4533" end="4537" title="Cato the Elder" label="Cato"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="5103" end="5123" title="classical literature" label="classical literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="5152" end="5157" title="Greek (language)" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="5161" end="5166" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268205" start="6122" end="6136" title="whip-poor-will" label="whip-poor-will"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="6181" end="6190" title="cockerels" label="cockerels"/>
<link wikidata="Q721368" start="8261" end="8269" title="poll tax" label="poll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q15131448" start="9589" end="9600" title="teetotalism" label="teetotalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558572" start="10444" end="10467" title="William Ellery Channing (poet)" label="William Ellery Channing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558572" start="11516" end="11531" title="Ellery Channing" label="Ellery Channing"/>
<link wikidata="Q81063" start="11650" end="11654" title="Snowshoe Hare" label="hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q326976" start="11657" end="11669" title="American Red Squirrel" label="red squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q133333" start="11785" end="11793" title="fox hunt" label="fox hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747220" start="12065" end="12074" title="Carolinas" label="Carolinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341794" start="13546" end="13559" title="Self-sustainability" label="Self-reliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447995" start="14088" end="14101" title="Self-Reliance" label="Self-Reliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q508291" start="14111" end="14121" title="Simplicity" label="Simplicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351730" start="14395" end="14403" title="Progress" label="Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q143210" start="14628" end="14647" title="Religious experience" label="spiritual awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q108458" start="15022" end="15032" title="Meditation" label="Meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12846123" start="15115" end="15123" title="Patience" label="Patience"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="16540" end="16559" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="17115" end="17129" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Thomas Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134140" start="17263" end="17278" title="Sartor Resartus" label="Sartor Resartus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="17429" end="17434" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q262135" start="17647" end="17660" title="Parable of the Prodigal Son" label="Luke 15.11–32"/>
<link wikidata="Q168728" start="18173" end="18185" title="Robert Frost" label="Robert Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="19622" end="19631" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="19662" end="19669" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373919" start="19686" end="19701" title="intentional community" label="communal living"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062137" start="19705" end="19724" title="religious communism" label="religious communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="20074" end="20096" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q458372" start="20354" end="20377" title="John Greenleaf Whittier" label="John Greenleaf Whittier"/>
<link wikidata="Q221612" start="20492" end="20501" title="woodchuck" label="woodchuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q937610" start="20693" end="20705" title="Edward Abbey" label="Edward Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q105756" start="21007" end="21018" title="John Updike" label="John Updike"/>
<link wikidata="Q213195" start="21389" end="21402" title="B. F. Skinner" label="B. F. Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289889" start="21504" end="21514" title="Walden Two" label="Walden Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194102" start="21621" end="21635" title="Kathryn Schulz" label="Kathryn Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q201650" start="21659" end="21668" title="hypocrisy" label="hypocrisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967116" start="21854" end="21885" title="National Endowment for the Arts" label="National Endowment for the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831734" start="21903" end="21918" title="Tracy Fullerton" label="Tracy Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="21955" end="21988" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21996" end="22015" title="Game Innovation Lab" label="Game Innovation Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q46993159" start="22119" end="22133" title="Walden, a game" label="Walden, a game"/>
<link wikidata="Q478050" start="22340" end="22377" title="National Endowment for the Humanities" label="National Endowment for the Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149540" start="22818" end="22857" title="State University of New York at Geneseo" label="State University of New York at Geneseo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796191" start="22863" end="22878" title="Thoreau Society" label="Thoreau Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208241" start="22888" end="22908" title="Walden Woods Project" label="Walden Woods Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q211514" start="23678" end="23696" title="Frederik van Eeden" label="Frederik van Eeden"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="23802" end="23813" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289889" start="23848" end="23858" title="Walden Two" label="Walden Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q213195" start="23892" end="23905" title="B. F. Skinner" label="B. F. Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q699702" start="24061" end="24072" title="Jonas Mekas" label="Jonas Mekas"/>
<link wikidata="Q58815030" start="24095" end="24101" title="Walden (1968 film)" label="Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q275188" start="24143" end="24164" title="Jean Craighead George" label="Jean Craighead George"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801260" start="24178" end="24201" title="My Side of the Mountain" label="My Side of the Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481357" start="24377" end="24390" title="Shane Carruth" label="Shane Carruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899323" start="24416" end="24430" title="Upstream Color" label="Upstream Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015558" start="24569" end="24590" title="William Melvin Kelley" label="William Melvin Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q48817320" start="24621" end="24640" title="A Different Drummer (novel)" label="A Different Drummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309041" start="25023" end="25027" title="Drum (American magazine)" label="Drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q106316" start="25155" end="25173" title="Dead Poets Society" label="Dead Poets Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q43510" start="25291" end="25300" title="Nightwish" label="Nightwish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118093" start="25415" end="25445" title="The Crow, the Owl and the Dove" label="The Crow, the Owl and the Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q633074" start="25480" end="25491" title="Imaginaerum" label="Imaginaerum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18668276" start="25590" end="25618" title="Endless Forms Most Beautiful (album)" label="Endless Forms Most Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389504" start="25755" end="25772" title="Morningstar, Inc." label="Morningstar, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q6211110" start="25846" end="25858" title="Joe Mansueto" label="Joe Mansueto"/>
<link wikidata="Q10493813" start="25969" end="25978" title="Fallout 4" label="Fallout 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883319" start="26292" end="26307" title="Phoebe Bridgers" label="Phoebe Bridgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q388457" start="26516" end="26532" title="Weight Gain 4000" label="Weight Gain 4000"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="26548" end="26558" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q47352" start="26566" end="26578" title="Eric Cartman" label="Eric Cartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="26729" end="26746" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="26810" end="26824" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337126" start="26871" end="26885" title="nature writing" label="nature writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q233762" start="26889" end="26908" title="American literature" label="American literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="27066" end="27082" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456936" start="27143" end="27146" title="table of contents" label="TOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796191" start="27201" end="27216" title="Thoreau Society" label="Thoreau Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136919" start="27221" end="27242" title="Iowa State University" label="Iowa State University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291982" wikidata="Q6551929" url="?curid=291982" title="Linda Rogers">
<text>Linda Rogers (born 10 October 1944) is a Canadian poet and children&#x27;s writer based in British Columbia.

==Early life and education==
Rogers was born October 10, 1944, in Port Alice, British Columbia. Rogers attended the University of British Columbia. She was raised in Vancouver and attended University Hill School. She graduated with BA in English in 1966 and an MA in Canadian Literature in 1970.

==Career==
Rogers began publishing chapbooks in the 1970s. One of her first full-length titles, &quot;Queens of the Next Hot Star&quot; (1981), is based on her relationships with First Nations women.

In addition to writing, Rogers has taught at the University of British Columbia, the University of Victoria, Malaspina College and Camosun College. Rogers served as president of the League of Canadian Poets (1997) and the Federation of BC Writers (1990). From 1 December 1988, Rogers served as the second Poet Laureate of the City of Victoria.

==Personal life==
Rogers married musician Rick Van Krugel. She has three sons from a previous marriage.

==Bibliography==

===Poetry===
*&quot;Some Breath&quot; (1976)
*&quot;Queens of the Next Hot Star&quot; (1981)
*&quot;Witness&quot; (1985)
*&quot;Singing Rib&quot; (1987)
*&quot;Woman at Mile Zero&quot; (1990)
*&quot;Letters from the Doll Hospital&quot; (1992)
*&quot;Hard Candy&quot; (1994)
*&quot;Love in the Rainforest&quot; (1995)
*&quot;Heaven Cake&quot; (1997)
*&quot;The Broad Canvas&quot; (1999)
*&quot;The Saning&quot; (1999)
*2000: Shaunt Basmajian Chapbook Award, &quot;Grief Sits Down&quot; 
*&quot;The Bursting Test&quot; (2002)

===Children&#x27;s books===
*&quot;Worm Sandwich&quot; (1989)
*&quot;Kestrel and Leonardo&quot; (1990)
*&quot;Brown Bag Blues&quot; (1991)
*&quot;The Magic Flute&quot; (1991)
*&quot;Frankie Zapper and the Disappearing Teacher&quot; (1994)
*&quot;Molly Brown is Not a Clown&quot; (1996)

===Fiction===
*&quot;The Half Life of Radium&quot; (1994)
*&quot;Say My Name: The Memoirs of Charlie Louie&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Friday Water&quot; (2003)
*&quot;The Empress Letters&quot; (2007)

===Non-fiction===
*&quot;The Broad Canvas: Portraits of Women Artists&quot; (1999)

===Anthologies===
*&quot;Breaking the Surface: Five Canadian Poets Introduce New Voices&quot; (2001)
*&quot;P.K. Page: Essays on Her Works&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Bill Bissett: Essays on His Works&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Al Purdy: Essays on His Works&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Joe Rosenblatt: Essays on His Works&quot; (2005)
*&quot;George Fetherling and His Work&quot; (2005)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6551929" start="0" end="12" title="Linda Rogers" label="Linda Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131539" start="59" end="81" title="children&amp;#x27;s writer" label="children&amp;#x27;s writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957506" start="176" end="186" title="Port Alice, British Columbia" label="Port Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="226" end="256" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="276" end="285" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="586" end="599" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914214" start="717" end="734" title="Malaspina College" label="Malaspina College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029244" start="739" end="754" title="Camosun College" label="Camosun College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440768" start="830" end="854" title="Federation of BC Writers" label="Federation of BC Writers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291984" wikidata="Q201392" url="?curid=291984" title="Domenico Modugno">
<text>Domenico Modugno (; 9 January 1928 – 6 August 1994) was an Italian singer, actor and, later in life, a member of the Italian Parliament. He is known for his 1958 international hit song &quot;Nel blu dipinto di blu&quot;, for which he received the first Grammy Awards for Record of the Year and Song of the Year. He is considered the first Italian cantautore.

== Early life ==
The youngest of four children, Modugno was born at Polignano a Mare, in the province of Bari (Apulia), on 9 January 1928. His father, Vito Cosimo Modugno, was a municipal police commander, while his mother, Pasqua Lorusso, was a housewife.

At the age of 9, his family moved to San Pietro Vernotico, in the Province of Brindisi, where his father was transferred for a new job position. Here Domenico attended primary school and learned San Pietro Vernotico&#x27;s dialect, which belongs to the linguistic area of Salentino dialect, similar to Sicilian. He attended secondary school in Lecce.

== Career ==
While still studying, Modugno had a role in a cinematographic version of &quot;Filumena Marturano&quot; by Eduardo De Filippo as well as some other films. In 1957, his song &quot;Lazzarella&quot;, sung by Aurelio Fierro, came second in the Festival della Canzone Napoletana, bringing him his first taste of popularity.

In 1958, Modugno took part in Antonio Aniante&#x27;s comedy &quot;La Rosa di Zolfo&quot; at the Festival della Prosa in Venice. Also in 1958, he discovered the Italian comedy duo of Franco and Ciccio, became their manager and got them into a long-running film career. The turning point of his career came in that year, when he also participated in the Sanremo Music Festival, presenting, together with Johnny Dorelli, the song &quot;Nel blu dipinto di blu.&quot; Co-authored by Modugno and Franco Migliacci, the song won the contest and became an enormous success worldwide. It received two Grammy Awards with sales above 22 million copies, and represented Italy in the 1958 Eurovision Song Contest, where it came in third.

Modugno reportedly used the money gained with &quot;Nel blu dipinto di blu&quot; to purchase a Ferrari, however, his car was totalled in an accident, which included his fenders being smashed. This was mentioned in the Allan Sherman song &quot;America&#x27;s a nice Italian Name&quot;.

In 1959, Modugno won the Sanremo Music Festival for the second time in a row, with &quot;Piove&quot; (also known as &quot;Ciao, ciao bambina&quot;), and received second place in 1960 with &quot;Libero&quot;. This was a successful period of time for Modugno who again represented Italy in the Eurovision Song Contest of 1959. Later his hit song &quot;Io&quot; was sung by Elvis Presley in English with the title &quot;Ask Me&quot;.

In 1962, Modugno won the Sanremo Music Festival a third time with &quot;Addio..., addio...&quot; Four years later, he again represented Italy at Eurovision with &quot;Dio, come ti amo&quot;. Sergio Franchi recorded it in Italian (titled &quot;Oh How Much I Love You (Dio, come ti amo!)) on his 1967 RCA Victor album, &quot;From Sergio-with Love&quot;. Jack Jones recorded it in English for his 1967 album, &quot;Our Song&quot;, under the title &quot;Oh How Much I Love You&quot;.Shirley Bassey also recorded it with the title &quot;Oh God How Much I Love You, on her album Keep the Music Playing in 1991&quot;.

Modugno was an actor in 44 movies (such as &quot;Appuntamento a Ischia&quot;), and was a film producer of two (&quot;Tutto è musica&quot; of 1963 was his own biographical production).

In 1970, Modugno focused on more classic music genres and profiles, as a singer and as a musician, adapting poetry, acting on television and in lead singing roles in modern operas.

== Final years ==

In 1984, Modugno suffered a severe stroke and remained partially paralyzed; this forced him to abandon his artistic career and devote himself to rehab.

From 1986, he worked for the rights of disabled people, and in June 1987, he was elected congressman for Turin in the Italian Parliament, in the ranks of the Radical Party, a liberal-social political group. In the past he had supported the campaigns of the Italian Socialist Party and one for divorce, in addition to criticizing the human rights violations by the regime of Augusto Pinochet, that cost him a denial of entry in Chile, where he had been scheduled to hold a concert. In this last stage of his life, instead, he was very active in social issues, fighting against the inhumane conditions of patients in the Agrigento psychiatric hospital.

Modugno returned to the music scene, definitively (he already held a concert for former inmates of Agrigento&#x27;s mental asylum, in 1989), in 1992–1993. His last song was &quot;Delfini&quot; (&quot;Dolphins&quot;), in 1993 with his son, Massimo.

On 6 August 1994, Modugno died at the age of 66, from a heart attack, on the island of Lampedusa, south of Sicily, while he was in his home by the sea. His beach villa was put up for sale in 2020. It is located on Rabbits&#x27; Islet beach, the location is part of a natural protected reserve with limestones and crags.

== Discography ==
* &quot;Lu pisce spada&quot;
* &quot;Lazzarella&quot;
* &quot;Nel blu dipinto di blu&quot; – also known as &quot;Volare&quot; (Sanremo winner song, 1958), co-authored with Franco Migliacci
* Buon Natale A Tutto Il Mondo (1958, with Ennio Morricone)
* &quot;La lontananza&quot;
* &quot;Piove&quot; – also known as &quot;Ciao, ciao bambina&quot; (Sanremo winner song, 1959)
* &quot;Sopra i tetti azzurri del mio pazzo amore&quot;
* &quot;Vecchio frac&quot;
* &quot;Non piangere Maria&quot;
* &quot;Amara terra mia&quot;
* &quot;Stasera pago io&quot;
* &quot;Il maestro di violino&quot;
* &quot;Tu si &#x27;na cosa grande&quot;
* &quot;Questa è la mia vita&quot;
* &quot;Addio...addio...&quot;
* &quot;Piange... il telefono&quot;

=== Sanremo Festival ===
Modugno was the winner four times (in 1958, 1959, 1962 and 1966).
* 1956 &quot;Musetto&quot;
* 1958 &quot;Nel blu dipinto di blu&quot; (winner)
* 1959 &quot;Piove (Ciao, ciao bambina)&quot; (winner)
* 1960 &quot;Libero&quot; (second place)
* 1962 &quot;Addio... addio...&quot; (winner)
* 1964 &quot;Che me ne importa a me&quot; (second place)
* 1966 &quot;Dio, come ti amo&quot; (winner)
* 1967 &quot;Sopra i tetti azzurri del mio pazzo amore&quot;
* 1968 &quot;Il posto mio&quot;
* 1971 &quot;Come stai?&quot;
* 1972 &quot;Un calcio alla città&quot;
* 1974 &quot;Questa è la mia vita&quot; (second place)

== References ==
== External links ==
*Official website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q201392" start="0" end="16" title="Domenico Modugno" label="Domenico Modugno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117578" start="117" end="135" title="Italian Parliament" label="Italian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q598412" start="191" end="213" title="Nel blu, dipinto di blu (song)" label="Nel blu dipinto di blu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542208" start="243" end="266" title="1st Annual Grammy Awards" label="the first Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q843219" start="271" end="289" title="Grammy Award for Record of the Year" label="Record of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027904" start="294" end="310" title="Grammy Award for Song of the Year" label="Song of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q488205" start="347" end="357" title="cantautore" label="cantautore"/>
<link wikidata="Q51842" start="428" end="444" title="Polignano a Mare" label="Polignano a Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q16123" start="453" end="469" title="province of Bari" label="province of Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="471" end="477" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431981" start="538" end="554" title="Municipal police (Italy)" label="municipal police"/>
<link wikidata="Q51877" start="655" end="675" title="San Pietro Vernotico" label="San Pietro Vernotico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148" start="684" end="704" title="Province of Brindisi" label="Province of Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213" start="890" end="907" title="Salentino dialect" label="Salentino dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="920" end="928" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246987" start="1062" end="1080" title="Filumena Marturano" label="Filumena Marturano"/>
<link wikidata="Q332632" start="1090" end="1108" title="Eduardo De Filippo" label="Eduardo De Filippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13178537" start="1162" end="1172" title="Lazzarella" label="Lazzarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247419" start="1188" end="1202" title="Aurelio Fierro" label="Aurelio Fierro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248879" start="1223" end="1256" title="Festival della Canzone Napoletana" label="Festival della Canzone Napoletana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3619185" start="1333" end="1348" title="Antonio Aniante" label="Antonio Aniante"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="1423" end="1429" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141470" start="1471" end="1481" title="comedy duo" label="comedy duo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442505" start="1485" end="1502" title="Franco and Ciccio" label="Franco and Ciccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q206959" start="1655" end="1677" title="Sanremo Music Festival" label="Sanremo Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q554971" start="1705" end="1719" title="Johnny Dorelli" label="Johnny Dorelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q598412" start="1736" end="1758" title="Volare (song)" label="Nel blu dipinto di blu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442617" start="1793" end="1809" title="Franco Migliacci" label="Franco Migliacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="1894" end="1906" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q188517" start="1973" end="2001" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1958" label="1958 Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="2123" end="2130" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q708963" start="2246" end="2259" title="Allan Sherman" label="Allan Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q734836" start="2403" end="2408" title="Piove (Ciao, ciao bambina)" label="Piove"/>
<link wikidata="Q199924" start="2606" end="2637" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1959" label="Eurovision Song Contest of 1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="2685" end="2698" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q207889" start="2891" end="2901" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1966" label="Eurovision"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708000" start="2913" end="2929" title="Dio, come ti amo" label="Dio, come ti amo"/>
<link wikidata="Q782020" start="2937" end="2951" title="Sergio Franchi" label="Sergio Franchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q201569" start="3098" end="3108" title="Jack Jones (singer)" label="Jack Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383178" start="3319" end="3341" title="Keep the Music Playing" label="Keep the Music Playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620967" start="3407" end="3428" title="Appuntamento a Ischia" label="Appuntamento a Ischia"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="4002" end="4007" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704736" start="4055" end="4068" title="Radical Party (Italy)" label="Radical Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q590750" start="4154" end="4177" title="Italian Socialist Party" label="Italian Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q368" start="4271" end="4287" title="Augusto Pinochet" label="Augusto Pinochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704093" start="4324" end="4329" title="Chile under Pinochet" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q13678" start="4516" end="4525" title="Agrigento" label="Agrigento"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="4526" end="4546" title="psychiatric hospital" label="psychiatric hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q107338" start="4885" end="4894" title="Lampedusa" label="Lampedusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q598412" start="5199" end="5221" title="Nel blu, dipinto di blu (song)" label="Nel blu dipinto di blu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442617" start="5309" end="5325" title="Franco Migliacci" label="Franco Migliacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q23848" start="5369" end="5384" title="Ennio Morricone" label="Ennio Morricone"/>
<link wikidata="Q734836" start="5422" end="5427" title="Piove (Ciao, ciao bambina)" label="Piove"/>
<link wikidata="Q108804288" start="5573" end="5585" title="Vecchio frac" label="Vecchio frac"/>
<link wikidata="Q20009771" start="5836" end="5857" title="Piange... il telefono (song)" label="Piange... il telefono"/>
<link wikidata="Q598412" start="5996" end="6018" title="Volare (song)" label="Nel blu dipinto di blu"/>
<link wikidata="Q734836" start="6047" end="6073" title="Piove (Ciao, ciao bambina)" label="Piove (Ciao, ciao bambina)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708000" start="6246" end="6262" title="Dio, come ti amo" label="Dio, come ti amo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291986" wikidata="Q577288" url="?curid=291986" title="Calder Cup">
<text>The Calder Cup is the trophy awarded annually to the playoff champions of the American Hockey League. It was first presented in 1937 to the Syracuse Stars.

The cup is made of sterling silver mounted on a base of Brazilian mahogany. In its current shape, the trophy has a two-tiered square base with commemorative plaques for each of the AHL&#x27;s 20 most recent champions: 12 on the bottom tier and 8 on the top tier. Each time a new championship plaque is added, the oldest plaque is retired and joins a display at the Hockey Hall of Fame in Toronto.

The Hershey Bears have won the Cup more times than any other team, with thirteen victories in franchise history. The Cleveland Barons come in second with nine; the Springfield Indians/Kings are third with seven. Eight teams have won back-to-back championships; the Springfield Indians of 1960–62 are the only team to have won three straight Calder Cup championships.

On three occasions an AHL club has won the Calder Cup coincidentally with its NHL affiliate winning the Stanley Cup: in 1976 and 1977 when the Montreal Canadiens and their AHL affiliate, the Nova Scotia Voyageurs both won, and in 1995, when the New Jersey Devils and Albany River Rats both won.

The Calder Cup was not awarded in 2020 and 2021 as the AHL did not hold a playoff due to effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.

==History==
The trophy is named after Frank Calder, who was the first president of the National Hockey League. The Calder Memorial Trophy, which is awarded annually to the Rookie of the Year in the National Hockey League, was also named after Calder.

As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the 2019–20 AHL season was cancelled and the Calder Cup was not awarded in 2020. Previously, it had been the oldest continuously awarded professional ice hockey playoff trophy, having been presented annually from 1936–37 to 2018–19.

==See also==
* List of Calder Cup champions

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
==External links==
*Official AHL website
*Official Calder Cup website
*AHL Hall of Fame</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q577288" start="4" end="14" title="Calder Cup" label="Calder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="78" end="100" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="128" end="132" title="1936–37 AHL season#Calder Cup Playoffs" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q940519" start="140" end="154" title="Syracuse Stars (ice hockey)" label="Syracuse Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q239788" start="223" end="231" title="mahogany" label="mahogany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="522" end="541" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q569225" start="559" end="572" title="Hershey Bears" label="Hershey Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100731" start="672" end="688" title="Cleveland Barons (1937–1973)" label="Cleveland Barons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240798" start="719" end="744" title="Springfield Indians" label="Springfield Indians/Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240798" start="820" end="839" title="Springfield Indians" label="Springfield Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189268" start="1043" end="1047" title="1976 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092006" start="1052" end="1056" title="1977 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="1066" end="1084" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546953" start="1114" end="1135" title="Nova Scotia Voyageurs" label="Nova Scotia Voyageurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590672" start="1153" end="1157" title="1995 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="1168" end="1185" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752575" start="1190" end="1207" title="Albany River Rats" label="Albany River Rats"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="1323" end="1340" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235790" start="1381" end="1393" title="Frank Calder" label="Frank Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="1430" end="1452" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q726480" start="1458" end="1480" title="Calder Memorial Trophy" label="Calder Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="1541" end="1563" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q86695115" start="1614" end="1631" title="COVID-19 pandemic in North America" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65951979" start="1637" end="1655" title="2019–20 AHL season" label="2019–20 AHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676957" start="1882" end="1910" title="List of Calder Cup champions" label="List of Calder Cup champions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291988" wikidata="Q7057560" url="?curid=291988" title="Northalsted Market Days">
<text>Northalsted Market Days is an annual two-day festival in Chicago, Illinois, United States. Established in 1982, it&#x27;s the Midwest&#x27;s largest street festival with annual attendance exceeding 300,000 people over the two-day event. 
==Description==

The festival takes place in the Boystown section of Lakeview along North Halsted Street from Belmont Avenue to Addison Avenue and is a half-mile long. The festival consists of 3 music stages, 2 local band stages and a dance floor. The festival showcases food and merchandise tents. There are also Halsted business establishment tents, as well as those of radio stations, public service organizations &amp; companies (SAAB in 2008). Many give away small souvenir items.

The overall flavor of the event is decidedly geared toward the LGBT community, but is open to all. The street remains closed from Saturday at 7am to Monday at 1am. Most of the businesses along Halsted Street are open during the day and stay open late each night when the festival ends for the day. Most notably the 20+ bars and restaurants see a significant increase in patronage.
==History==
2006 was the 25th Anniversary for North Halsted Market Days, and helping celebrate were such performers as Billie Myers, Brazilian Girls, Powder, East Village Opera Company and Michael McDermott.

2008 performers included &#x27;80s pop group Exposé and Broadway singer Jennifer Holliday. In 2011, singers Darren Criss and Gloria Gaynor performed at the festival. In 2012, Olivia Newton-John, Sheena Easton, and the Pointer Sisters performed. In 2015, headliners included Salt-N-Pepa, En Vogue and Aaron Carter, among other notable performers.

There was no Market Days in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

==Notable performers==

*10,000 Maniacs
*A Flock of Seagulls
*Aaron Carter
*Adam Barta
*Alex Newell 
*Alexis Jordan
*All-4-One
*Andy Bell
*Betty Who
*Belinda Carlisle
*Berlin
*Big Freedia
*Billie Myers
*Blake Lewis
*Blu Cantrell 
*Blush
*Bonnie McKee 
*Brian Justin Crum
*C + C Music Factory
*CeCe Peniston
*Charice
*Cherie Currie
*Chi Chi LaRue
*Crystal Waters
*Darren Criss
*David Cassidy
*David Hernandez
*Deborah Cox
*Diana King
*En Vogue
*Erika Jayne 
*Exposé
*Ferras
*Frenchie Davis
*Gina Glocksen
*Gloria Gaynor
*Icona Pop
*Inaya Day
*Jack &amp; Jack
*Jake Miller 
*Jennifer Holliday
*Jessica Sutta
*Jill Sobule
*Joan Jett
*Jody Watley
*Jon Secada
*Judy Tenuta
*Karmin
*Kat Graham
*Kerli 
*Kimberley Locke
*Kristine W
*La Bouche
*Leslie Jordan
*Linda Clifford
*Lisa Lisa
*Lynda Carter
*Manila Luzon
*Margaret Cho
*Martha Wash
*Mary Lambert
*MAX
*Maxine Nightingale
*Mimi Imfurst
*Neon Trees
*Nina Flowers
*Olivia Newton-John
*Paris Bennett
*Prince Poppycock
*RJD2
*Robin S.
*Rockell
*Salt-N-Pepa
*Sheena Easton
*Shiny Toy Guns
*Sir the Baptist
*Steve Grand
*Taylor Dayne
*The Cover Girls
*The Pointer Sisters
*Thea Austin
*Tiffany
*Todrick Hall
*Tony Hadley
*Trenyce
*Trixie Mattel
*Ty Herndon
*Ultra Nate
*The Village People
*(We Are) Nexus
*Who Is Fancy 
*Wilson Phillips
*Wynter Gordon
==References==
==External links==
* Special Events Market Days Website
* NortHalsted Market Days Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7057560" start="0" end="23" title="Northalsted Market Days" label="Northalsted Market Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q132241" start="45" end="53" title="festival" label="festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="57" end="74" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216469" start="307" end="315" title="Lakeview (Chicago)" label="Lakeview"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="322" end="342" title="Lake View, Chicago#Inclusiveness concerns and Northalsted name change" label="North Halsted Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="509" end="513" title="food" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q740777" start="518" end="529" title="merchandise" label="merchandise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552753" start="1225" end="1237" title="Billie Myers" label="Billie Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384772" start="1360" end="1366" title="Exposé (group)" label="Exposé"/>
<link wikidata="Q439626" start="1387" end="1404" title="Jennifer Holliday" label="Jennifer Holliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q295502" start="1423" end="1435" title="Darren Criss" label="Darren Criss"/>
<link wikidata="Q228918" start="1440" end="1453" title="Gloria Gaynor" label="Gloria Gaynor"/>
<link wikidata="Q185165" start="1490" end="1508" title="Olivia Newton-John" label="Olivia Newton-John"/>
<link wikidata="Q465977" start="1510" end="1523" title="Sheena Easton" label="Sheena Easton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161836" start="1533" end="1548" title="Pointer Sisters" label="Pointer Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545961" start="1589" end="1600" title="Salt-N-Pepa" label="Salt-N-Pepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137304" start="1602" end="1610" title="En Vogue" label="En Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q301818" start="1615" end="1627" title="Aaron Carter" label="Aaron Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="1706" end="1723" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q163819" start="1751" end="1765" title="10,000 Maniacs" label="10,000 Maniacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q300409" start="1767" end="1786" title="A Flock of Seagulls" label="A Flock of Seagulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q301818" start="1788" end="1800" title="Aaron Carter" label="Aaron Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678677" start="1802" end="1812" title="Adam Barta" label="Adam Barta"/>
<link wikidata="Q578403" start="1814" end="1825" title="Alex Newell" label="Alex Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q235310" start="1828" end="1841" title="Alexis Jordan" label="Alexis Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291981" start="1843" end="1852" title="All-4-One" label="All-4-One"/>
<link wikidata="Q514969" start="1854" end="1863" title="Andy Bell (singer)" label="Andy Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211287" start="1865" end="1874" title="Betty Who" label="Betty Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q233959" start="1876" end="1892" title="Belinda Carlisle" label="Belinda Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q821198" start="1894" end="1900" title="Berlin (band)" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905738" start="1902" end="1913" title="Big Freedia" label="Big Freedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552753" start="1915" end="1927" title="Billie Myers" label="Billie Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q556615" start="1929" end="1940" title="Blake Lewis" label="Blake Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q440676" start="1942" end="1954" title="Blu Cantrell" label="Blu Cantrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q196696" start="1957" end="1962" title="Blush (Asian band)" label="Blush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026055" start="1964" end="1976" title="Bonnie McKee" label="Bonnie McKee"/>
<link wikidata="Q27783546" start="1979" end="1996" title="Brian Justin Crum" label="Brian Justin Crum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024639" start="1998" end="2017" title="C + C Music Factory" label="C + C Music Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q467129" start="2019" end="2032" title="CeCe Peniston" label="CeCe Peniston"/>
<link wikidata="Q464357" start="2034" end="2041" title="Jake Zyrus" label="Charice"/>
<link wikidata="Q237497" start="2043" end="2056" title="Cherie Currie" label="Cherie Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q708085" start="2058" end="2071" title="Chi Chi LaRue" label="Chi Chi LaRue"/>
<link wikidata="Q249141" start="2073" end="2087" title="Crystal Waters" label="Crystal Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q295502" start="2089" end="2101" title="Darren Criss" label="Darren Criss"/>
<link wikidata="Q457306" start="2103" end="2116" title="David Cassidy" label="David Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234953" start="2118" end="2133" title="David Hernandez (singer)" label="David Hernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q457622" start="2135" end="2146" title="Deborah Cox" label="Deborah Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q455240" start="2148" end="2158" title="Diana King" label="Diana King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137304" start="2160" end="2168" title="En Vogue" label="En Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q867257" start="2170" end="2181" title="Erika Jayne" label="Erika Jayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384772" start="2184" end="2190" title="Exposé (group)" label="Exposé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445276" start="2192" end="2198" title="Ferras" label="Ferras"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502694" start="2200" end="2214" title="Frenchie Davis" label="Frenchie Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562874" start="2216" end="2229" title="Gina Glocksen" label="Gina Glocksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q228918" start="2231" end="2244" title="Gloria Gaynor" label="Gloria Gaynor"/>
<link wikidata="Q808703" start="2246" end="2255" title="Icona Pop" label="Icona Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243342" start="2257" end="2266" title="Inaya Day" label="Inaya Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q18352842" start="2268" end="2283" title="Jack &amp;amp; Jack" label="Jack &amp;amp; Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124853" start="2285" end="2296" title="Jake Miller (singer)" label="Jake Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q439626" start="2299" end="2316" title="Jennifer Holliday" label="Jennifer Holliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q202662" start="2318" end="2331" title="Jessica Sutta" label="Jessica Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q520324" start="2333" end="2344" title="Jill Sobule" label="Jill Sobule"/>
<link wikidata="Q231106" start="2346" end="2355" title="Joan Jett" label="Joan Jett"/>
<link wikidata="Q465897" start="2357" end="2368" title="Jody Watley" label="Jody Watley"/>
<link wikidata="Q946170" start="2370" end="2380" title="Jon Secada" label="Jon Secada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811023" start="2382" end="2393" title="Judy Tenuta" label="Judy Tenuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167969" start="2395" end="2401" title="Karmin" label="Karmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151118" start="2403" end="2413" title="Kat Graham" label="Kat Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q233944" start="2415" end="2420" title="Kerli" label="Kerli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082543" start="2423" end="2438" title="Kimberley Locke" label="Kimberley Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q456964" start="2440" end="2450" title="Kristine W" label="Kristine W"/>
<link wikidata="Q572077" start="2452" end="2461" title="La Bouche" label="La Bouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q684370" start="2463" end="2476" title="Leslie Jordan" label="Leslie Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q457811" start="2478" end="2492" title="Linda Clifford" label="Linda Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165645" start="2494" end="2503" title="Lisa Lisa and Cult Jam" label="Lisa Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q242903" start="2505" end="2517" title="Lynda Carter" label="Lynda Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749693" start="2519" end="2531" title="Manila Luzon" label="Manila Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q257243" start="2533" end="2545" title="Margaret Cho" label="Margaret Cho"/>
<link wikidata="Q465302" start="2547" end="2558" title="Martha Wash" label="Martha Wash"/>
<link wikidata="Q13077226" start="2560" end="2572" title="Mary Lambert (singer)" label="Mary Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190160" start="2574" end="2577" title="Max Schneider" label="MAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q433115" start="2579" end="2597" title="Maxine Nightingale" label="Maxine Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862144" start="2599" end="2611" title="Mimi Imfurst" label="Mimi Imfurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508269" start="2613" end="2623" title="Neon Trees" label="Neon Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7037930" start="2625" end="2637" title="Nina Flowers" label="Nina Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q185165" start="2639" end="2657" title="Olivia Newton-John" label="Olivia Newton-John"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081516" start="2659" end="2672" title="Paris Bennett" label="Paris Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047360" start="2674" end="2690" title="Prince Poppycock" label="Prince Poppycock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933793" start="2692" end="2696" title="RJD2" label="RJD2"/>
<link wikidata="Q470066" start="2698" end="2706" title="Robin S." label="Robin S."/>
<link wikidata="Q6271540" start="2708" end="2715" title="Rockell" label="Rockell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545961" start="2717" end="2728" title="Salt-N-Pepa" label="Salt-N-Pepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q465977" start="2730" end="2743" title="Sheena Easton" label="Sheena Easton"/>
<link wikidata="Q931174" start="2745" end="2759" title="Shiny Toy Guns" label="Shiny Toy Guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823498" start="2761" end="2776" title="Sir the Baptist" label="Sir the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q13851321" start="2778" end="2789" title="Steve Grand" label="Steve Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q168274" start="2791" end="2803" title="Taylor Dayne" label="Taylor Dayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727888" start="2805" end="2820" title="The Cover Girls" label="The Cover Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161836" start="2822" end="2841" title="The Pointer Sisters" label="The Pointer Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182579" start="2843" end="2854" title="Thea Austin" label="Thea Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q233886" start="2856" end="2863" title="Tiffany Darwish" label="Tiffany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205820" start="2865" end="2877" title="Todrick Hall" label="Todrick Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q81624" start="2879" end="2890" title="Tony Hadley" label="Tony Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838625" start="2892" end="2899" title="Trenyce" label="Trenyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q23905339" start="2901" end="2914" title="Trixie Mattel" label="Trixie Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462520" start="2916" end="2926" title="Ty Herndon" label="Ty Herndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q444309" start="2928" end="2938" title="Ultra Nate" label="Ultra Nate"/>
<link wikidata="Q219874" start="2940" end="2958" title="Village People" label="The Village People"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947065" start="2960" end="2974" title="(We Are) Nexus" label="(We Are) Nexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605366" start="2976" end="2988" title="Who Is Fancy" label="Who Is Fancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358683" start="2991" end="3006" title="Wilson Phillips" label="Wilson Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q195777" start="3008" end="3021" title="Wynter Gordon" label="Wynter Gordon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="291993" wikidata="Q285852" url="?curid=291993" title="Volunteer fire department">
<text>A volunteer fire department (VFD) is a fire department of volunteers who perform fire suppression and other related emergency services for a local jurisdiction. Volunteer and retained (on-call) firefighters are expected to be on call to respond to emergency calls for long periods of time, and are summoned to the fire station when their services are needed. They are also expected to attend other non-emergency duties as well (training, fundraising, equipment maintenance, etc.).

Volunteer firefighters contrast with paid firefighters who work full or part-time and receive a salary. Some volunteer firefighters may be part of a combination fire department that employs both full-time and volunteer firefighters. On-call firefighters who receive some pay for their work are known as call firefighters in the United States, and retained firefighters in the United Kingdom and Ireland.

== International ==

The earliest firefighting organizations were made up of volunteers. The first large organized force of firefighters was the Corps of Vigiles, established in ancient Rome in 6 AD.

=== Argentina ===

The first volunteer fire department in Argentina was Bomberos Voluntarios de La Boca (La Boca Volunteer Firemen) founded on June 2, 1884, by Italian immigrant Tomas Liberti in the neighborhood of La Boca, Buenos Aires. June 2 is the Day of Volunteer Firefighters. The Argentina Federation of Volunteer Firefighters was founded in 1954. In 2018, 80% of the country is covered by volunteers.

=== Australia ===

Throughout Australia, there are many volunteer firefighting agencies that are set up by individual states or territories. New South Wales is serviced by two statutory firefighting authorities. These are the New South Wales Rural Fire Service (NSWRFS) and Fire and Rescue NSW. Fire and Rescue NSW has firefighting and rescue responsibilities for the major cities, metropolitan areas, and several other towns in NSW. It also has the responsibility for all land-based HAZMAT incidents as well as inland waterway-based HAZMAT incidents. The NSWRFS is the volunteer firefighting service in NSW and consists of over 70,000 volunteers and has responsibility for over 90% of the land area in NSW. Although most of this is bush and grassland, the NSWRFS also serves smaller and regional communities that are not covered by Fire and Rescue NSW.

In Victoria, there are three main fire fighting organizations, Metropolitan Fire and Emergency Services Board (MFB), Country Fire Authority (CFA) and The Department of Environment, Water, Land, and Planning (DEWLP). The CFA is a volunteer and community-based fire and emergency services organization that is made up of around 61,000 members. Of these members, some 59,000 are volunteers. Their roles range from fire, rescue, HAZMAT, to non-operational support roles.

In Western Australia, fire fighting is organized by the Department of Fire and Emergency Services (DFES) together with Local Councils. DFES operates the Volunteer Fire and Rescue Service Brigades (VFRS) and some Bush Fire Service Brigades (BFS), while the remainder of the Bush Fire Service Brigades is trained by DFES, but operated and administered by the Council of the associated area. VFRS Brigades are generally more involved in Structural Fire fighting, Asset Protection, and Road Crash Rescue depending on their location, whereas the BFS Brigades are generally more involved in Wildfire Fighting. In Western Australia, there is an estimated 31,000 BFS Members among 585 Brigades, and 2,000 VFRS Members among 88 Brigades.

In South Australia, there are two legislated fire fighting organizations. The South Australian Metropolitan Fire Service (SAMFS) and the South Australian Country Fire Service (SACFS). The SACFS is staffed by approximately 13,500 volunteer firefighters and around 120 paid employees.

=== Austria and Germany ===

Volunteer fire departments (&quot;Freiwillige Feuerwehr&quot;) provide the majority (97% of all German firefighters) of Austria&#x27;s and Germany&#x27;s civil protection services, alongside other volunteer organizations like the German Federal Agency for Technical Relief (THW), voluntary ambulance services and emergency medical or rescue services like German Red Cross or Johanniter-Unfall-Hilfe. In most rural fire departments, the staff consists only of volunteers. The members of these departments are usually on-call 24/7 and working in other professions.

The alarm can be performed by different alarm systems, such as by sirens or pager sometimes combined with an app on the mobile phone. In Germany, the alarm via radio pager is on the frequencies of the BOS radio. In Austria, the fire departments have their own frequencies.

In medium-sized cities and communities, fire departments will often be partially staffed by career firefighters. They ensure the rapid availability of some of the department&#x27;s fire apparatus, with the remaining apparatus staffed and brought to the scene of the emergency by volunteers as soon as they arrive at the department.

Larger cities, typically those with 100,000 inhabitants or more, will operate fire departments staffed entirely by career firefighters. However, they also typically have several volunteer fire departments, who are called upon in case of larger emergencies.

Municipalities are the support of volunteer fire departments. Additional funding may include, for example, contributions from support organizations, donations made in fundraising, or income from various events.

===Canada===

While wholly volunteer fire departments are mostly found in rural and remote areas of Canada, &quot;composite&quot; departments composed of both career and volunteer or &quot;call&quot; firefighters can be found in more urbanized municipalities. For example, in the city of Kingston Ontario (population 130,000), of the ten stations operated by the Kingston Fire and Rescue Service, three are staffed with career firefighters, two are composite and five are wholly volunteer. There are an estimated 127,000 volunteer firefighters across the country. Most urban and larger fire services began as volunteer service and evolved into full-time members. Volunteer departments are necessary for areas that cannot afford to staff a full-time department. Unlike the United States where volunteer fire companies may operate independently of local government with limited tax base support, or as semi-private organizations, in Canada volunteer fire departments are normally operated by municipalities or by counties. Provinces establish standards of equipment and training that volunteer departments must meet.

=== Chile ===

Chile is one of the few countries in the world in which all firefighters are unpaid. The local fire departments are part of the National Board of Firefighters (&quot;Junta Nacional de Bomberos&quot;).

=== Croatia ===
There are 1,768 volunteer fire departments in Croatia, as well as 33 units of what is officially called &quot;volunteer fire department in economy&quot;.

Some Croatian volunteer fire departments include:

* Zaprešić Volunteer Fire Department

=== Estonia ===

The first volunteer fire team in Estonia was created in 1788 by the Brotherhood of Blackheads, the first organization of volunteer firemen in 1862, also being the first such organization in Imperial Russia. Volunteer fire organizations existed throughout all political systems in Estonia since then, although the cause saw significant setbacks in the political purges following Soviet occupation. Volunteer fire brigades were the backbone of the rescue services before re-independence, owning around 3/4ths of rescue equipment, personnel, and also handling around 3/4ths of all fires, primarily in rural areas. In 2010, the nation&#x27;s volunteer fire brigades were united under an umbrella organization, the Rescue Union (Estonian: Päästeliit), also including chimney sweeping, water rescue and similar organizations.

In 2021, there were 117 volunteer fire brigades (comprising 62% of all fire brigades) with a total of 2 319 volunteer firemen (comprising around half of Estonian rescue personnel). Volunteer fire brigades are placed in rural areas or the satellite areas of cities and towns. On smaller islands such as Naissaar or Abruka, the volunteer fire brigades are the only rescue brigades. In a few cases, volunteer brigades are attached to national ones. Due to being placed in primarily rural areas, they are often the first to arrive at the scene.

Volunteer organizations are funded through support via the national or local municipal budget, companies and donations.

=== Finland ===
In Finland, the firefighting in the countryside mostly depends on volunteer fire departments, nearly always with a contract with the regional emergency authorities (or, formerly and in Åland, the municipality). There are also volunteer fire departments in cities, but they have a minor role.

There are also junior firefighters in the volunteer fire departments. They are usually 10–17 years old but some fire departments also have &quot;early juniors&quot; that are 7–9 years old.

=== France ===

In France, 80% of the firefighters are volunteers.

=== Indonesia ===

In Indonesia, the city with the largest number of volunteer fire brigades is in Banjarmasin, South Kalimantan province. The city is also sometimes nicknamed &quot;Kota seribu pemadam kebakaran&quot; (The city with a thousand fire brigades). Water access is also relatively easy as rivers are easily founded at the city to be the source of water for fire fighting. The need for more fire brigades in the city emerged when people realized the very frequent incidents of fire, especially structure fire because houses are traditionally made out of wood. Due to high temperatures near the equator, fire incidents are common; thus, many people started or joined volunteer fire brigades to assist the existing government fire brigade (the &quot;Dinas Pemadam Kebakaran&quot;). These volunteer fire brigades are paid Rp 0.000,- but in some cases, some people give them money for charitable reasons.

=== Israel ===
In Israel, volunteer firefighters function alongside paid firefighters in the Israel Fire and Rescue Services. Adult volunteers work either out of the fire stations, in the same vehicles as the paid firefighters or in independent units that operate out of their own fire truck. Young volunteers (ages 15–18) work only out of the stations.

=== Ireland ===

The Auxiliary Fire Service (AFS) in Ireland is a branch of Civil Defence Ireland. The service is usually only called upon for flooding incidents, emergency water supply and large-scale incidents where the resources of front-line fire brigades are stretched.

=== Netherlands ===

In The Netherlands, approximately 80% of firefighters are volunteers. These firefighters do not have to remain at the fire station, but can be called upon based on a pre-determined schedule. When they are scheduled to be on call, they have to be able to get to the fire station within 3 minutes. And even though they are volunteers, they get a decent hourly wage, even for participating in training sessions.

=== Nicaragua ===

In Nicaragua, there are three different groups of firefighters, one commanded by the &quot;Direccion General de Bomberos 18&quot; fire station, which has government support; the second is commanded by the &quot;Federación de Cuerpos de Bomberos de Nicaragua Benemeritos 8&quot; fire station; the third is commanded by the &quot;Asociacion civil Cuerpo de BOMBEROS Voluntarios de Nicaragua 24&quot; fire station.

=== Peru ===

Peru&#x27;s &quot;bomberos&quot; are all unpaid volunteers that extinguish fires, clear up hazardous materials, provide aid and assistance during natural disasters, and transport the sick to hospitals, in a 150-year tradition. Citizens apply to enter a training program they must pay for with their own money. During training sessions, they are taught how to put out fires, provide first aid, and use specialized equipment. Upon successful completion of the program, they enter a probation period where they have to prove they are capable of dealing with real-life emergencies.

=== Philippines ===

Volunteer fire services in the Philippines began during the 1960s, a time when fires were a frequent occurrence. Member proficiency for these services has improved since the 1960s due to self-education, training, and experience.

===Poland===

The State Fire Service () is a professional firefighting service that covers the whole territory from their stations in cities and towns. In rural areas, however, local inhabitants may create a Voluntary Fire Service (&quot;Ochotnicza Straż Pożarna&quot;) under proper law. Such volunteer fire services may receive financial assistance from the government for the equipment and staff training. In certain areas of Poland, almost every village has a volunteer fire service, because members enjoy high respect in their community. Volunteer fire services are fully integrated with the emergency system. Any call to the fire emergency number is routed to the nearest state fire service station, which first deploys the nearest volunteer fire service, followed by the State Fire Service.

===Slovenia===

The Firefighting Association of Slovenia is an independent, non-profitable, humanitarian, non-political and the highest form of association of voluntary fire brigades and their associations. It operates on the basis of the Associations law and the Firefighting law. It is a union of all voluntary fire brigades, all voluntary industrial fire brigades and their fire brigades, which are organized at the municipal, inter-municipal and regional level.

The Firefighting Association of Slovenia was founded in 1949 in Ljubljana, as the successor to all previous associations of fire brigade organizations. Since then, it has been performing the duties of the umbrella fire organization in the Republic of Slovenia and has been a member of CTIF since 1992. There are over 165000 members in 1341 volunteer fire brigades.

=== United Kingdom ===

In the United Kingdom, it is standard for smaller, rural stations to be staffed by retained firefighters, part-time firefighters who are paid for attending incidents and for spending long periods of time on-call known as a retainer fee. A few fire services have volunteer units, including the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service, Mid and West Wales Fire and Rescue Service and North Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service, where they only get paid their retainer fee, but are not paid for attending incidents The only autonomous volunteer fire service is the Peterborough Volunteer Fire Brigade, which is contracted to provide operations for Cambridgeshire Fire and Rescue Service. Other voluntary fire brigades existed in the past, but no others have existed since the disbanding of the Auxiliary Fire Service in 1968.

=== United States ===

According to the National Fire Protection Association, 54 percent of firefighters in the United States are volunteers. The Volunteer Firefighter Alliance represents Volunteer Firefighters across the U.S. The National Volunteer Fire Council represents fire and emergency services on a national level, providing advocacy, information, resources, and programs to support volunteer first responders. The NVFC includes 49 state-based firefighter associations, such as the Firemen&#x27;s Association of the State of New York (FASNY), which provides information, education, and training for the volunteer fire and emergency medical services throughout New York State.

Volunteer firefighters go through some or all of the same training that career personnel do, although the training varies among jurisdictions. When volunteers join a department, they often enroll in firefighting classes and other certifications that teach them how to become volunteer firefighters. Examples of these certifications include Firefighter I, Firefighter II, S-130/S-190, Emergency Medical Responder, and Emergency Medical Technician. Some departments also require recruits to complete a specified amount of in-house training. During this time, often called the probationary period, the recruit is known as a probationary firefighter, or &#x27;probie&#x27;. Once the probationary period is completed, the member is eligible to become a fully qualified firefighter.

In the United States, the Department of Labor classifies volunteer firefighters as firefighters that receive no compensation or nominal fees up to 20% of the compensation a full-time firefighter would receive in the same capacity. The DOL allows volunteer firefighters to receive benefits such as worker&#x27;s compensation, health insurance, life insurance, disability insurance, pension plans, length of service awards, and property tax relief. DOL-defined volunteer firefighters may be paid nominal fees on a per-call basis, per-shift basis, or various service requirements, but they may not be compensated based on productivity or with an hourly wage.

The terms &#x27;part paid&#x27; and &#x27;paid on-call&#x27; refer to firefighters who are receiving some compensation, but less than the compensation a full-time firefighter would receive. The terms may refer to volunteer firefighters who do not qualify as volunteers under the United States Department of Labor. These individuals may also volunteer time for training, public education, fund-raising, and other non-emergency department-related activities.

In late 19th and early 20th century American slang, volunteer firefighters were referred to as &#x27;&#x27;, although the origin of this is obscure.

==Financial support==
A VFD may be financially supported by taxes raised in a city, town, county, fire district, or other governmental entity, as well as corporate and other private donations, federal grants, and other assistance from auxiliary members, or firefighters&#x27; associations.

With these funds, the VFD acquires and operates the firefighting apparatus, equips and trains the firefighters, maintains the firehouse, and possibly also covers insurance, worker&#x27;s compensation, and other post-injury or retirement benefits. A VFD (or its governing entity) may also contract with other nearby departments to cover each other in a mutual aid (or automatic aid) pact as a means of assisting each other with equipment and manpower as necessary.

===Germany===
The material and extraordinary training of the Federal Agency for technical Relief(THW) is funded as a federal agency by the federal government of Germany. 99.7755% of the members volunteer their time.

==Expanded duties==
Depending upon the location and availability of other services, a VFD may be responsible for controlling structure fires as well as forest fires. Because it may be the only emergency services department for some distance, a rural VFD may also include community first responders, emergency medical technicians, Hazardous Materials Response, and other specially qualified rescue personnel. Law enforcement officers may also be trained in these related duties and overlap with the VFD. The VFD may also have duties as the local fire inspectors, arson investigators, and as fire safety and prevention education, in addition to being the local civil defense or disaster relief liaison.

==Emergency response==

A volunteer fire department is normally reached the same way as other emergency services, such as by calling 9-1-1 or 1-1-2. A central dispatcher then calls out the VFD, often through equipment such as pagers, radios, phone apps, or loud signals, such as a fire siren. Average response times are longer than with full-time services because the members must come from different distances to the station or to the incident. Such departments often have a fixed number of firefighters on staff at any given point in time, which sometimes equals the minimal numbers recommended. Some states allow the use of Length of Service Award Programs (LOSAPS) to provide these volunteer departments with a tool to assist in recruiting and retaining members. LOSAPS are simple programs that can be implemented with minimal taxpayer expense.

Some volunteer fire departments allow the use of courtesy lights or emergency lights and sirens by their members. In most states that allow both lights and sirens, this is a red light and siren that gives the responding member the same privileges as other emergency vehicles. In other jurisdictions, this may be a green or blue light without a siren. The use of such equipment varies from fire district to fire district based on the need for fast response, the distance that members live from the fire station, the size and amount of other traffic in the fire district as well as local and state law. Some departments restrict or prohibit the use of such emergency lights, even when allowed by state law, due to the increased risk of traffic accidents involving volunteers responding in emergency mode. In some states, volunteer firefighters and EMTs are eligible to receive specialty license plates for personal vehicles that identify them as trained emergency services personnel.

==Training==
Operational volunteer fire department members receive some form of training, either in a formal or informal setting, depending on the state and regulatory authority. The level and type of basic and specialty training vary across the country. The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) has several published standards for firefighter qualifications and training, including Standard for Fire Service Professional Qualifications Accreditation and Certification Systems, and Fire Fighter Professional Qualifications. These standards apply to both volunteer and career firefighters.

New members are referred to as &quot;recruits,&quot; &quot;rookies,&quot; &quot;probies&quot; (short for &quot;probationary&quot;), or even &quot;red hats&quot; in some departments that require the recruit to wear special gear or markings (such as a red helmet in some departments) to denote their ranking. Some departments allow (or even require) new recruits to ride along on fire apparatus as observers before undergoing the rigors of further fire training.

Firefighters typically progress through formal Fire Fighter I and Fire Fighter II training in accordance with national standards.

Specialty training can include wildland firefighting, technical rescue, swift water rescue, hazardous materials response, vehicle extrication, FAST team, fire instructor, fire officer, and others.

==Open house==

A VFD may hold an &quot;open house&quot; at their station. The event serves many purposes including demonstration, training, drill, fundraising, and recruitment. There is no particular format for the VFD open house. It can be formal or informal. The goal is to get public involvement in the VFD efforts. It is recommended that the open house should include demonstrations of equipment and show and tell. This allows the public to understand how the volunteers are organized in their local community and it is used as a public relations tool. The combination of demonstrations and drills allows the public and prospective volunteers to see volunteer firefighters in action while they are participating in the practices.

==See also==

* 1836 U.S. Patent Office fire
* 1877 U.S. Patent Office fire
* Compulsory Fire Service
* List of fire departments
* Medical volunteerism

==References==

==External links==
* Volunteer Firefighter Resource - VolunteerFD.com
* National Volunteer Fire Council
* Volunteer Firefighter Alliance</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q285852" start="2" end="27" title="Volunteer fire department" label="volunteer fire department"/>
<link wikidata="Q285852" start="29" end="32" title="Volunteer fire department" label="VFD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498663" start="39" end="54" title="fire department" label="fire department"/>
<link wikidata="Q188844" start="58" end="67" title="Volunteering" label="volunteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q814610" start="116" end="133" title="emergency service" label="emergency service"/>
<link wikidata="Q694554" start="248" end="263" title="Emergency telephone number" label="emergency calls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195942" start="314" end="326" title="fire station" label="fire station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150811" start="631" end="658" title="combination fire department" label="combination fire department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316623" start="829" end="849" title="retained firefighter" label="retained firefighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409977" start="1041" end="1048" title="Vigiles" label="Vigiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1065" end="1077" title="ancient Rome" label="ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q690649" start="1303" end="1310" title="La Boca" label="La Boca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="1312" end="1324" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011777" start="1724" end="1758" title="New South Wales Rural Fire Service" label="New South Wales Rural Fire Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451532" start="1772" end="1791" title="Fire and Rescue NSW" label="Fire and Rescue NSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q757138" start="1982" end="1988" title="HAZMAT" label="HAZMAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q757138" start="2032" end="2038" title="HAZMAT" label="HAZMAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825095" start="2464" end="2467" title="Metropolitan Fire Brigade (Melbourne)" label="MFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632973" start="2494" end="2497" title="Country Fire Authority" label="CFA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2561" end="2566" title="Department of Environment, Water, Land, and Planning, Victoria" label="DEWLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451517" start="2877" end="2918" title="Department of Fire and Emergency Services" label="Department of Fire and Emergency Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566124" start="3629" end="3671" title="South Australian Metropolitan Fire Service" label="South Australian Metropolitan Fire Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566104" start="3688" end="3725" title="South Australian Country Fire Service" label="South Australian Country Fire Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q896544" start="4003" end="4017" title="German fire services" label="Germany&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q10427676" start="4018" end="4043" title="Civil defense" label="civil protection services"/>
<link wikidata="Q697698" start="4094" end="4142" title="Technisches Hilfswerk" label="German Federal Agency for Technical Relief (THW)"/>
<link wikidata="Q694104" start="4219" end="4235" title="German Red Cross" label="German Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q14751117" start="4239" end="4262" title="Johanniter-Unfall-Hilfe" label="Johanniter-Unfall-Hilfe"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4629" end="4632" title=":de:BOS-Funk" label="BOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="6636" end="6641" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408" start="7062" end="7096" title="Zaprešić Volunteer Fire Department" label="Zaprešić Volunteer Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="7148" end="7155" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q74552" start="7183" end="7208" title="Brotherhood of Blackheads" label="Brotherhood of Blackheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="7305" end="7320" title="Russian Empire" label="Imperial Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14505142" start="7493" end="7510" title="Soviet occupation of the Baltic states (1940)" label="Soviet occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q61393829" start="7825" end="7837" title="Estonian Voluntary Rescue Association" label="Rescue Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132553" start="8238" end="8246" title="Naissaar" label="Naissaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q331594" start="8250" end="8256" title="Abruka" label="Abruka"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="8618" end="8625" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="8800" end="8805" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q314202" start="8923" end="8941" title="junior firefighter" label="junior firefighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="9117" end="9123" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="9188" end="9197" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14182" start="9265" end="9276" title="Banjarmasin" label="Banjarmasin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906" start="9278" end="9294" title="South Kalimantan" label="South Kalimantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625093" start="9670" end="9684" title="structure fire" label="structure fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41588" start="9995" end="9997" title="Indonesian rupiah" label="Rp"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="10096" end="10102" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409931" start="10171" end="10202" title="Israel Fire and Rescue Services" label="Israel Fire and Rescue Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827284" start="10454" end="10476" title="Auxiliary Fire Service" label="Auxiliary Fire Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="10486" end="10493" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079447" start="10509" end="10530" title="Civil Defence Ireland" label="Civil Defence Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="11162" end="11171" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815208" start="12434" end="12452" title="State Fire Service" label="State Fire Service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12624" end="12646" title="Voluntary Fire Service" label="Voluntary Fire Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="14078" end="14092" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437729" start="14364" end="14396" title="Scottish Fire and Rescue Service" label="Scottish Fire and Rescue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841065" start="14398" end="14440" title="Mid and West Wales Fire and Rescue Service" label="Mid and West Wales Fire and Rescue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057460" start="14445" end="14484" title="North Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service" label="North Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178039" start="14622" end="14657" title="Peterborough Volunteer Fire Brigade" label="Peterborough Volunteer Fire Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025656" start="14705" end="14743" title="Cambridgeshire Fire and Rescue Service" label="Cambridgeshire Fire and Rescue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827284" start="14851" end="14873" title="Auxiliary Fire Service" label="Auxiliary Fire Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806416" start="14924" end="14960" title="National Fire Protection Association" label="National Fire Protection Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="14996" end="15009" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979328" start="15115" end="15146" title="National Volunteer Fire Council" label="National Volunteer Fire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="15552" end="15566" title="New York State" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387031" start="15940" end="15951" title="S-130/S-190" label="S-130/S-190"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002970" start="15953" end="15980" title="Emergency Medical Responder" label="Emergency Medical Responder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497094" start="15986" end="16014" title="Emergency Medical Technician" label="Emergency Medical Technician"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246905" start="16190" end="16214" title="probationary firefighter" label="probationary firefighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944185" start="18255" end="18265" title="mutual aid (emergency services)" label="mutual aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625093" start="18710" end="18724" title="structure fire" label="structure fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="18737" end="18749" title="bushfire" label="forest fires"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972859" start="18856" end="18881" title="community first responder" label="community first responder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497094" start="18884" end="18912" title="emergency medical technician" label="emergency medical technician"/>
<link wikidata="Q898372" start="19130" end="19144" title="fire inspector" label="fire inspector"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451611" start="19147" end="19165" title="arson investigator" label="arson investigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997557" start="19175" end="19186" title="fire safety" label="fire safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451640" start="19191" end="19201" title="fire prevention" label="prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q10427676" start="19244" end="19257" title="civil defense" label="civil defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="19261" end="19276" title="disaster relief" label="disaster relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q533806" start="19420" end="19425" title="9-1-1" label="9-1-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061257" start="19429" end="19434" title="1-1-2" label="1-1-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q832436" start="19513" end="19518" title="pager" label="pager"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="19521" end="19526" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q205234" start="19568" end="19578" title="fire siren" label="fire siren"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049917" start="19914" end="19955" title="Length of service award program" label="Length of Service Award Programs (LOSAPS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178489" start="20186" end="20201" title="courtesy lights" label="courtesy lights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20853" end="20867" title="Courtesy lights#Danger" label="increased risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806416" start="21379" end="21415" title="National Fire Protection Association" label="National Fire Protection Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451805" start="22453" end="22462" title="firefighter assist and search team" label="FAST team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742841" start="22913" end="22926" title="Show and tell (education)" label="show and tell"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="23043" end="23059" title="public relations" label="public relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902322" start="23260" end="23288" title="1836 U.S. Patent Office fire" label="1836 U.S. Patent Office fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555603" start="23291" end="23319" title="1877 U.S. Patent Office fire" label="1877 U.S. Patent Office fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250930" start="23322" end="23345" title="Compulsory Fire Service" label="Compulsory Fire Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903015" start="23348" end="23372" title="List of fire departments" label="List of fire departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q109373949" start="23375" end="23395" title="Medical volunteerism" label="Medical volunteerism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292005" wikidata="Q969099" url="?curid=292005" title="Leon Rooke">
<text>Leon Rooke, CM (born September 11, 1934) is a Canadian novelist. He was born in Roanoke Rapids, North Carolina in the United States. Educated at the University of North Carolina, he moved to Canada in 1969. He now lives in Toronto, Ontario.

Rooke helped to found the Eden Mills Writers&#x27; Festival in 1989. In 2002, Rooke championed &quot;The Stone Angel&quot; by Margaret Laurence in that year&#x27;s edition of &quot;Canada Reads&quot;. Rooke&#x27;s work also appears in .

In 2007, he was made a Member of the Order of Canada.

==Bibliography==

===Novels===
*&quot;Fat Woman&quot; (1980) — nominated for a Governor General&#x27;s Award
*&quot;Shakespeare&#x27;s Dog&quot; (1983) — winner of the 1983 Governor General&#x27;s Award for Fiction
*&quot;A Good Baby&quot; (1989)
*&quot;Who Goes There&quot; (1998)
*&quot;The Fall of Gravity&quot; (2000)
*&quot;The Beautiful Wife&quot; (2005)

===Short story collections===
Approximately 350 short stories published.
*&quot;Last One Home Sleeps in the Yellow Bed&quot; (1968)
*&quot;Vault&quot; (1973)
*&quot;The Love Parlour&quot; (1977)
*&quot;The Broad Back of the Angel&quot; (1977)
*&quot;Cry Evil&quot; (1980)
*&quot;Death Suite&quot; (1981)
*&quot;The Birth Control King of the Upper Volta&quot; (1982)
*&quot;Sing Me No Love Songs, I&#x27;ll Say You No Prayers: Selected Stories&quot; (1984)
*&quot;A Bolt of White Cloth&quot; (1984)
*&quot;How I Saved the Province&quot; (1989)
*&quot;The Happiness of Others&quot; (1991)
*&quot;Who Do You Love&quot; (1992)
*&quot;Art. Three Fictions in Prose&quot; (1997)
*&quot;Oh! Twenty-Seven Stories&quot; (1997)
*&quot;Painting the Dog: The Best Stories of Leon Rooke&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Hitting the Charts: Selected Stories&quot; (2006)
*&quot;The Last Shot: Eleven Stories and a Novella&quot; (2009)
*&quot;Swinging Through Dixie&quot; (2016)
*&quot;Fabulous Fictions and Peculiar Practices&quot;, with Tony Calzetta (2016)

===Poetry===
*&quot;Hot Poppies&quot; (2005)
*&quot;The April Poems&quot; (2013)

==References==
==External links==
*Leon Rooke&#x27;s entry in The Canadian Encyclopedia
*Blackbird: an online journal of literature and the arts</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q969099" start="0" end="10" title="Leon Rooke" label="Leon Rooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="12" end="14" title="Order of Canada" label="CM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="55" end="63" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028322" start="80" end="94" title="Roanoke Rapids" label="Roanoke Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="96" end="110" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q192334" start="149" end="177" title="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill" label="University of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="223" end="230" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="232" end="239" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336891" start="268" end="301" title="Eden Mills Writers&amp;#x27; Festival" label="Eden Mills Writers&amp;#x27; Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096633" start="343" end="358" title="The Stone Angel" label="The Stone Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q443591" start="368" end="385" title="Margaret Laurence" label="Margaret Laurence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031998" start="423" end="435" title="Canada Reads" label="Canada Reads"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="517" end="532" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405744" start="614" end="643" title="1980 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q60786519" start="651" end="673" title="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Dog" label="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405750" start="703" end="749" title="1983 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="1983 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q130334" start="2073" end="2098" title="The Canadian Encyclopedia" label="The Canadian Encyclopedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292011" wikidata="Q42622" url="?curid=292011" title="Suzhou">
<text>Suzhou is a major prefecture-level city in southern Jiangsu province, China. As part of the Yangtze Delta megalopolis, it is a major economic center and focal point of trade and commerce.

Founded in 514 BC, Suzhou rapidly grew in size by the Eastern Han dynasty, mostly due to emigration from northern China. From the 10th century onwards, it has been an important economic, cultural, and commercial center, as well as the largest non-capital city in the world, until it was overtaken by Shanghai. Since economic reforms began in 1978, Suzhou attained GDP growth rates of about 14% in 35 years. In 2023, Suzhou had 5 million registered residents. Suzhou is listed as the 48th cities by scientific output according to the Nature Index 2022. The city is home to universities, including Soochow University, Suzhou University of Science and Technology, Xi&#x27;an Jiaotong–Liverpool University, and Changshu Institute of Technology.

The city&#x27;s tourist attractions include canals, stone bridges, pagodas, and gardens. The Classical Gardens of Suzhou were added to the list of the UNESCO World Heritage Sites in 1997 and 2000.

==Names==
During the Zhou dynasty, a settlement known as Gusu after nearby Mount Gusu () became the capital of the state of Wu. From this role, it also came to be called Wu as well. In 514BC, King Helü of Wu established a new capital nearby at Helü City and this grew into the modern city. During the Warring States period, Helü City continued to serve as the local seat of government. From the areas it administered, it became known as Wuxian (. &quot;Wu County&quot;) and Wujun (&quot;Wu Commandery&quot;). Under the Qin, it was known as Kuaiji after its greatly enlarged commandery, which was named for the reputed resting place of Yu the Great near modern Shaoxing in Zhejiang.

The name &quot;Suzhou&quot; was first officially used for the city in AD 589 during the Sui dynasty. &quot;Su&quot; ( or ) in its name is a contraction of the old name Gusu. It refers to &quot;Satisfied place&quot; in the Old Yue language. The &quot;zhou&quot; originally meant something like a province or county (cf. Guizhou), but often came to be used metonymously for the capital of such a region (cf. Guangzhou, Hangzhou, etc.). Suzhou is the Hanyu Pinyin spelling of the Putonghua pronunciation of the name. Prior to the adoption of pinyin, it was variously romanized as Soo-chow, Suchow, or Su-chow.

==History==
Suzhou, the cradle of Wu culture, is one of the oldest towns in the Yangtze Basin. By the Spring and Autumn period of the Zhou, local Baiyue tribes named the Gou Wu are recorded living in the area which would become the modern city of Suzhou. These tribes formed villages on the edges of the hills above the wetlands surrounding Lake Tai.

Sima Qian&#x27;s &quot;Records of the Grand Historian&quot; records traditional accounts that the Zhou lord Taibo established the state of Wu at nearby Wuxi during the 11th centuryBC, civilizing the local people and improving their agriculture and mastery of irrigation. The Wu court later moved to Gusu within the area of modern Suzhou. In 514BC, King Helü of Wu relocated his court nearby and called the settlement Helü City after himself. His minister Wu Zixu was closely involved with its planning and it was this site that grew into present-day Suzhou. The height of his tower on Gusu Hill (&quot;Gusutai&quot;) passed into Chinese legend. In 496BC, King Helü was buried at Tiger Hill. In 473BC, Wu was defeated and annexed by Yue, a kingdom to its southeast; Yue was annexed in turn by Chu in 306BC. Remnants of the ancient kingdom include pieces of its 2,500-year-old city wall and the gate through it at Pan Gate.

The city was originally laid out according to a symbolic three-by-three grid of nine squares, with the royal palace occupying the central position.

During the Warring States period, Suzhou was the seat of Wu County (, Wú xiàn) and Commandery (, &quot;Wú jùn&quot;). Following the Qin Empire&#x27;s conquest of the area in 222BC, it was made the capital of Kuaiji Commandery, including lands stretching from the south bank of the Yangtze to the unconquered interior of Minyue in southern Zhejiang. Amid the collapse of the Qin, Kuaiji&#x27;s governor Yin Tong attempted to organize his own rebellion only to be betrayed and executed by Xiang Liang and his nephew Xiang Yu, who launched their own rebellion from the city.

When the Grand Canal was completed, Suzhou found itself strategically located on a major trade route. Suzhou served as the regional metropolis of industry and foreign commerce on the southeastern coast of China. During the Tang dynasty, the great poet Bai Juyi constructed the Shantang Canal (better known as &quot;Shantang Street&quot;) to connect the city with Tiger Hill for tourists. In AD1035, the Suzhou Confucian Temple was founded by famed poet and writer Fan Zhongyan. It became a venue for the imperial civil examinations and then developed into the modern Suzhou High School in the 1910s.
After February 1130, riots and unrest disrupted Suzhou. In 1356, Suzhou became the capital of Zhang Shicheng, King of Wu. In 1367, Zhang&#x27;s rival Zhu Yuanzhang took the city after a 10-month siege. Zhu who was soon to proclaim himself the first emperor of the Ming dynasty demolished the old city walls at the center of Suzhou&#x27;s walled city and imposed crushing taxes on the city and prefecture&#x27;s powerful families. Despite the heavy taxation and the forced exile of some prominent citizens&#x27; south, Suzhou was soon prosperous again. During the early Ming, Suzhou Prefecture supervised the Yangtze shoals which later became Shanghai&#x27;s Chongming Island. For centuries the city, with its surroundings as an economic base, represented an extraordinary source of tax revenue.

When the shipwrecked Korean official Choe Bu had a chance to see much of Eastern China from Zhejiang to Liaoning on his way home in 1488, he described Suzhou in his travel report as exceeding every other city. Under the Ming, Suzhou was a prosperous center of the Nanzhili area controlled by the secondary capital at Nanjing; scholar-officials constructed the area&#x27;s most famous private gardens during this period in a &quot;Jiangnan style&quot; copied at the time by Shanghai&#x27;s Yu Garden and later by parts of the empress dowager Cixi&#x27;s Summer Palace.

After the Qing occupied the area in 1644 and 1645, it was reorganized as Jiangnan Province, whose &quot;Right&quot; Governor controlled its eastern prefectures from Suzhou until the division of Jiangnan into the separate provinces of Jiangsu and Anhui at some point during the reign of the Qianlong Emperor. The Taipings captured the city in 1860. Many of its former buildings and gardens were &quot;almost... a heap of ruins&quot; by the time of their recovery by Charles Gordon&#x27;s Ever-Victorious Army in November 1863. Nonetheless, by 1880, its population was estimated to have recovered to about 500,000, which remained stable for the next few decades. In the late 19th century, the town was particularly known for its wide range of silks and its Chinese-language publishing industry. The town was first opened to direct foreign trades by the Treaty of Shimonoseki ending the First Sino-Japanese War and by the most favored nation clauses of earlier unequal treaties with the Great Powers. The new expatriates opened a European-and-Chinese school in 1900 and the Suzhou railway station, connecting it with Shanghai, opened on 16 July 1906. Just prior to World War I, there were 7000 silk looms in operation, as well as a cotton mill and a large trade in rice.
As late as the early 20th century, much of the city consisted of islands connected by rivers, creeks, and canals to the surrounding countryside. Prior to their demolition, the city walls ran in a circuit of about with four large suburbs lying outside. The Japanese invaded in 1937, and many gardens were again devastated by the end of the war. In the early 1950s, restoration was done on the Humble Administrator&#x27;s Garden and the Lingering Garden.

==Administrative divisions==

The urban core of Suzhou, Gusu District, is informally called the &quot;Old Town.&quot; Suzhou Industrial Park is to the east of the old town, and Suzhou High &amp; New Technology Development Zone is to the west. In 2000, the original Wu County was divided into two districts, Xiangcheng and Wuzhong. They now form the northern and southern parts of the city of Suzhou. In 2012, the original Wujiang City became Wujiang District of Suzhou City.

Suzhou is one of the most prosperous cities in China. Its development has a direct correlation with the growth of its satellite cities, including Kunshan, Taicang, Changshu, and Zhangjiagang, which together with the city of Suzhou form the Suzhou prefecture. The Suzhou prefecture is home to many high-tech enterprises.
==Geography==
Suzhou is on the Lake Tai Plain south of the Yangtze River, about to the west of Shanghai and just over east of Nanjing.

===Climate===
Suzhou has a four-season humid subtropical climate with hot, humid summers and cool, cloudy, damp winters with occasional snowfall (Köppen climate classification &quot;Cfa&quot;). Northwesterly winds blowing from Siberia during winter can cause temperatures to fall below freezing at night, while southerly or southwesterly winds during the summer can push temperatures above . The hottest temperature recorded since 1951 was at on 7 August 2013, and the lowest at on 16 January 1958, though an unofficial record low of was recorded on 10 January 1933.
==Cityscape and environment==
===Classical Gardens of Suzhou===

Suzhou is famous for its over 60 Classical Gardens, collectively a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The city has the most UNESCO-recognized gardens in the world.
The Humble Administrator&#x27;s Garden and Lingering Garden are among the four most famous classical gardens in China. The Canglang Pavilion, Lion Grove Garden, Humble Administrator&#x27;s Garden and Lingering Garden, respectively representing the garden styles of traditional architecture are called the four most famous gardens in Suzhou. Other gardens inscribed on the World Heritage List include the Couple&#x27;s Retreat Garden, the Garden of Cultivation, and the Retreat and Reflection Garden. Five Peaks Garden which dates to the Ming dynasty (1522–1566) is also located in the Suzhou. Ming painter Wen Boren established his home on the site. The original name was Qiayin Shanfang and the garden is located at Changmin West Street.

===Temples===
*Hanshan Temple
*Xiyuan Temple
*Xuanmiao Temple
*Lingyanshan Temple
*Chongyuan Temple

=== Canals and Historic Districts ===
The Suzhou section of the Jiangnan Canal, Grand Canal (China), includes ten city gates and over 20 stone bridges of traditional design and historic areas that have been well preserved, as well as temples and pavilions. 

 There are a full 24 waterways in Suzhou near the Grand Canal.

In 2015, both 800-year-old Pingjiang Road Historical Block () and 1,200-year-old Shantang Street Scenic Area () were added to the list of China&#x27;s &quot;National Historic and Cultural Streets&quot;.

Pingjiang Road runs parallel to the Pingjiang River for 1.5 kilometers and is lined with homes and some teahouses. Shantang Street, over twice as long at 3.8 km, is described by the BBC as retaining &quot;the alluring qualities of an old canal-side street: whitewashed buildings are completed by red-tasseled lanterns that swing softly in the breeze, adding to the charm of the river bank&quot;.

Boat tours are offered on the waterways of this city that was dubbed the &quot;Venice of the East&quot; by Marco Polo because of its criss-crossing canals and stone bridges. The Grand Canal (from Beijing to Zhejiang province) is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

===Resorts and natural reserves===
Suzhou Taihu National Tourism and Vacation Zone () is in the western part of Suzhou, from the city center.

===Skyscrapers===

Gate to the East is a 301.8-meter, 74-story skyscraper in Suzhou&#x27;s central business district, built in 2015 at a cost of US$700 million and is currently the tallest building in Suzhou.

Suzhou IFS is a building home to 95 floors near Gate to the East. You can see the tower from Huqiu, which is a special tourist attraction in Suzhou.

===Pan Gate===

Pan Gate is on the southwest corner of the Main Canal or encircling canal of Suzhou. Originally built during the Warring States period in the state of Wu, historians estimate it to be around 2,500 years old. It is now part of the &quot;Pan Gate Scenic Area&quot;. It is known for the &quot;three landmarks of Pan Gate&quot;. They are the Ruiguang Pagoda, the earliest pagoda in Suzhou built in 247BC, the &quot;Wu Gate Bridge&quot;, the entrance to the gate at that time over the water passage and the highest bridge in Suzhou at the time, and the &quot;Pan Gate&quot;. The Ruigang Pagoda is constructed of brick with wooden platforms and has Buddhist carvings at its base.

===Baodai Bridge===
Baodai Bridge stretches across the Tantai Lake in the suburbs of Suzhou. To raise money to finance the bridge, the magistrate donated his expensive belt, hence the name. The bridge was first built in 806 A.D. in the Tang dynasty and has 53 arches with a length of 317 meters. It was made out of stone from Jinshan Mountain and is the longest standing bridge of its kind in China. The bridge was included on the list of national monuments (resolution 5–285) in 2001.

===Tiger Hill===
Tiger Hill is known for its natural environment and historical sites. The hill is so named because it is said to look like a crouching tiger. Another legend states that a white tiger appeared on the hill to guard it following the burial The hill has been a tourist destination for hundreds, if not thousands, of years, as is evident from the poetry and calligraphy carved into rocks on the hill. The Song dynasty poet, Su Shi said, &quot;It is a lifelong pity if having visited Suzhou you did not visit Tiger Hill.&quot;

===Pagodas===
Yunyan Pagoda (or Huqiu Tower), built in 961, is a Chinese pagoda built on Tiger Hill in Suzhou. It has several other names, including the &quot;Leaning Tower of China&quot; (as referred to by historian O.G. Ingles) and the Yunyan Temple Tower. The tower rises to a height of 47 m (154 ft). It is a seven-story octagonal building built with blue bricks. In more than a thousand years the tower has gradually slanted due to forces of nature. Now the top and bottom of the tower vary by 2.32 meters. The entire structure weighs some , supported by internal brick columns. However, the tower leans roughly 3 degrees due to the cracking of two supporting columns.

Beisi Pagoda or North Temple Pagoda is a Chinese pagoda at Bao&#x27;en Temple in Suzhou. It rises nine stories in a height of . It is the tallest Chinese pagoda south of the Yangtze river.

Twin Pagodas () lie in the Dinghui Temple Lane in the southeastern corner of the city proper of Suzhou. They are artistic and natural as they are close at hand. One of them is called &quot;Clarity-Dispensing Pagoda,&quot; and the other, the &quot;Beneficence Pagoda&quot;; they are in the same form of architecture. There are many legends about this one-thousand-year-old pagodas. It is charming that the exquisite and straight Twin Pagoda look like two inserted writing brushes. There was originally a single-story house with three rooms just like a writing brush holder with the shadows of the two pagodas reclining on its roof at sunset. To the east of the pagoda is a square five-story bell building built in the Ming dynasty which appears exactly like a thick ink stick. So there is a saying that &quot;the Twin Pagodas are as writing brushes while the bell building as ink stick&quot;.

===Museums===

The city&#x27;s major museums include the Suzhou Museum (designed by I. M. Pei), Suzhou Silk Museum, and the China Kunqu Museum.

=== Hospitals ===
As a result of its recent rapid population increase, healthcare demand in Suzhou is increasing rapidly. In July 2019, Washington University School of Medicine announced a collaboration with Huici Health Management Co., and the Xiangcheng District, to open the new Huici Medical Center, which will include a 1,000-bed hospital for adult and pediatric patients. Once the hospital is unveiled, Washington University doctors in St. Louis will be able to provide long-distance health-care services to patients in China through a telemedicine program.

==Demographics==

The population of Suzhou is predominantly Han Chinese. The official language of broadcast, instruction, etc. is Mandarin Chinese, although many speak a local dialect known as Suzhounese, a member of the Wu language family. In addition to American and European expatriates, there is a large Korean community in Suzhou. The Industrial Bank of Korea (IBK) estimated that there were 15,000 Koreans in the municipality in 2014. That year 850 Korean companies operated in Suzhou, and the Koreans made up the largest number of students at the Suzhou Singapore International School.

==Economy==
Suzhou&#x27;s economy is based primarily on its large manufacturing sector—China&#x27;s first largest(from 2020)—including iron and steel, IT and electronic equipment, and textile products. The city&#x27;s service sector is notably well-developed, primarily owing to tourism, which brought in a total of RMB 152 billion of revenue in 2013. Suzhou&#x27;s overall GDP exceeded RMB 1.3 trillion in 2013 (up 9.6 percent from the year previous).

The city is also one of China&#x27;s foremost destinations for foreign investment, based on its relative proximity to Shanghai and comparatively low operating costs. The municipal government has enacted various measures to encourage FDI in a number of manufacturing (e.g. pharmaceutical, electronic goods, automobile) and service (e.g. banking, logistics, research services) sectors. Included among these measures is a preferential tax policy for limited partnership venture capital enterprises in the Suzhou Industrial Park.

Suzhou is a highly developed economic region in China and is the economic centre, industrial, commercial and logistical hub city of Jiangsu province, as well as an important financial, cultural, artistic, educational and transportation centre.

Agriculture

In 2013, total grain production reached 1,311,200 tonnes, a decrease of 2.9%. Grain supply was effectively guaranteed through the vigorous construction of commodity grain production bases, wholesale grain markets and reserve systems.

Traditional handicrafts

Suzhou has a long history of reeling silkworms and has always been an important base for silk production in China. Since the Song and Yuan dynasties, Suzhou has been one of the centres of silk weaving and dyeing in the country, and in the Ming dynasty, Suzhou silk was praised as the &quot;clothing of the world&quot;.

===Development zones===
====Suzhou Industrial Park====

The Suzhou Industrial Park (SIP) is the largest cooperative project between the Chinese and the Singaporean government. It is beside Jinji Lake, which lies to the east of the Suzhou Old City. On 26 February 1994, Vice Premier Li Lanqing and Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew, representing China and Singapore respectively, signed an agreement to jointly develop Suzhou Industrial Park (originally called the Singapore Industrial Park). The project officially commenced on 12 May in the same year. SIP has a jurisdiction area of , of which, the China-Singapore cooperation area covers with a planned residential population of 1.2 million.

SIP is home to the Suzhou Dushu Lake Science and Education Innovation District, an area of universities and higher education institutions, including Soochow University and Xi&#x27;an Jiaotong-Liverpool University. Suzhou Industrial Park is also a popular residential district for many foreigners who work and live in Suzhou, as well as &#x27;new Suzhou&#x27; residents who migrate to the area in search of work opportunities.
====Suzhou Industrial Park Export Processing Zone====
The Suzhou Industrial Park Export Processing Zone was approved to be established by the government in April 2000, with a planning area of . It is in Suzhou Industrial Park set up by China and Singapore. Inside the Export Processing Zone, all the infrastructures are of high standard.

====Suzhou New District====

The Suzhou New District was established in 1990. In November 1992, the zone was approved to be the national-level hi-tech industrial zone. By the end of 2007, foreign-invested companies had a registered capital worth of US$13 billion, of which US$6.8 billion was paid in. SND hosts now more than 1,500 foreign companies. Some 40 Fortune 500 companies set up 67 projects in the district.

==Sports==
The Suzhou Dongwu currently play in China League One, the second highest level of Chinese professional football competition. The 13,000 seat Suzhou Industrial Park Sports Arena was one of the venues for the 2019 FIBA Basketball World Cup.

==Transportation==
===Railway===
Suzhou is on the Shanghai-Nanjing corridor which carries three parallel railways. Suzhou railway station, near the city center, is among the busiest passenger stations in China. It is served by the Beijing–Shanghai railway (mostly &quot;conventional&quot; trains to stations throughout China) and the Shanghai-Nanjing intercity railway (high-speed D- and G-series trains providing frequent service primarily between Shanghai and Nanjing). It takes only 25 minutes to reach Shanghai railway station on the fastest G-series trains and less than 1 hour to Nanjing.

The Suzhou North railway station, a few kilometers to the north, is on the Beijing–Shanghai high-speed railway (opened 2011), served by high-speed trains to Beijing, Qingdao, etc.

Other stations on the Beijing–Shanghai railway and the Shanghai–Nanjing intercity railway serve other points in the same corridor within Suzhou Prefecture-level city, such as Kunshan. In between Suzhou and Kunshan South railway station, Suzhou Industrial Park railway station is also an important station for people visiting and living in the areas.

The northern part of the prefectural area, including Zhangjiagang, Changshu and Taicang, were the last areas to be connected by rail; the Shanghai–Suzhou–Nantong railway reached there in 2020.

===Highways===
The Nanjing-Shanghai Expressway connects Suzhou with Shanghai, alternatively, there is the Yangtze Riverine Expressway and the Suzhou-Jiaxing-Hangzhou Expressway. In 2005, the Suzhou Outer Ring was completed, linking the peripheral county-level cities of Taicang, Kunshan, and Changshu. China National Highway 312 also passes through Suzhou.

===Water transport===

Port of Suzhou, on the right bank of the Yangtze River, dealt with 428 million tons of cargo and 5.86 million TEU containers in 2012, which made it the busiest inland river port in the world by annual cargo tonnage and container volume.

===Metro===

The Suzhou Rail Transit currently has nine lines in operation and one line in construction. The masterplan consists of nine independent lines. Line 1 started operation on 28 April 2012, Line 2 started operation on 28 December 2013, and Line 4 started operation in 2017, Suzhou Railway Line 5 began operation in June 2021. Suzhou railway Line 6 finished construction and opened in June of 2024, followed by Line 8 in September and Line 7 in December. The Suzhou rail system is connected with the Shanghai Metro via line 11, where it opened in June 2023.

===Tram===
The Suzhou Tram system has two routes in the Suzhou New District.

===Bus===
Suzhou has public bus routes that run into all parts of the city. Fares are flat rated, usually 1 Yuan for a non-air-conditioned bus and 2 Yuan for an air-conditioned one. The Suzhou BRT, a -long bus rapid transit system opened in 2008, operates 5 lines using elevated busways and bus-only lanes throughout the city.

==Culture==
*Opera: Kunqu originated in the Suzhou region, as does the much later Suzhou Opera. Ballad-singing, or Suzhou pingtan, is a local form of storytelling that mixes singing (accompanied by the pipa and sanxian) with portions in spoken dialect.
*Silk: throughout China&#x27;s Imperial past, Suzhou silk has been associated with high-quality silk products, supplying silks to ancient royal families. By the 13th century, Suzhou was already the center of the profitable silk trade.
*Song brocade: Suzhou Song-style brocade is one of China&#x27;s three famous brocades, together with Nanjing Yun brocade and Sichuan Shu brocade. This Song-style brocade, made of silk, has a thin yet strong material with flashy colors, exquisite patterns, and soft texture. Suzhou&#x27;s brocade production can be traced back to the Five Dynasties. It prospered in the Song dynasty. After the government moved the capital southward, the country&#x27;s political and cultural center moved to the Yangtze River area.
*Cuisine: Suzhou cuisine (苏帮菜), which is part of Jiangsu cuisine, including Yangcheng Lake large crab, Squirrel fish, etc. 
*Handicrafts: Suzhou embroidery, fans, Chinese musical instruments, scroll mounting, lanterns, mahogany furniture, jade carving, silk tapestry, traditional painting pigments of Jiangenxutang Studio, the New Year&#x27;s wood-block prints of Taohuawu Studio.
*Paintings
*Calligraphic art
*Suzhou Silk Hand Embroidery Art
*Suzhou is the original place of &quot;Jasmine&quot;, a song sung by Chinese singers or actresses thousands of times on the occasions of almost every important meetings or celebrations. Jasmine is the symbol of Suzhou as well as Tai Hu Lake.
*Suzhou Gardens: Gardens in Suzhou have an ancient history. The first garden in Suzhou belonged to the emperor of Wu State in Spring and Autumn period (600 BC). More than 200 gardens existed in Suzhou between the 16th and 18th centuries. Gardens in Suzhou were built according to the style of Chinese paintings. Every view in a garden can be seen as a piece of Chinese painting and the whole garden is a huge piece of Chinese paintings. At present, the Humble Administrator&#x27;s Garden, built in 16th, is the largest private garden in Suzhou. It belonged to by Wang Xianchen, an imperial censor. 
*Suzhou embroidery together with embroidery of Hunan, Sichuan and Guangdong are called as the &quot;Four Famous Embroideries&quot;. Suzhou tapestry method is done in fine silks and gold thread. Other art forms found in this area are sculpture, Song brocade, jade and rosewood carving. Suzhou embroidery, acknowledged as a cultural heritage, has involved many cultural practitioners in advancing technology and skills with ICH-resources to better engage in economic pursuits.
*The Suzhou Museum has a rich collection of relics from many eras. The collection includes revolutionary records, stele carving, folk customs, drama and verse, Suzhou embroidery, silk cloth, gardens, coins and Buddhist artifacts.
*Wedding gowns

==Notable people==

Lu Xun () (183–245) military general and politician of the state of Eastern Wu during the Three Kingdoms era, most famous for his defeat of Liu Bei in the Battle of Xiaoting.

Feng Menglong () (1574–1645) famous vernacular writer and poet of the late Ming dynasty.

Tang Yin () (1470–1524) one of the most renowned painter in China history, calligrapher, and poet of the Ming dynasty, better known by his courtesy name Tang Bohu ()

Wen Zhengming () (1470–1559) painter and poet of the Ming dynasty, the founder of Wu School (), one of Four Masters of the Ming Dynasty

Weng Tonghe () (1830–1904) Chinese Confucian scholar and imperial tutor of the Tongzhi and Guangxu emperors in the late Qing dynasty, who is one of the most obdurate old guard defending the traditional Confucianism practices while being stubbornly against reform efforts to westernise the country.

I. M. Pei () (1917–2019) One of the best architects in China history, being recognised as the &#x27;last master of high modernist architecture&#x27;, famous for his design of Louvre Pyramid, Hong Kong Bank of China tower, Singapore OCBC Centre, East Building of National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., Germany Historical Museum, etc.

Cheng Kaijia () (1918–2018) A nuclear physicist and engineer. One of the key figure in China&#x27;s nuclear weapons development and a founding father of the Two Bombs, One Satellite project.

Tsung-Dao Lee () (1926–2024) Physicist, who won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1957 at the age of 30, for his work on the violation of the parity law in weak interactions.

Meng Jianzhu () (1947–) Politician, former member of the Politburo and Secretary of the Central Political and Legal Affairs Commission

==Education==
===Universities and colleges===
*Changshu Institute of Technology
*Duke Kunshan University
*KEDGE Business School
*Jiangnan Social University
*Jiangsu University Zhangjiagang Campus
*Renmin University of China Suzhou Campus
*Skema Business School – Chinese campus of the French business school
*Soochow University
*Suzhou Polytechnic Institute of Agriculture
*Suzhou University of Science and Technology
*Xi&#x27;an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
*Suzhou City University

====Under construction====
*Nanjing University Suzhou Campus
*Northwestern Polytechnical University Taicang Campus

===High schools===
*Changshu High School
*Dulwich College Suzhou
*Dulwich International High School Suzhou
*Kunshan Senior High School
*Suzhou Experimental High School
*Suzhou High School
*Suzhou Singapore International School
*Suzhou No.10 High School
*Suzhou Wuxian High School ()
*Taicang Senior High School
*United World College (UWC) Changshu China
*Zhenze Middle School
*Jiangsu Province Mudu senior High School

===Postgraduate institutions===
*Southeast University-Monash University Joint Graduate School
*Suzhou Dushu Lake Higher Education Town (National University of Singapore and Fudan Joint Graduate School, Nanjing University Graduate School, etc.)

===Others===
*Japanese School of Suzhou
*Overseas Chinese Academy Chiway Suzhou ()

==See also==

*List of twin towns and sister cities in China
*Port of Suzhou

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Works cited ===
*.

== External sources==
*Economic profile for Suzhou at HKTDC

*Official Resource for English-speaking travelers
*Official website for Suzhou&#x27;s municipal government
*Suzhou city guide with open directory (Jiangsu Network)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42622" start="0" end="6" title="Suzhou" label="Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q748149" start="18" end="39" title="prefecture-level city" label="prefecture-level city"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963" start="52" end="59" title="Jiangsu" label="Jiangsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="70" end="75" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195076" start="92" end="105" title="Yangtze Delta" label="Yangtze Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q471822" start="106" end="117" title="megalopolis" label="megalopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="243" end="262" title="Eastern Han dynasty" label="Eastern Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138179" start="294" end="308" title="Northern and southern China" label="northern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="436" end="448" title="capital city" label="capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="505" end="535" title="Chinese economic reform" label="economic reforms began in 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q105082043" start="677" end="704" title="List of cities by scientific output" label="cities by scientific output"/>
<link wikidata="Q51431089" start="722" end="734" title="Nature Index" label="Nature Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639978" start="785" end="803" title="Soochow University (Suzhou)" label="Soochow University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579566" start="805" end="848" title="Suzhou University of Science and Technology" label="Suzhou University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562485" start="850" end="890" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an Jiaotong–Liverpool University" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an Jiaotong–Liverpool University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072128" start="896" end="928" title="Changshu Institute of Technology" label="Changshu Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280" start="989" end="996" title="bridges" label="bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q199451" start="998" end="1004" title="pagoda" label="pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144337" start="1024" end="1051" title="Classical Gardens of Suzhou" label="Classical Gardens of Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1082" end="1088" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1089" end="1108" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="1150" end="1162" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q836688" start="1244" end="1249" title="ancient Chinese states" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q912068" start="1253" end="1255" title="Wu (state)" label="Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279924" start="1321" end="1336" title="King Helü of Wu" label="King Helü of Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="1430" end="1451" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092999" start="1582" end="1591" title="Wu County" label="Wu County"/>
<link wikidata="Q10919741" start="1616" end="1629" title="Wu Commandery" label="Wu Commandery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="1648" end="1651" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790816" start="1739" end="1760" title="Mount Kuaiji" label="reputed resting place"/>
<link wikidata="Q627784" start="1764" end="1776" title="Yu the Great" label="Yu the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q42666" start="1789" end="1797" title="Shaoxing" label="Shaoxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="1801" end="1809" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="1900" end="1911" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070912" start="2090" end="2125" title="Zhou (Chinese administrative division)" label="something like a province or county"/>
<link wikidata="Q47097" start="2131" end="2138" title="Guizhou" label="Guizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="2167" end="2179" title="metonymy" label="metonymously"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="2218" end="2227" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="2229" end="2237" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="2260" end="2272" title="Hanyu Pinyin" label="Hanyu Pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q117073" start="2376" end="2385" title="romanization of Chinese" label="romanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307095" start="2454" end="2464" title="Wu (region)" label="Wu culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="2500" end="2507" title="Yangtze River" label="Yangtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q185047" start="2522" end="2546" title="Spring and Autumn period" label="Spring and Autumn period"/>
<link wikidata="Q912068" start="2590" end="2596" title="Gou Wu" label="Gou Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q140712" start="2761" end="2769" title="Lake Tai" label="Lake Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9372" start="2772" end="2781" title="Sima Qian" label="Sima Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q272530" start="2795" end="2825" title="Records of the Grand Historian" label="Records of the Grand Historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="2870" end="2874" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010535" start="2880" end="2885" title="Wu Taibo" label="Taibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q912068" start="2902" end="2913" title="state of Wu" label="state of Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268609" start="3227" end="3234" title="Wu Zixu" label="Wu Zixu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013177" start="3451" end="3461" title="Tiger Hill, Suzhou" label="Tiger Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137403" start="3504" end="3507" title="State of Yue" label="Yue"/>
<link wikidata="Q504759" start="3564" end="3567" title="State of Chu" label="Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q855173" start="3684" end="3692" title="Pan Gate" label="Pan Gate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3743" end="3787" title="Chinese urban planning#Classical" label="symbolic three-by-three grid of nine squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="3855" end="3869" title="Warring States" label="Warring States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289426" start="3904" end="3910" title="county (China)" label="County"/>
<link wikidata="Q517267" start="3927" end="3937" title="Commandery (China)" label="Commandery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="3976" end="3986" title="Qin Empire" label="Qin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8193392" start="4052" end="4069" title="Kuaiji Commandery" label="Kuaiji Commandery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="4125" end="4132" title="Yangtze" label="Yangtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936158" start="4164" end="4170" title="Minyue" label="Minyue"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709899" start="4202" end="4221" title="fall of Qin" label="collapse of the Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336714" start="4331" end="4342" title="Xiang Liang" label="Xiang Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q182266" start="4358" end="4366" title="Xiang Yu" label="Xiang Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q31347" start="4426" end="4437" title="Grand Canal of China" label="Grand Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="4640" end="4652" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q313324" start="4669" end="4677" title="Bai Juyi" label="Bai Juyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q46606" start="4732" end="4747" title="Shantang Street" label="Shantang Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807033" start="4820" end="4843" title="Suzhou Confucian Temple" label="Suzhou Confucian Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q381822" start="4881" end="4893" title="Fan Zhongyan" label="Fan Zhongyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="4921" end="4948" title="keju" label="imperial civil examinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639969" start="4984" end="5002" title="Suzhou High School" label="Suzhou High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q704619" start="5111" end="5125" title="Zhang Shicheng" label="Zhang Shicheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q704619" start="5135" end="5137" title="Kingdom of Dazhou" label="Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9957" start="5167" end="5180" title="Hongwu Emperor" label="Zhu Yuanzhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="5281" end="5293" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28337" start="5633" end="5638" title="shoal" label="shoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="5659" end="5667" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q378223" start="5675" end="5691" title="Chongming Island" label="Chongming Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q705838" start="5850" end="5857" title="Choe Bu" label="Choe Bu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="6033" end="6037" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908774" start="6077" end="6085" title="Nanzhili" label="Nanzhili"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="6130" end="6137" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q708299" start="6139" end="6155" title="scholar-official" label="scholar-official"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144337" start="6169" end="6212" title="Suzhou gardens" label="the area&amp;#x27;s most famous private gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367898" start="6243" end="6251" title="Jiangnan (region)" label="Jiangnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="6286" end="6294" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328025" start="6302" end="6311" title="Yu Garden" label="Yu Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409248" start="6338" end="6353" title="empress dowager" label="empress dowager"/>
<link wikidata="Q47842" start="6354" end="6358" title="Empress Dowager Cixi" label="Cixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132" start="6366" end="6379" title="Summer Palace" label="Summer Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="6392" end="6396" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11133842" start="6455" end="6472" title="Jiangnan Province" label="Jiangnan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q839328" start="6530" end="6541" title="fu (administrative division)" label="prefectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="6672" end="6688" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486676" start="6694" end="6702" title="Taiping Heavenly Kingdom" label="Taipings"/>
<link wikidata="Q310035" start="6847" end="6861" title="Charles George Gordon" label="Charles Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571227" start="6869" end="6889" title="Ever-Victorious Army" label="Ever-Victorious Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q269655" start="7233" end="7254" title="Treaty of Shimonoseki" label="Treaty of Shimonoseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="7266" end="7289" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q827518" start="7301" end="7320" title="most favored nation" label="most favored nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q864737" start="7340" end="7356" title="unequal treaties" label="unequal treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q702073" start="7366" end="7378" title="Great Powers" label="Great Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045582" start="7453" end="7475" title="Suzhou railway station" label="Suzhou railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036412" start="7496" end="7504" title="Shanghai North railway station" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7544" end="7555" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="7906" end="7922" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Japanese invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076650" start="8042" end="8076" title="Humble Administrator&amp;#x27;s Garden" label="Humble Administrator&amp;#x27;s Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553852" start="8085" end="8101" title="Lingering Garden" label="Lingering Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q167516" start="8160" end="8173" title="Gusu, Suzhou" label="Gusu District"/>
<link wikidata="Q863462" start="8222" end="8244" title="Suzhou Industrial Park" label="Suzhou Industrial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040111" start="8281" end="8330" title="Suzhou High &amp;amp; New Technology Development Zone" label="Suzhou High &amp;amp; New Technology Development Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q986151" start="8411" end="8421" title="Xiangcheng District, Suzhou" label="Xiangcheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q943850" start="8426" end="8433" title="Wuzhong District" label="Wuzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q691960" start="8698" end="8714" title="satellite town" label="satellite cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q42773" start="8726" end="8733" title="Kunshan" label="Kunshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q61985" start="8735" end="8742" title="Taicang" label="Taicang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015805" start="8744" end="8752" title="Changshu" label="Changshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q197377" start="8758" end="8770" title="Zhangjiagang" label="Zhangjiagang"/>
<link wikidata="Q140712" start="8931" end="8939" title="Lake Tai" label="Lake Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="8959" end="8972" title="Yangtze River" label="Yangtze River"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="8995" end="9003" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="9026" end="9033" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="9075" end="9100" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="9182" end="9211" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="9263" end="9270" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144337" start="9701" end="9718" title="Classical Gardens of Suzhou" label="Classical Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="9735" end="9741" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="9742" end="9761" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076650" start="9829" end="9863" title="Humble Administrator&amp;#x27;s Garden" label="Humble Administrator&amp;#x27;s Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553852" start="9868" end="9884" title="Lingering Garden" label="Lingering Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600169" start="9948" end="9965" title="Canglang Pavilion" label="Canglang Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555424" start="9967" end="9984" title="Lion Grove Garden" label="Lion Grove Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372384" start="10229" end="10257" title="Couple&amp;#x27;s Retreat Garden" label="Couple&amp;#x27;s Retreat Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522381" start="10263" end="10284" title="Garden of Cultivation" label="Garden of Cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459376" start="10294" end="10323" title="Retreat and Reflection Garden" label="Retreat and Reflection Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q10881739" start="10325" end="10342" title="Five Peaks Garden" label="Five Peaks Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="10362" end="10374" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567211" start="10431" end="10440" title="Wen Boren" label="Wen Boren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146619" start="10580" end="10594" title="Hanshan Temple" label="Hanshan Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q15929019" start="10596" end="10609" title="Xiyuan Temple" label="Xiyuan Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518088" start="10611" end="10626" title="Xuanmiao Temple" label="Xuanmiao Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q15921888" start="10628" end="10646" title="Lingyanshan Temple" label="Lingyanshan Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q27963900" start="10648" end="10664" title="Chongyuan Temple" label="Chongyuan Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q31347" start="10746" end="10765" title="Grand Canal (China)" label="Grand Canal (China)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="11375" end="11378" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="11697" end="11707" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="11828" end="11847" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495771" start="12012" end="12028" title="Gate to the East" label="Gate to the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q617082" start="12203" end="12213" title="Suzhou IFS" label="Suzhou IFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q855173" start="12369" end="12377" title="Pan Gate" label="Pan Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="12482" end="12496" title="Warring States" label="Warring States"/>
<link wikidata="Q855173" start="12707" end="12722" title="Ruiguang Pagoda" label="Ruiguang Pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q807059" start="13064" end="13077" title="Baodai Bridge" label="Baodai Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="13280" end="13292" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202233" start="13370" end="13386" title="Jingshan Mountains" label="Jinshan Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013177" start="13548" end="13558" title="Tiger Hill, Suzhou" label="Tiger Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q36020" start="13967" end="13973" title="Su Shi" label="Su Shi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581102" start="14084" end="14097" title="Huqiu Tower" label="Yunyan Pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q199451" start="14135" end="14149" title="Chinese pagoda" label="Chinese pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q836041" start="14745" end="14757" title="Beisi Pagoda" label="Beisi Pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q15926455" start="14935" end="14947" title="Twin Pagodas (Suzhou)" label="Twin Pagodas"/>
<link wikidata="Q998042" start="15885" end="15898" title="Suzhou Museum" label="Suzhou Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q46868" start="15912" end="15921" title="I. M. Pei" label="I. M. Pei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806827" start="15924" end="15942" title="Suzhou Silk Museum" label="Suzhou Silk Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7651049" start="15952" end="15970" title="China Kunqu Museum" label="China Kunqu Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972509" start="16109" end="16149" title="Washington University School of Medicine" label="Washington University School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q986151" start="16218" end="16237" title="Xiangcheng District, Suzhou" label="Xiangcheng District"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="16382" end="16403" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="16415" end="16424" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46994" start="16515" end="16527" title="telemedicine" label="telemedicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="16598" end="16609" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="16668" end="16684" title="Standard Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748296" start="16708" end="16721" title="dialects of Chinese" label="local dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q831744" start="16731" end="16741" title="Suzhounese" label="Suzhounese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34290" start="16759" end="16761" title="Wu languages" label="Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="16762" end="16777" title="language family" label="language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q484464" start="16846" end="16852" title="Koreans" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q483855" start="16878" end="16902" title="Industrial Bank of Korea" label="Industrial Bank of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7651057" start="17092" end="17129" title="Suzhou Singapore International School" label="Suzhou Singapore International School"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="17819" end="17822" title="Foreign direct investment" label="FDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="18870" end="18882" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921017" start="19140" end="19150" title="Jinji Lake" label="Jinji Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q388125" start="19233" end="19243" title="Li Lanqing" label="Li Lanqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q131248" start="19264" end="19276" title="Lee Kuan Yew" label="Lee Kuan Yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639978" start="19790" end="19808" title="Soochow University (Suzhou)" label="Soochow University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562485" start="19813" end="19853" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an Jiaotong-Liverpool University" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an Jiaotong-Liverpool University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15917432" start="20838" end="20851" title="Suzhou Dongwu" label="Suzhou Dongwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207912" start="20870" end="20886" title="China League One" label="China League One"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785884" start="20975" end="21010" title="Suzhou Industrial Park Sports Center" label="Suzhou Industrial Park Sports Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630359" start="21041" end="21071" title="2019 FIBA Basketball World Cup" label="2019 FIBA Basketball World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045582" start="21189" end="21211" title="Suzhou railway station" label="Suzhou railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q915161" start="21305" end="21329" title="Beijing–Shanghai railway" label="Beijing–Shanghai railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q844171" start="21408" end="21442" title="Shanghai–Nanjing intercity railway" label="Shanghai-Nanjing intercity railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q529728" start="21580" end="21604" title="Shanghai railway station" label="Shanghai railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5926126" start="21674" end="21702" title="Suzhou North railway station" label="Suzhou North railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q913275" start="21745" end="21780" title="Beijing–Shanghai high-speed railway" label="Beijing–Shanghai high-speed railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q248045" start="22057" end="22086" title="Kunshan South railway station" label="Kunshan South railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7651043" start="22088" end="22126" title="Suzhou Industrial Park railway station" label="Suzhou Industrial Park railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711039" start="22340" end="22371" title="Shanghai–Suzhou–Nantong railway" label="Shanghai–Suzhou–Nantong railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q130443" start="22415" end="22442" title="Nanjing-Shanghai Expressway" label="Nanjing-Shanghai Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22538" end="22572" title="Suzhou-Jiaxing-Hangzhou Expressway" label="Suzhou-Jiaxing-Hangzhou Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22587" end="22604" title="Suzhou Outer Ring" label="Suzhou Outer Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969401" start="22698" end="22724" title="China National Highway 312" label="China National Highway 312"/>
<link wikidata="Q488021" start="22887" end="22890" title="Twenty-foot equivalent unit" label="TEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q914748" start="23032" end="23051" title="Suzhou Rail Transit" label="Suzhou Rail Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q45668" start="23171" end="23177" title="Line 1, Suzhou Rail Transit" label="Line 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054280" start="23214" end="23220" title="Line 2, Suzhou Rail Transit" label="Line 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112249" start="23264" end="23270" title="Line 4, Suzhou Rail Transit" label="Line 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q9005956" start="23846" end="23856" title="Suzhou BRT" label="Suzhou BRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="23866" end="23883" title="bus rapid transit" label="bus rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="24001" end="24006" title="Opera" label="Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q674493" start="24008" end="24013" title="Kunqu" label="Kunqu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066820" start="24070" end="24082" title="Suzhou Opera" label="Suzhou Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="24084" end="24090" title="Ballad" label="Ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3905200" start="24110" end="24117" title="pingtan (artform)" label="pingtan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685124" start="24190" end="24194" title="pipa" label="pipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860805" start="24199" end="24206" title="sanxian" label="sanxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="24242" end="24246" title="Silk" label="Silk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24477" end="24489" title="Song brocade" label="Song brocade"/>
<link wikidata="Q242115" start="24809" end="24823" title="Five Dynasties" label="Five Dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="24845" end="24857" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="24971" end="24978" title="Yangtze" label="Yangtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="24992" end="24999" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045166" start="25040" end="25055" title="Jiangsu cuisine" label="Jiangsu cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q823941" start="25067" end="25092" title="Yangcheng Lake large crab" label="Yangcheng Lake large crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q10345683" start="25094" end="25107" title="Squirrel fish" label="Squirrel fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q877729" start="25116" end="25126" title="Handicraft" label="Handicraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164242" start="25129" end="25146" title="Suzhou embroidery" label="Suzhou embroidery"/>
<link wikidata="Q193220" start="25148" end="25151" title="Hand fan" label="fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q262093" start="25154" end="25181" title="Chinese musical instruments" label="Chinese musical instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q720106" start="25183" end="25189" title="scroll" label="scroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q862454" start="25200" end="25207" title="lantern" label="lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q239788" start="25210" end="25218" title="mahogany" label="mahogany"/>
<link wikidata="Q175089" start="25230" end="25234" title="jade" label="jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="25244" end="25248" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q184296" start="25249" end="25257" title="tapestry" label="tapestry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25355" end="25370" title="Taohuawu Studio" label="Taohuawu Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q919348" start="25373" end="25382" title="Chinese painting" label="Paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498317" start="25384" end="25400" title="Chinese calligraphy" label="Calligraphic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424649" start="25402" end="25433" title="Suzhou Silk Hand Embroidery Art" label="Suzhou Silk Hand Embroidery Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q544386" start="25473" end="25480" title="Mo Li Hua" label="Jasmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q378492" start="27016" end="27022" title="Lu Xun (Three Kingdoms)" label="Lu Xun"/>
<link wikidata="Q274488" start="27084" end="27094" title="Eastern Wu" label="Eastern Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q185043" start="27106" end="27120" title="Three Kingdoms" label="Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q245315" start="27156" end="27163" title="Liu Bei" label="Liu Bei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141614" start="27171" end="27189" title="Battle of Xiaoting" label="Battle of Xiaoting"/>
<link wikidata="Q371966" start="27192" end="27205" title="Feng Menglong" label="Feng Menglong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="27267" end="27279" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248916" start="27282" end="27290" title="Tang Yin" label="Tang Yin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248916" start="27435" end="27444" title="Tang Bohu" label="Tang Bohu"/>
<link wikidata="Q306673" start="27449" end="27462" title="Wen Zhengming" label="Wen Zhengming"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="27502" end="27514" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q558875" start="27531" end="27540" title="Wu School" label="Wu School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11087750" start="27552" end="27584" title="Four Masters of the Ming Dynasty" label="Four Masters of the Ming Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q985522" start="27586" end="27597" title="Weng Tonghe" label="Weng Tonghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q318811" start="27665" end="27672" title="Tongzhi Emperor" label="Tongzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q299710" start="27677" end="27684" title="Guangxu Emperor" label="Guangxu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="27706" end="27718" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="27788" end="27800" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46868" start="27885" end="27894" title="I. M. Pei" label="I. M. Pei"/>
<link wikidata="Q13397" start="28060" end="28074" title="Louvre Pyramid" label="Louvre Pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q214855" start="28076" end="28105" title="Bank of China Tower (Hong Kong)" label="Hong Kong Bank of China tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790093" start="28107" end="28128" title="OCBC Centre" label="Singapore OCBC Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q214867" start="28130" end="28170" title="National Gallery of Art" label="East Building of National Gallery of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="28174" end="28190" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q688335" start="28192" end="28217" title="Deutsches Historisches Museum" label="Germany Historical Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069890" start="28225" end="28237" title="Cheng Kaijia" label="Cheng Kaijia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10891829" start="28382" end="28406" title="Two Bombs, One Satellite" label="Two Bombs, One Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q183679" start="28417" end="28430" title="Tsung-Dao Lee" label="Tsung-Dao Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="28469" end="28491" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365182" start="28589" end="28601" title="Meng Jianzhu" label="Meng Jianzhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076970" start="28646" end="28655" title="Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q912139" start="28677" end="28723" title="Central Political and Legal Affairs Commission" label="Central Political and Legal Affairs Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072128" start="28772" end="28804" title="Changshu Institute of Technology" label="Changshu Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391751" start="28806" end="28829" title="Duke Kunshan University" label="Duke Kunshan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16647785" start="28831" end="28852" title="KEDGE Business School" label="KEDGE Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q23006203" start="28854" end="28880" title="Jiangnan Social University" label="Jiangnan Social University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191740" start="28882" end="28900" title="Jiangsu University" label="Jiangsu University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074117" start="28922" end="28948" title="Renmin University of China" label="Renmin University of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486229" start="28964" end="28985" title="Skema Business School" label="Skema Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639978" start="29034" end="29052" title="Soochow University (Suzhou)" label="Soochow University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7651053" start="29054" end="29097" title="Suzhou Polytechnic Institute of Agriculture" label="Suzhou Polytechnic Institute of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579566" start="29099" end="29142" title="Suzhou University of Science and Technology" label="Suzhou University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562485" start="29144" end="29184" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an Jiaotong-Liverpool University" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an Jiaotong-Liverpool University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29186" end="29208" title="Suzhou City University" label="Suzhou City University"/>
<link wikidata="Q683580" start="29238" end="29256" title="Nanjing University" label="Nanjing University"/>
<link wikidata="Q832550" start="29272" end="29309" title="Northwestern Polytechnical University" label="Northwestern Polytechnical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072125" start="29346" end="29366" title="Changshu High School" label="Changshu High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313541" start="29368" end="29390" title="Dulwich College Suzhou" label="Dulwich College Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080342" start="29392" end="29432" title="Dulwich International High School Suzhou" label="Dulwich International High School Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445009" start="29434" end="29460" title="Kunshan Senior High School" label="Kunshan Senior High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q10379335" start="29462" end="29493" title="Suzhou Experimental High School" label="Suzhou Experimental High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639969" start="29495" end="29513" title="Suzhou High School" label="Suzhou High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7651057" start="29515" end="29552" title="Suzhou Singapore International School" label="Suzhou Singapore International School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042803" start="29554" end="29578" title="Suzhou No.10 High School" label="Suzhou No.10 High School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29580" end="29605" title="Suzhou Wuxian High School" label="Suzhou Wuxian High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675893" start="29610" end="29636" title="Taicang Senior High School" label="Taicang Senior High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070798" start="29681" end="29701" title="Zhenze Middle School" label="Zhenze Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29703" end="29743" title="Jiangsu Province Mudu senior High School" label="Jiangsu Province Mudu senior High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569399" start="29778" end="29838" title="Southeast University-Monash University Joint Graduate School" label="Southeast University-Monash University Joint Graduate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579567" start="29840" end="29879" title="Suzhou Dushu Lake Higher Education Town" label="Suzhou Dushu Lake Higher Education Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q738236" start="29881" end="29913" title="National University of Singapore" label="National University of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q19459107" start="30004" end="30029" title="Japanese School of Suzhou" label="Japanese School of Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644086" start="30089" end="30134" title="List of twin towns and sister cities in China" label="List of twin towns and sister cities in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024795" start="30136" end="30150" title="Port of Suzhou" label="Port of Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426533" start="30259" end="30264" title="Hong Kong Trade Development Council" label="HKTDC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292012" wikidata="Q937466" url="?curid=292012" title="GNU Mailman">
<text>GNU Mailman is a computer software application from the GNU Project for managing electronic mailing lists.&lt;ref name=&quot;http://freshmeat.net&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=&quot;http://www.gnu.org&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;
Mailman is coded primarily in Python and currently maintained by Abhilash Raj. Mailman is free software, licensed under the GNU General Public License.

== History ==
A very early version of Mailman was written by John Viega while a graduate student, who then lost his copy of the source in a hard drive crash sometime around 1998.&lt;ref name=&quot;http://myriadicity.net&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Ken Manheimer at Corporation for National Research Initiatives (CNRI), who was looking for a replacement for Majordomo, then took over development. When Manheimer left CNRI, Barry Warsaw took over. Mailman 3, the first major new version in over a decade, was released in April 2015.
== Features ==
Mailman runs on most Unix-like systems, including Linux. Since Mailman 3.0 it has required Python-3.4 or newer. It works with Unix-style mail servers, such as Exim, Postfix, Sendmail and qmail. Features include:
* A customizable publicly-accessible Web page for each maillist.
* Web application for list administration, archiving of messages, spam filtering, etc. Separate interfaces are available for users (for self-administration), moderators (to accept/reject list posts), and administrators.
* Support for multiple administrators and moderators for each list.
* Per-list privacy features, such as closed-subscriptions, private archives, private membership rosters, and sender-based posting rules.
* Integrated bounce detection and automatic handling of bouncing addresses.
* Integrated spam filters
* Majordomo-style email based commands.
* Support for virtual domains.
* List archiving. The default archiver provided with Mailman 2 is Pipermail, although other archivers can be used instead. The archiver for Mailman 3 is HyperKitty.

== See also ==

* List of mailing list software
* Electronic mailing list

==References==
== Further reading ==
=== Reviews ===
* Mailing List Management Made Easy

=== Other resources ===
* List Administrator&#x27;s Guide
* &quot;Mailman – An Extensible Mailing List Manager Using Python&quot;; Ken Manheimer, Barry Warsaw, John Viega; presented at the 7th International Python Conference, Nov 10–13, 1998
* &quot;Mailman: The GNU Mailing List Manager&quot;; John Viega, Barry Warsaw, Ken Manheimer; presented at the 12th Usenix Systems Administration Conference (LISA &#x27;98), Dec 9, 1998
* GNU Mailman chapter in &quot;The Architecture of Open Source Applications Volume 2&quot;
* Barry Warsaw presentation on Mailman 3 at PyCon US 2012

==External links==
* Mailman Documentation
* Mailman support mailing lists</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q937466" start="0" end="11" title="GNU Mailman" label="GNU Mailman"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="26" end="46" title="Application software" label="software application"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598" start="56" end="67" title="GNU Project" label="GNU Project"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81" end="105" title="Mailing list#Electronic mailing list" label="electronic mailing lists"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="257" end="263" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="317" end="330" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="351" end="377" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049290" start="441" end="451" title="John Viega" label="John Viega"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350649" start="639" end="684" title="Corporation for National Research Initiatives" label="Corporation for National Research Initiatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751545" start="731" end="740" title="Majordomo (software)" label="Majordomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="941" end="945" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="970" end="975" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1011" end="1021" title="History of Python#Version 3" label="Python-3.4"/>
<link wikidata="Q859477" start="1057" end="1069" title="Message transfer agent" label="mail servers"/>
<link wikidata="Q994121" start="1079" end="1083" title="Exim" label="Exim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121334" start="1085" end="1092" title="Postfix (software)" label="Postfix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342790" start="1094" end="1102" title="Sendmail" label="Sendmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q284108" start="1107" end="1112" title="qmail" label="qmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q36774" start="1169" end="1177" title="Web page" label="Web page"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1187" end="1195" title="Mailing list#Electronic mailing list" label="maillist"/>
<link wikidata="Q189210" start="1199" end="1214" title="Web application" label="Web application"/>
<link wikidata="Q13512320" start="1263" end="1267" title="email spam" label="spam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1355" end="1365" title="Internet forum#Moderators" label="moderators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751545" start="1726" end="1735" title="Majordomo (software)" label="Majordomo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1778" end="1793" title="Virtual hosting#Name-based" label="virtual domains"/>
<link wikidata="Q22682030" start="1979" end="2008" title="List of mailing list software" label="List of mailing list software"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2011" end="2034" title="Mailing list#Electronic mailing list" label="Electronic mailing list"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292013" wikidata="Q299952" url="?curid=292013" title="FFA">
<text>FFA may refer to:
==Aviation and military==
* First Flight Airport, near Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, United States
* Free-fire area in U.S. military parlance
* Flug- und Fahrzeugwerke Altenrhein, a Swiss aircraft and railway vehicle manufacturer
* Feldflieger Abteilung, of the German army&#x27;s air service in World War I

==Business and commerce==
* Ferrara Fire Apparatus, a builder of fire trucks and other emergency vehicles
* Forward freight agreement
* Field force automation
* Furniture, fixtures and equipment (accounting), sometimes &quot;furniture, fixtures and accessories&quot; (FF&amp;A)

==Entertainment==
* &quot;Final Fantasy Adventure&quot;, Game Boy game that is actually part of the &quot;Mana&quot; series
* &quot;Final Fantasy Anthology&quot;, a computer role-playing game compilation
* Far from Alaska, a Brazilian stoner rock group
* Food for Animals, an American hip-hop group
* Festival du film francophone d&#x27;Angoulême, an annual festival in France

==Finance==
* FFA Private Bank 
* Fellow of the Faculty of Actuaries
* Financial Fraud Action UK
* Forward-forward agreement
* Free File Alliance in the United States
* Full fiscal autonomy for Scotland
* Fellow member of the Institute of Financial Accountants

==Sport==
* Fédération française d&#x27;athlétisme, the governing body for the sport of athletics in France
* FFA Centre of Excellence, a defunct Australian football club
* Florida Football Alliance, an amateur American football league
* Football Federation Australia
* Football Federation of Armenia
* First free ascent, in climbing and mountaineering

==Science and computing==
* Fast folding algorithm
* Finite field arithmetic
* Fixed-Field alternating gradient Accelerator
* Flash flood watch, issued by the United States National Weather Service
* Ford–Fulkerson algorithm
* Free fatty acid
* Fusiform face area
* Fundus fluorescein angiography; see fluorescein angiography

==Other uses==
* Federal Firearms Act
* Ffairfach railway station, in Wales
* Free for All (disambiguation)
* Fugitive Felon Act
* National FFA Organization (Future Farmers of America), an American student organization
* Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency
* Fatima Family Apostolate, a U.S.-based Roman Catholic organization</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q299952" start="0" end="3" title="FFA" label="FFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453024" start="46" end="66" title="First Flight Airport" label="First Flight Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4193799" start="117" end="131" title="Free-fire area" label="Free-fire area"/>
<link wikidata="Q502243" start="160" end="194" title="Flug- und Fahrzeugwerke Altenrhein" label="Flug- und Fahrzeugwerke Altenrhein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441647" start="248" end="269" title="Feldflieger Abteilung" label="Feldflieger Abteilung"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445248" start="353" end="375" title="Ferrara Fire Apparatus" label="Ferrara Fire Apparatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439282" start="433" end="458" title="Forward freight agreement" label="Forward freight agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447000" start="461" end="483" title="Field force automation" label="Field force automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509676" start="486" end="532" title="Furniture, fixtures and equipment (accounting)" label="Furniture, fixtures and equipment (accounting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333557" start="630" end="653" title="Final Fantasy Adventure" label="Final Fantasy Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570840" start="736" end="759" title="Final Fantasy Anthology" label="Final Fantasy Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q17329264" start="810" end="825" title="Far from Alaska" label="Far from Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465470" start="859" end="875" title="Food for Animals" label="Food for Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070503" start="905" end="950" title="Angoulême Francophone Film Festival" label="Festival du film francophone d&amp;#x27;Angoulême"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425415" start="996" end="1012" title="FFA Private Bank" label="FFA Private Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428889" start="1016" end="1050" title="Fellow of the Faculty of Actuaries" label="Fellow of the Faculty of Actuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980744" start="1053" end="1078" title="Financial Fraud Action UK" label="Financial Fraud Action UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473161" start="1081" end="1106" title="Forward-forward agreement" label="Forward-forward agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499837" start="1109" end="1127" title="Free File Alliance" label="Free File Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508182" start="1151" end="1184" title="Full fiscal autonomy for Scotland" label="Full fiscal autonomy for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041437" start="1208" end="1242" title="Institute of Financial Accountants" label="Institute of Financial Accountants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060292" start="1256" end="1294" title="Fédération française d&amp;#x27;athlétisme" label="Fédération française d&amp;#x27;athlétisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824323" start="1354" end="1378" title="FFA Centre of Excellence" label="FFA Centre of Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993521" start="1417" end="1442" title="Florida Football Alliance" label="Florida Football Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q781890" start="1482" end="1511" title="Football Federation Australia" label="Football Federation Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q391151" start="1514" end="1544" title="Football Federation of Armenia" label="Football Federation of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194369" start="1547" end="1564" title="First free ascent" label="First free ascent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437031" start="1626" end="1648" title="Fast folding algorithm" label="Fast folding algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450398" start="1651" end="1674" title="Finite field arithmetic" label="Finite field arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038519" start="1677" end="1721" title="Fixed-Field alternating gradient Accelerator" label="Fixed-Field alternating gradient Accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457554" start="1724" end="1741" title="Flash flood watch" label="Flash flood watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q284695" start="1798" end="1822" title="Ford–Fulkerson algorithm" label="Ford–Fulkerson algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="1825" end="1840" title="Free fatty acid" label="Free fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624677" start="1843" end="1861" title="Fusiform face area" label="Fusiform face area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434206" start="1900" end="1923" title="fluorescein angiography" label="fluorescein angiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510366" start="1942" end="1962" title="Federal Firearms Act" label="Federal Firearms Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933445" start="1965" end="1990" title="Ffairfach railway station" label="Ffairfach railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205889" start="2003" end="2032" title="Free for All (disambiguation)" label="Free for All (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896996" start="2035" end="2053" title="Fugitive Felon Act" label="Fugitive Felon Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039073" start="2056" end="2081" title="National FFA Organization" label="National FFA Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122517" start="2146" end="2184" title="Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency" label="Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437834" start="2187" end="2211" title="Fatima Family Apostolate" label="Fatima Family Apostolate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292014" wikidata="Q380761" url="?curid=292014" title="Sisaket province">
<text>Sisaket province (, , ; Northern Khmer: ) is one of Thailand&#x27;s seventy-six provinces (&quot;changwat&quot;). It lies in lower northeastern Thailand, a region called Isan. Neighboring provinces are (from west clockwise): Surin, Roi Et, Yasothon, and Ubon Ratchathani. To the south it borders Oddar Meancheay and Preah Vihear of Cambodia.

==Geography==
The province is in the valley of the Mun River, a tributary of the Mekong. The Dângrêk mountain chain, which forms the border with Cambodia, is in the south of the province. The total forest area is or 11.5 percent of provincial area. Khao Phra Wihan National Park covers an area of 130 km2 of the Dângrêk mountains in the southeast of the province. Established on 20 March 1998, it is named after a ruined Khmer Empire temple Prasat Preah Vihear (anglicised in Thailand as &quot;Prasat Khao Phra Wihan&quot;), now in Cambodia, which had been the focus of boundary dispute. The temple faces north and was built to serve the Sisaket region. Earlier maps had shown it as inside Thailand. However, a boundary survey conducted by the French for the Franco-Siamese treaty of 1907 deviated from the agreed-upon international divide by watershed in order to place the temple on the French (Cambodian) side.

The Thai government ignored the deviation and continued to regard the temple as being in Sisaket province. In the mid-1950s, newly independent Cambodia protested the Thai &quot;occupation&quot; of what the French map showed as theirs. Since the French map was clearly incorrect, in 1962 the Thai government agreed to submit the dispute to the International Court of Justice. The court voted nine to four to confirm the border as shown in 1907 map and awarded the temple to Cambodia. Access to the temple is still principally from the Thai side, as the ruins are difficult to reach from the Cambodian plains at the bottom of a sheer cliff several hundred meters below. The Cambodian government has expressed interest in building a cable car to carry tourists to the site, though this has yet to happen, pending resolution of the ownership of other areas in the Cambodian–Thai border dispute.

===National park===
There is one national park, along with five other national parks, make up region 9 (Ubon Ratchathani) of Thailand&#x27;s protected areas. 
* Khao Phra Wihan National Park, 

===Wildlife sanctuaries===
There are two wildlife sanctuaries, along with four other wildlife sanctuaries, make up region 9 (Ubon Ratchathani) of Thailand&#x27;s protected areas.
* Huai Sala Wildlife Sanctuary, 
* Phanom Dong Rak Wildlife Sanctuary, 

==History==
The many Khmer ruins found in the province show the area must have been important to the Khmer empire at least by the 12th century, although it was apparently sparsely populated. According to local tradition, it was known as &quot;Sri Nakorn Lamduan&quot; (.) It was later called &quot;Khukhan&quot;, after a town built in the late-15th century CE during the reign of King Boromaratcha III of Ayutthaya. Ethnic Laos began settling the northern portion of the province, and in 1786 the town Sisaket was formed, subject to Khukhan. In 1904, Sisaket was renamed Khukhan, while the original Khukhan was designated Huai Nua.Monthon Udon Thani was created in 1912, and assumed the administration of the most of region. In 1933 the monthon system was ended, and the province of Khukhan was administered directly from Bangkok. Five years later, the name of the town and province were restored to Sisaket, with the district containing Huai Nua being called &quot;Khukhan&quot;.
The Rasi Salai Dam built here in 1994 was unofficially decommissioned in July 2000, following devastation of local farming villages.

==Demographics==
The province is populated by four main ethnic groups: Kui, Lao, Khmer, and Yer. Sisaket is one of the provinces where there is a sizable northern Khmer population. In the 2000 census it was reported that 26.2 percent of the population are capable of speaking Khmer. This is down from the 1990 census when it was reported that 30.2 percent of the population were capable of speaking Khmer. The majority are Lao speaking people.

==Symbols==
The provincial seal shows Prasat Hin Ban Samo, a Khmer temple about 1,000 years old, in the Prang Ku District.

The provincial tree and flower of the province is the lamduan. The six leaves of the flower symbolise the six original districts of the province: Khukhan, Kantharalak, Uthumphon Phisai, Kanthararom, Rasi Salai, and Khun Han. The provincial aquatic life is the Chinese edible frog (&quot;Hoplobatrachus rugulosus&quot;).

==Economy==
Sisaket is largely agricultural. Among other agricultural produce, it is known for its garlic and its shallots, for which it was rewarded with GI registration in 2020.

==Administrative divisions==

===Provincial government===
The province is divided into 22 districts (&quot;amphoes&quot;). The districts are further subdivided into 206 sub-districts (&quot;tambons&quot;) and 2,411 villages (&quot;mubans&quot;).
===Local government===
As of 26 November 2019 there is one Sisaket Provincial Administration Organisation (&quot;&quot;) and 37 municipal (&quot;thesaban&quot;) areas in the province. Sisaket and Kantharalak have town (&quot;thesaban mueang&quot;) status. There are a further 35 subdistrict municipalities (&quot;thesaban tambon&quot;). The non-municipal areas are administered by 179 Subdistrict Administrative Organisations, SAO (&quot;ongkan borihan suan tambon&quot;).

==Transportation==
Sisaket is on the northeastern railway line from Bangkok () to Warin Chamrap (). Sisaket&#x27;s main station is Sisaket Railway Station. Sisaket has frequent bus service to and from Bangkok&#x27;s Northern Bus Terminal (; )

== Health ==
Sisaket&#x27;s main hospital is Sisaket Hospital, a regional hospital operated by the Ministry of Public Health.

==Human achievement index 2022==

Since 2003, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in Thailand has tracked progress on human development at sub-national level using the Human achievement index (HAI), a composite index covering all the eight key areas of human development. National Economic and Social Development Board (NESDB) has taken over this task since 2017.


== See also ==
* Khit cloth
* Si in place names
* Sisaket F.C.
* Sri Nakhon Lamduan Stadium

== References ==
== External links ==
* Province page from the Tourist Authority of Thailand

* Website of province (limited English section)
* Si Saket provincial map, coat of arms and postal stamp</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q380761" start="0" end="16" title="Sisaket province" label="Sisaket province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502234" start="24" end="38" title="Northern Khmer dialect" label="Northern Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q50198" start="80" end="89" title="Provinces of Thailand" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125" end="152" title="Isan#Administrative divisions" label="lower northeastern Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="170" end="174" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q380757" start="225" end="230" title="Surin province" label="Surin"/>
<link wikidata="Q625463" start="232" end="238" title="Roi Et province" label="Roi Et"/>
<link wikidata="Q506598" start="240" end="248" title="Yasothon province" label="Yasothon"/>
<link wikidata="Q629024" start="254" end="270" title="Ubon Ratchathani province" label="Ubon Ratchathani"/>
<link wikidata="Q629538" start="296" end="311" title="Oddar Meancheay" label="Oddar Meancheay"/>
<link wikidata="Q502151" start="316" end="328" title="Preah Vihear province" label="Preah Vihear"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="332" end="340" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455933" start="394" end="403" title="Mun River" label="Mun River"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="424" end="430" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q939398" start="436" end="458" title="Dângrêk Mountains" label="Dângrêk mountain chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="488" end="496" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536858" start="592" end="621" title="Khao Phra Wihan National Park" label="Khao Phra Wihan National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q45949" start="784" end="803" title="Prasat Preah Vihear" label="Prasat Preah Vihear"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="819" end="827" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="875" end="883" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131300664" start="1102" end="1131" title="Franco-Siamese treaty of 1907" label="Franco-Siamese treaty of 1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q152005" start="1186" end="1195" title="water divide" label="watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="1240" end="1248" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="1601" end="1631" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q168329" start="2118" end="2147" title="Cambodian–Thai border dispute" label="Cambodian–Thai border dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q105773345" start="2244" end="2271" title="Protected Areas Regional Offices of Thailand" label="region 9 (Ubon Ratchathani)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536858" start="2311" end="2340" title="Khao Phra Wihan National Park" label="Khao Phra Wihan National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q105773345" start="2459" end="2486" title="Protected Areas Regional Offices of Thailand" label="region 9 (Ubon Ratchathani)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2525" end="2553" title="Huai Sala Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Huai Sala Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2558" end="2592" title="Phanom Dong Rak Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Phanom Dong Rak Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="2617" end="2622" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="2697" end="2709" title="Khmer empire" label="Khmer empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q883022" start="2981" end="2997" title="Boromaratcha III" label="Boromaratcha III"/>
<link wikidata="Q203370" start="3001" end="3010" title="Ayutthaya (city)" label="Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q383946" start="3019" end="3022" title="Lao people" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936511" start="3227" end="3234" title="Monthon" label="Monthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q816331" start="3235" end="3245" title="Udon Thani" label="Udon Thani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295039" start="3581" end="3595" title="Rasi Salai Dam" label="Rasi Salai Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4444914" start="3782" end="3785" title="Kui people" label="Kui"/>
<link wikidata="Q383946" start="3787" end="3790" title="Lao people" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q201028" start="3792" end="3797" title="Khmer people" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3803" end="3806" title="Yer people" label="Yer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6676085" start="3865" end="3879" title="Northern Khmer people" label="northern Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="3987" end="3992" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9211" start="4134" end="4137" title="Lao language" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819245" start="4172" end="4187" title="Seals of the provinces of Thailand" label="provincial seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13019783" start="4284" end="4299" title="list of Thai provincial trees" label="provincial tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q126487702" start="4334" end="4341" title="lamduan" label="lamduan"/>
<link wikidata="Q711322" start="4540" end="4559" title="Chinese edible frog" label="Chinese edible frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q711322" start="4567" end="4591" title="Hoplobatrachus rugulosus" label="Hoplobatrachus rugulosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="4700" end="4706" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193498" start="4715" end="4722" title="shallot" label="shallot"/>
<link wikidata="Q325668" start="4756" end="4771" title="Geographical indication" label="GI registration"/>
<link wikidata="Q475061" start="4889" end="4895" title="Districts of Thailand" label="amphoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077097" start="4972" end="4978" title="tambon" label="tambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368879" start="5013" end="5018" title="muban" label="muban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155688" start="5253" end="5268" title="thesaban mueang" label="thesaban mueang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155688" start="5341" end="5356" title="thesaban tambon" label="thesaban tambon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5539" end="5564" title="State Railway of Thailand#Northeastern Line" label="northeastern railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23925684" start="5570" end="5577" title="Krung Thep Aphiwat Central Terminal" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q477043" start="5584" end="5597" title="Warin Chamrap District" label="Warin Chamrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633377" start="5633" end="5656" title="Si Sa Ket Railway Station" label="Sisaket Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q13021613" start="5718" end="5739" title="Northern Bus Terminal (Bangkok)" label="Northern Bus Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13026867" start="5791" end="5807" title="Sisaket Hospital" label="Sisaket Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970641" start="5845" end="5870" title="Ministry of Public Health (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6049" end="6072" title="Human achievement index" label="Human achievement index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740643" start="6264" end="6274" title="Khit cloth" label="Khit cloth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6277" end="6294" title="Sri#Place names" label="Si in place names"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387648" start="6297" end="6309" title="Sisaket F.C." label="Sisaket F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7586170" start="6312" end="6338" title="Sri Nakhon Lamduan Stadium" label="Sri Nakhon Lamduan Stadium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292024" wikidata="Q1666624" url="?curid=292024" title="International Hockey League (1945–2001)">
<text>The International Hockey League (IHL) was a minor professional ice hockey league in the United States and Canada that operated from 1945 to 2001. The IHL served as the National Hockey League (NHL)&#x27;s alternate farm system to the American Hockey League (AHL). After 56 years of operation, financial instability led to the league&#x27;s demise. Six of the surviving seven teams merged into the AHL in 2001.

==History==

===Early years===
The IHL was formed on December 5, 1945, in a three-hour meeting at the Norton Palmer Hotel in Windsor, Ontario. In attendance were Jack Adams (coach of the Detroit Red Wings), Fred Huber (Red Wings public relations), Frank Gallagher (amateur hockey organizer in Detroit and Windsor), Lloyd Pollock (Windsor hockey pioneer), Gerald McHugh (Windsor lawyer), Len Hebert, Len Loree and Bill Beckman. The league began operations in the 1945–46 IHL season with four teams in Windsor and Detroit, and operated as semi-professional league.

In 1947, a team from Toledo, Ohio, joined the league, and the following year the IHL expanded significantly, with teams in four additional U.S. cities. The expansion did not take hold, and for 1949–50, the league was back down to teams in Detroit and Windsor as well as two nearby Canadian cities, Sarnia, Ontario, and Chatham, Ontario. Windsor dropped out in 1950, and expansion into the U.S. began again, with Toledo rejoining the league and new teams in Grand Rapids, Michigan (1950), Troy, Ohio, (1951), Cincinnati (1952), Fort Wayne, Indiana (1952), and Milwaukee (1952). At the same time, the last Canadian team left the league in 1952, when the Chatham Maroons pulled out. Three new U.S. cities were added in 1953. The league would expand and shrink between five and nine teams through the 1950s, with another major expansion in 1959. In the 1962–63 season, the IHL played an interlocking schedule with the NHL-owned Eastern Professional Hockey League, which itself folded after its 1962–63 season. After 11 seasons as a strictly U.S.-based league, the IHL admitted two Canadian teams in 1963, with the Windsor Bulldogs and the return of the Chatham Maroons. Both teams dropped out after one season, however, and the league would not have a Canadian team again until 1996.

===Major market expansion===
Bill Beagan served as commissioner of the IHL from 1969 to 1978. The Canadian Press cited him for turning around the league&#x27;s financial situation and making it a top-tier development system for future NHL talent.

Starting in the late 1960s, the IHL&#x27;s quality of play significantly improved. By the mid-1970s it was on par with the American Hockey League (AHL), the longtime top feeder league for the National Hockey League. Many IHL teams became the top farm teams of NHL teams. In 1984, the league swallowed up a few surviving members of the Central Hockey League, which had ceased operations.

In 1985, the league adopted the shootout to determine tie games in place of traditional overtime. The NHL would begin using the shootout to avoid tie games in 2005.

Beginning in the late 1980s and continuing into the mid-90s, the IHL expanded or re-located existing franchises into major U.S. markets such as Atlanta, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Denver, Houston, Indianapolis, Kansas City, Las Vegas, Minneapolis–Saint Paul, Orlando, Phoenix, Salt Lake City, San Antonio, San Diego, and San Francisco. Many of these markets had been previously served by the defunct World Hockey Association or abandoned by the NHL. The IHL also entered markets that had existing NHL teams, such as Chicago, Detroit, and Los Angeles. In 1996, the IHL moved its Atlanta and Minneapolis–Saint Paul franchises to Quebec City and Winnipeg, respectively, restoring the league&#x27;s Canadian presence and filling the void left by the departure of the NHL&#x27;s Quebec Nordiques and the original Winnipeg Jets.

The minimum requirements for an IHL expansion team in 1995 were &quot;a 10,000-seat arena, a population base of one million, and a $6 million franchise fee.&quot; As the league expanded into larger markets, many of the smaller-market teams (such as Fort Wayne, Peoria, Muskegon, Kalamazoo and Flint) left the IHL and joined lower-level leagues.

===Decline and collapse===
The IHL&#x27;s expansion into NHL markets put a strain on relationships between the leagues. There was some speculation that the IHL was intending to compete directly with the NHL, especially when a lockout in 1994–95 threatened to wipe out the NHL season. However, in the 1995–96 season, the IHL&#x27;s &quot;soft&quot; salary cap was just $1.5 million, while the lowest NHL team payroll that season was $11.4 million. A Fall 1994 article in Sports Illustrated praising the IHL and mocking the NHL only fueled the fire. In said article, IHL officials detailed plans to continue expanding the league to large markets in North America, as well as, &quot;a six-team European league with franchises in England, Switzerland, Italy, Austria, Sweden and France.&quot;

In response, many NHL clubs shifted their affiliations to the AHL, and by 1997–98, only four of 18 IHL teams had NHL affiliations. With the loss of subsidized salaries, high expansion fees (by the end the league was charging as much as $8 million US for new teams), exploding travel costs and the NHL itself moving back into some of its markets, the league&#x27;s rapid expansion proved a critical strain, and it folded after the 2000–01 season.

Six IHL franchises (the Chicago Wolves, Grand Rapids Griffins, Houston Aeros, Utah Grizzlies, Milwaukee Admirals and Manitoba Moose) were admitted into the AHL as expansion teams for the 2001–02 season. Between them, they have played for the AHL Calder Cup seven times, winning four—including three in a row after their arrival. As well, the Cincinnati Cyclones was readmitted to the East Coast Hockey League, which hosted the team from 1990 to 1992 before it moved to the IHL. The Orlando Solar Bears (the final IHL playoff champions) and the Kansas City Blades were not admitted into the AHL because their owner, Rich DeVos, who also owned the Griffins, was allowed to own only one AHL franchise. The league&#x27;s other two teams, the Cleveland Lumberjacks and Detroit Vipers, ceased operations along with the league.

Two former IHL teams that moved to the AHL have since relocated: the Utah Grizzlies moved to Cleveland, Ohio, to become the Lake Erie Monsters (rebranded as Cleveland Monsters in 2016) in 2007 and the Houston Aeros moved to Des Moines, Iowa, to become the Iowa Wild in 2013. A third team, the Manitoba Moose, temporarily relocated to St. John&#x27;s, Newfoundland and Labrador to become the St. John&#x27;s IceCaps from 2011 to 2015. Three former franchises have been relaunched in lower-tier leagues since the IHL&#x27;s demise. The Utah Grizzlies name was revived by the former Lexington Men O&#x27; War of the ECHL when they moved, and the Orlando Solar Bears restarted as an ECHL expansion team. The Peoria Rivermen have had three more franchises with an expansion team in the East Coast Hockey League from 1996 to 2005, a relocated Worcester IceCats in the American Hockey League from 2005 to 2013, and a fourth incarnation of the Peoria Rivermen subsequently launched in the Southern Professional Hockey League in 2013.

==Trophies and awards==

*Source.

==Franchise timelines==
===Timeline===
==See also==
*List of developmental and minor sports leagues
*List of ice hockey leagues
*Minor league

==References==
==External links==
*International Hockey League 1945-2001 Internet Hockey Database - Standings and Statistics
*International Hockey League 1945-2001 Internet Hockey Database - IHL Awards</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1666624" start="4" end="31" title="International Hockey League (1945–2001)" label="International Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666624" start="33" end="36" title="International Hockey League (1945–2001)" label="IHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="63" end="73" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="88" end="101" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="106" end="112" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="168" end="190" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q31532" start="214" end="225" title="Farm team" label="farm system"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="233" end="255" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q182625" start="535" end="551" title="Windsor, Ontario" label="Windsor, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354191" start="572" end="582" title="Jack Adams" label="Jack Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495512" start="617" end="627" title="Fred Huber" label="Fred Huber"/>
<link wikidata="Q124304476" start="658" end="673" title="Frank Gallagher (ice hockey)" label="Frank Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q65048289" start="725" end="738" title="Lloyd Pollock" label="Lloyd Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653696" start="872" end="890" title="1945–46 IHL season" label="1945–46 IHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="922" end="929" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q49239" start="995" end="1007" title="Toledo, Ohio" label="Toledo, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q34106" start="1272" end="1287" title="Sarnia, Ontario" label="Sarnia, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q113464" start="1293" end="1309" title="Chatham, Ontario" label="Chatham, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q184587" start="1431" end="1453" title="Grand Rapids, Michigan" label="Grand Rapids, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773067" start="1462" end="1472" title="Troy Bruins" label="Troy, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="1482" end="1492" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q49268" start="1501" end="1520" title="Fort Wayne, Indiana" label="Fort Wayne, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="1533" end="1542" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068206" start="1626" end="1641" title="Chatham Maroons (IHL)" label="Chatham Maroons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278223" start="1898" end="1932" title="Eastern Professional Hockey League (1959-1963)" label="Eastern Professional Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584047" start="2084" end="2100" title="Windsor Bulldogs" label="Windsor Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q89207221" start="2284" end="2295" title="Bill Beagan" label="Bill Beagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410130" start="2349" end="2367" title="The Canadian Press" label="The Canadian Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="2626" end="2648" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="2695" end="2717" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q31532" start="2749" end="2758" title="farm team" label="farm team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053809" start="2838" end="2859" title="Central Professional Hockey League" label="Central Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="3201" end="3208" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="3210" end="3220" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="3222" end="3231" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="3233" end="3239" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="3241" end="3248" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="3250" end="3262" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="3264" end="3275" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="3277" end="3286" title="Las Vegas, Nevada" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480013" start="3288" end="3310" title="Minneapolis–Saint Paul" label="Minneapolis–Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q49233" start="3312" end="3319" title="Orlando, Florida" label="Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="3321" end="3328" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="3330" end="3344" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="3346" end="3357" title="San Antonio, Texas" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="3359" end="3368" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="3374" end="3387" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q527513" start="3453" end="3477" title="World Hockey Association" label="World Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="3591" end="3602" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="3680" end="3691" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="3696" end="3704" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q530764" start="3827" end="3843" title="Quebec Nordiques" label="Quebec Nordiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q576406" start="3861" end="3874" title="Winnipeg Jets (1972–96)" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590028" start="4449" end="4456" title="1994–95 NHL lockout" label="lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369344" start="4571" end="4581" title="salary cap" label="salary cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="4693" end="4711" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="5075" end="5078" title="American Hockey League" label="AHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072030" start="5484" end="5498" title="Chicago Wolves" label="Chicago Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542857" start="5500" end="5521" title="Grand Rapids Griffins" label="Grand Rapids Griffins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474092" start="5523" end="5536" title="Houston Aeros (1994–2013)" label="Houston Aeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513220" start="5538" end="5552" title="Utah Grizzlies (1995–2005)" label="Utah Grizzlies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267828" start="5554" end="5572" title="Milwaukee Admirals" label="Milwaukee Admirals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474448" start="5577" end="5591" title="Manitoba Moose" label="Manitoba Moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q577288" start="5706" end="5716" title="Calder Cup" label="Calder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092226" start="5802" end="5821" title="Cincinnati Cyclones" label="Cincinnati Cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="5844" end="5868" title="East Coast Hockey League" label="East Coast Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531483" start="5942" end="5961" title="Orlando Solar Bears (IHL)" label="Orlando Solar Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723902" start="6004" end="6022" title="Kansas City Blades" label="Kansas City Blades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395520" start="6075" end="6085" title="Rich DeVos" label="Rich DeVos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100775" start="6198" end="6219" title="Cleveland Lumberjacks" label="Cleveland Lumberjacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q663338" start="6224" end="6238" title="Detroit Vipers" label="Detroit Vipers"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="6375" end="6390" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q992056" start="6406" end="6424" title="Lake Erie Monsters" label="Lake Erie Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q39709" start="6506" end="6522" title="Des Moines, Iowa" label="Des Moines, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11753937" start="6538" end="6547" title="Iowa Wild" label="Iowa Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082" start="6616" end="6658" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297053" start="6673" end="6696" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s IceCaps" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s IceCaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548536" start="6816" end="6830" title="Utah Grizzlies" label="Utah Grizzlies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822333" start="6862" end="6887" title="Lexington Men O&amp;#x27; War" label="Lexington Men O&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031076" start="6925" end="6944" title="Orlando Solar Bears (ECHL)" label="Orlando Solar Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720615" start="6986" end="7001" title="Peoria Rivermen (IHL)" label="Peoria Rivermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069671" start="7041" end="7055" title="Peoria Rivermen (ECHL)" label="expansion team"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="7063" end="7087" title="ECHL" label="East Coast Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q371928" start="7119" end="7136" title="Worcester IceCats" label="Worcester IceCats"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="7144" end="7166" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q968778" start="7172" end="7184" title="Peoria Rivermen (AHL)" label="2005 to 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134188" start="7218" end="7233" title="Peoria Rivermen (SPHL)" label="Peoria Rivermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296898" start="7263" end="7298" title="Southern Professional Hockey League" label="Southern Professional Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616147" start="7397" end="7443" title="List of developmental and minor sports leagues" label="List of developmental and minor sports leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863383" start="7445" end="7471" title="List of ice hockey leagues" label="List of ice hockey leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370066" start="7473" end="7485" title="Minor league" label="Minor league"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292029" wikidata="Q2923092" url="?curid=292029" title="Cornell box">
<text>The Cornell box is a test aimed at determining the accuracy of rendering software by comparing the rendered scene with an actual photograph of the same scene, and has become a commonly used 3D test model. It was created by Cindy M. Goral, Kenneth E. Torrance, Donald P. Greenberg, and Bennett Battaile at the Cornell University Program of Computer Graphics for their paper &quot;Modeling the Interaction of Light Between Diffuse Surfaces&quot; published and presented at SIGGRAPH&#x27;84.

A physical model of the box is created and photographed with a CCD camera. The exact settings are then measured from the scene: emission spectrum of the light source, reflectance spectra of all the surfaces, exact position and size of all objects, walls, light source and camera.

The same scene is then reproduced in the renderer, and the output file is compared with the photograph.

The basic environment consists of:
*One light source in the center of a white ceiling
*A green right wall
*A red left wall
*A white back wall
*A white floor

Objects are often placed inside the box. The first objects placed inside the environment were two white boxes. Another common version first used to test photon mapping includes two spheres: one with a perfect mirror surface and one made of glass.

The physical properties of the box are designed to show &quot;diffuse interreflection&quot;. For example, some light should reflect off the red and green walls and bounce onto the white walls, so parts of the white walls should appear slightly red or green.

Today, the Cornell box is often used to demonstrate renderers in a similar way as the Stanford bunny and the Utah teapot are; computer scientists often use the scene just for its visual properties without comparing it to test data from a physical model.

== See also ==
*3D modeling
*Utah teapot
*Stanford bunny
*Stanford dragon
*List of common 3D test models

== References ==
==External links==

*The Cornell Box website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2923092" start="4" end="15" title="Cornell box" label="Cornell box"/>
<link wikidata="Q176953" start="63" end="72" title="rendering (computer graphics)" label="rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="73" end="81" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q125191" start="129" end="139" title="photograph" label="photograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612053" start="176" end="203" title="List of common 3D test models" label="commonly used 3D test model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294966" start="260" end="279" title="Donald P. Greenberg" label="Donald P. Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="309" end="327" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q679325" start="471" end="479" title="SIGGRAPH" label="SIGGRAPH"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="553" end="563" title="Charge-coupled device" label="CCD camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q216817" start="618" end="635" title="emission spectrum" label="emission spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="657" end="676" title="Reflectance#Reflectance" label="reflectance spectra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="745" end="757" title="Light#Light sources" label="light source"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133" start="965" end="970" title="green" label="green"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142" start="985" end="988" title="red" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q23444" start="1002" end="1007" title="white" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659515" start="1187" end="1201" title="photon mapping" label="photon mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q35197" start="1243" end="1249" title="mirror" label="mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="1274" end="1279" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154504" start="1344" end="1367" title="Diffuse reflection" label="diffuse interreflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q838374" start="1627" end="1641" title="Stanford bunny" label="Stanford bunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416664" start="1650" end="1661" title="Utah teapot" label="Utah teapot"/>
<link wikidata="Q568742" start="1812" end="1823" title="3D modeling" label="3D modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416664" start="1825" end="1836" title="Utah teapot" label="Utah teapot"/>
<link wikidata="Q838374" start="1838" end="1852" title="Stanford bunny" label="Stanford bunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466781" start="1854" end="1869" title="Stanford dragon" label="Stanford dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612053" start="1871" end="1900" title="List of common 3D test models" label="List of common 3D test models"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292032" wikidata="Q11702361" url="?curid=292032" title="Food storage">
<text>Food storage is a way of decreasing the variability of the food supply in the face of natural, inevitable variability. It allows food to be eaten for some time (typically weeks to months) after harvest rather than solely immediately. It is both a traditional domestic skill (mainly as root cellaring) and, in the form of food logistics, an important industrial and commercial activity. Food preservation, storage, and transport, including timely delivery to consumers, are important to food security, especially for the majority of people throughout the world who rely on others to produce their food. 

Significant losses of food are caused by inadequate storage conditions as well as decisions made at earlier stages of the supply chain, which predispose products to a shorter shelf life. Adequate cold storage, in particular, can be crucial to prevent quantitative and qualitative food losses.

Food is stored by almost every human society and by many animals. Storing of food has several main purposes:

*Preventing foodborne illness from consuming decomposing food
*Reducing food waste by preserving unused or uneaten food for later use
*Storage of harvested and processed plant and animal food products for distribution to consumers
*Enabling a better balanced diet throughout the year
*Preserving pantry food, such as spices or dry ingredients like rice and flour, for eventual use in cooking
*Preparedness for catastrophes, emergencies and periods of food scarcity or famine, whether as basic emergency preparedness (for most people) or in its more extreme form of survivalism (prepping)
*Religious reasons: for example, leaders in the LDS Church (Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints) instruct church members to store food.
*Protection from animals or theft

==Domestic food storage==


The safe storage of food for home use should strictly adhere to guidelines set out by reliable sources, such as the United States Department of Agriculture. These guidelines have been thoroughly researched by scientists to determine the best methods for reducing the real threat of food poisoning from unsafe food storage. It is also important to maintain proper kitchen hygiene, to reduce risks of bacteria or virus growth and food poisoning. The common food poisoning illnesses include Listeriosis, Mycotoxicosis, Salmonellosis, E. coli, Staphylococcal food poisoning and Botulism. There are many other organisms that can also cause food poisoning.

There are also safety guidelines available for the correct methods of home canning of food. For example, there are specific boiling times that apply depending upon whether pressure canning or waterbath canning is being used in the process. These safety guidelines are intended to reduce the growth of mold and bacteria and the threat of potentially-fatal food poisoning.

===Food storage safety===
====Freezing food====
To preserve food over long periods the temperature should be maintained below . Careful thawing and cooking immediately after thawing are necessary to maintain the safety of food 

Food frozen at 0 °F and below may be preserved almost indefinitely although the quality of the food is likely to deteriorate over time. The United States Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection Service publishes a chart showing the suggested freezer storage time for common foods.

====Refrigeration====
Food storage in refrigerators may not be safe unless there is close adherence to temperature guidelines. In general the temperature should be maintained at or below but never below .

Safe storage times vary from food to food and may depend on how the food has been treated prior to being placed in the refrigerator.

===Storing oils and fats===
Oils and fats can begin to go rancid quickly when not stored safely. Rancid cooking oils and fats do not often smell rancid until well after they have spoiled. Oxygen, light and heat all contribute to cooking oils becoming rancid. The higher the level of polyunsaturated fat that an oil contains, the faster it spoils. The percentage of polyunsaturated fat in some common cooking oils is: safflower (74%); sunflower (66%); corn (60%); soybean (37%); peanut (32%); canola (29%); olive (8%); coconut (5%).

To help preserve oils from rancidification, they should be stored in a dark place, stored in oxygen-safe, light-reducing containers (e.g. dark glass or metal). Once opened, oils should be refrigerated and used within a few weeks, when some types begin to go rancid. Unopened oils can have a storage life of up to one year, but some types have a shorter shelf-life even when unopened (such as sesame and flaxseed).

===Dry storage of foods===
====Vegetables====
The guidelines vary for safe storage of vegetables under dry conditions. This is because different vegetables have different characteristics, for example, tomatoes contain a lot of water, while root vegetables such as carrots and potatoes contain less. These factors, and many others, affect the amount of time that a vegetable can be kept in dry storage, as well as the temperature needed to preserve its usefulness. The following guideline shows the required dry storage conditions:

* Cool and dry: onion
* Cool and moist: root vegetable, potato, cabbage
* Warm and dry: winter squash, pumpkin, sweet potatoes, dried hot peppers

====Grain====
Grain, which includes dry kitchen ingredients such as flour, rice, millet, couscous, cornmeal, and so on, can be stored in rigid sealed containers to prevent moisture contamination or insect or rodent infestation. For kitchen use, glass containers are the most traditional method. During the 20th century plastic containers were introduced for kitchen use. They are now sold in a vast variety of sizes and designs.

Metal cans are used (in the United States the smallest practical grain storage uses closed-top #10 metal cans measuring about 3 to 3.5 liters). Storage in grain sacks is ineffective; mold and pests destroy a 25 kg cloth sack of grain in a year, even if stored off the ground in a dry area. On the ground or damp concrete, grain can spoil in as little as three days, and the grain might have to be dried before it can be milled. Food stored under unsuitable conditions should not be purchased or used because of risk of spoilage. To test whether grain is still good, it can be sprouted. If it sprouts, it is still good, but if not, it should not be eaten. It may take up to a week for grains to sprout. When in doubt about the safety of the food, throw it out as quickly as possible.

====Spices and herbs====
Spices and herbs are today often sold prepackaged in a way that is convenient for pantry storage. The packaging has dual purposes of both storing and dispensing the spices or herbs. They are sold in small glass or plastic containers or resealable plastic packaging. When spices or herbs are homegrown or bought in bulk, they can be stored at home in glass or plastic containers. They can be stored for extended periods, in some cases for years. However, after 6 months to a year, spices and herbs will gradually lose their flavour as oils they contain will slowly evaporate during storage.

Spices and herbs can be preserved in vinegar for short periods of up to a month without losing flavor, creating a flavoured vinegar.

Alternative methods for preserving herbs include freezing in water or unsalted butter. Herbs can be chopped and added to water in an ice cube tray. After freezing, the ice cubes are emptied into a plastic freezer bag for storing in the freezer. Herbs also can be stirred into a bowl with unsalted butter, then spread on wax paper and rolled into a cylinder shape. The wax paper roll containing the butter and herbs is then stored in a freezer, and can be cut off in the desired amount for cooking. Using either of these techniques, the herbs should be used within a year.

====Meat====
Unpreserved meat has only a relatively short life in storage. Perishable meats should be refrigerated, frozen, dried promptly or cured. Storage of fresh meats is a complex discipline that affects the costs, storage life and eating quality of the meat, and the appropriate techniques vary with the kind of meat and the particular requirements. For example, dry ageing techniques are sometimes used to tenderize gourmet meats by hanging them in carefully controlled environments for up to 21 days, while game animals of various kinds may be hung after shooting. Details depend on personal tastes and local traditions. Modern techniques of preparing meat for storage vary with the type of meat and special requirements of tenderness, flavour, hygiene, and economy.

Semi-dried meats like salamis and country style hams are processed first with salt, smoke, sugar, acid, or other &quot;cures&quot; then hung in cool dry storage for extended periods, sometimes exceeding a year. Some of the materials added during the curing of meats serve to reduce the risks of food poisoning from anaerobic bacteria such as species of Clostridium that release botulinum toxin that can cause botulism. Typical ingredients of curing agents that inhibit anaerobic bacteria include nitrates. Such salts are dangerously poisonous in their own right and must be added in carefully controlled quantities and according to proper techniques. Their proper use has however saved many lives and much food spoilage.

Like the semi-dried meats, most salted, smoked, and simply-dried meats of different kinds that once were staples in particular regions, now are largely luxury snacks or garnishes; examples include jerky, biltong, and varieties of pemmican, but ham and bacon for instance, still are staples in many communities.

===Food rotation===
Food rotation is important to preserve freshness. When food is rotated, the food that has been in storage the longest is used first. As food is used, new food is added to the pantry to replace it; the essential rationale is to use the oldest food as soon as possible so that nothing is in storage too long and becomes unsafe to eat. Labelling food with paper labels on the storage container, marking the date that the container is placed in storage, can make this practice simpler.

===For emergency preparation===
Guides for surviving emergency conditions in many parts of the world recommend maintaining a store of essential foods; typically water, cereals, oil, dried milk, and protein rich foods such as beans, lentils, tinned meat and fish. A food storage calculator can be used to help determine how much of these staple foods a person would need to store in order to sustain life for one full year. In addition to storing the basic food items many people choose to supplement their food storage with frozen or preserved garden-grown fruits and vegetables and freeze-dried or canned produce. An unvarying diet of staple foods prepared in the same manner can cause appetite exhaustion, leading to less caloric intake. Another benefit to having a basic supply of food storage in the home is for the potential cost savings. Costs of dry bulk foods (before preparation) are often considerably less than convenience and fresh foods purchased at local markets or supermarkets. There is a significant market in convenience foods for campers, such as dehydrated food products.

==Commercial food logistics==
Grain and beans are stored in tall grain elevators, almost always at a rail head near the point of production. The grain is shipped to a final user in hopper cars. In the former Soviet Union, where harvest was poorly controlled, grain was often irradiated at the point of production to suppress mold and insects. In the U.S., threshing and drying is performed in the field, and transport is nearly sterile and in large containers that effectively suppresses pest access, which eliminates the need for irradiation. At any given time, the U.S. usually has about two weeks worth of stored grains for the population.

Fresh fruits and vegetables are sometimes packed in plastic packages and cups for fresh premium markets, or placed in large plastic tubs for sauce and soup processors. Fruits and vegetables are usually refrigerated at the earliest possible moment, and even so have a shelf life of two weeks or less.

In the United States, livestock is usually transported live, slaughtered at a major distribution point, hung and transported for two days to a week in refrigerated rail cars, and then butchered and sold locally. Before refrigerated rail cars, meat had to be transported live, and this placed its cost so high that only farmers and the wealthy could afford it every day. In Europe much meat is transported live and slaughtered close to the point of sale. In much of Africa and Asia most meat is for local populations is raised, slaughtered and eaten locally, which is believed to be less stressful for the animals involved and minimizes meat storage needs. In Australia and New Zealand, where a large proportion of meat production is for export, meat enters the cold chain early, being stored in large freezer plants before being shipped overseas in freezer ships.

==Food storage facilities==

Food storage facilities may include those used for dry goods, or in canning, Food dehydration, pickling, curing and more. They include:
*Pantry
*Larder
*Root cellar

Fully dedicated food storage facilities include:
*Cool store — a large refrigerated room or building 
*Cool warehouse — a very large refrigerated building 
*Silo — used to store grains, like wheat and maize
*2800 Polar Way — world&#x27;s largest food freezer

==See also==
* Canning
** Home canning
* Candying
* Food science
** &quot;Food and Bioprocess Technology&quot;
** Food chemistry
** Food engineering
** Food safety
** Food microbiology
** Food technology
* Dietary supplement
* Food dehydration
* Food fortification
* Food preservation
* Food rheology
* Food storage container
** Food packaging
* Food supplement
* Hoarding (animal behavior)
* Nutraceutical
* Pickling
* Preserves
* Root cellar
* Shaker-style pantry box
* Storage clamp

== Sources ==
== References ==
==External links==
* US Government Food Safety Guidelines
* USDA Resources for Food Safety and Storage
* Food Storage: Refrigerator and Freezer
* Food Storage Guidelines For Consumers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11702361" start="0" end="12" title="Food storage" label="Food storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="129" end="133" title="food" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q213753" start="194" end="201" title="harvest" label="harvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q425694" start="259" end="273" title="home economics" label="domestic skill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349300" start="285" end="296" title="root cellar" label="root cellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11702361" start="321" end="335" title="Food storage" label="food logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q173514" start="386" end="403" title="Food preservation" label="Food preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="418" end="427" title="transport" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q22855" start="458" end="467" title="Consumer" label="consumers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229911" start="486" end="499" title="food security" label="food security"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="929" end="942" title="human society" label="human society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874546" start="947" end="962" title="Hoarding (animal behavior)" label="by many animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q272002" start="1020" end="1037" title="foodborne illness" label="foodborne illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q18919" start="1080" end="1090" title="food waste" label="food waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q989018" start="1213" end="1225" title="distribution (economics)" label="distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q22855" start="1229" end="1237" title="consumer" label="consumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5906358" start="1258" end="1271" title="balanced diet" label="balanced diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q258313" start="1304" end="1310" title="pantry" label="pantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070802" start="1432" end="1443" title="emergency" label="emergencies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1501" end="1523" title="emergency management#Preparedness" label="emergency preparedness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229640" start="1573" end="1595" title="survivalism" label="survivalism (prepping)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="1644" end="1654" title="LDS Church" label="LDS Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="1919" end="1958" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q272002" start="2085" end="2099" title="Foodborne illness" label="food poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q272002" start="2231" end="2245" title="Foodborne illness" label="food poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q160653" start="2291" end="2302" title="Listeriosis" label="Listeriosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q422449" start="2304" end="2317" title="Mycotoxicosis" label="Mycotoxicosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q326648" start="2319" end="2332" title="Salmonellosis" label="Salmonellosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="2334" end="2341" title="Escherichia coli" label="E. coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q199695" start="2343" end="2372" title="Staphylococcal food poisoning" label="Staphylococcal food poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q154865" start="2377" end="2385" title="Botulism" label="Botulism"/>
<link wikidata="Q338215" start="2525" end="2537" title="home canning" label="home canning"/>
<link wikidata="Q843389" start="2636" end="2643" title="canning" label="canning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604509" start="3975" end="3994" title="polyunsaturated fat" label="polyunsaturated fat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4109" end="4118" title="Safflower#Seed_oil" label="safflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q171497" start="4126" end="4135" title="sunflower" label="sunflower"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4184" end="4190" title="Canola#Canola_oil" label="canola"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="4198" end="4203" title="Olive_oil" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q216235" start="4210" end="4217" title="coconut oil" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q859029" start="4252" end="4267" title="rancidification" label="rancidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q20136" start="4880" end="4894" title="root vegetable" label="root vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="5188" end="5193" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q20136" start="5212" end="5226" title="root vegetable" label="root vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="5228" end="5234" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q35051" start="5236" end="5243" title="cabbage" label="cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026408" start="5260" end="5273" title="winter squash" label="winter squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q165308" start="5275" end="5282" title="pumpkin" label="pumpkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="5284" end="5296" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q165199" start="5306" end="5317" title="Chili pepper" label="hot peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="5333" end="5338" title="Grain" label="Grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q36465" start="5387" end="5392" title="flour" label="flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="5394" end="5398" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="5400" end="5406" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q76605" start="5408" end="5416" title="couscous" label="couscous"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286140" start="5418" end="5426" title="cornmeal" label="cornmeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="5527" end="5533" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5777" end="5790" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q115805240" start="5904" end="5915" title="Flour sack" label="grain sacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q44494" start="6169" end="6175" title="milling (grinding)" label="milled"/>
<link wikidata="Q258313" start="6640" end="6646" title="pantry" label="pantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q41354" start="7186" end="7193" title="vinegar" label="vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q339062" start="7931" end="7941" title="Perishable" label="Perishable"/>
<link wikidata="Q747713" start="7958" end="7970" title="Refrigeration" label="refrigerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q751728" start="7972" end="7978" title="Frozen food" label="frozen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514687" start="7980" end="7985" title="Drying (food)" label="dried"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503716" start="7998" end="8003" title="Curing (food preservation)" label="cured"/>
<link wikidata="Q320706" start="8225" end="8235" title="Beef aging" label="dry ageing"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990" start="8287" end="8291" title="meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647973" start="8296" end="8303" title="Meat hanging" label="hanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503716" start="8882" end="8888" title="Curing (food preservation)" label="curing"/>
<link wikidata="Q272002" start="8927" end="8941" title="Foodborne illness" label="food poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q189790" start="8947" end="8956" title="Anaerobic organism" label="anaerobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q327663" start="8985" end="8996" title="Clostridium" label="Clostridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="9010" end="9025" title="botulinum toxin" label="botulinum toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154865" start="9041" end="9049" title="botulism" label="botulism"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="9459" end="9466" title="Staple food" label="staples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072897" start="9551" end="9556" title="jerky" label="jerky"/>
<link wikidata="Q863394" start="9558" end="9565" title="biltong" label="biltong"/>
<link wikidata="Q130097" start="9584" end="9592" title="pemmican" label="pemmican"/>
<link wikidata="Q11106" start="9606" end="9611" title="bacon" label="bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q258313" start="9861" end="9867" title="pantry" label="pantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q891382" start="10212" end="10242" title="Survival skills" label="surviving emergency conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="10330" end="10335" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="10337" end="10343" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="10357" end="10361" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="10367" end="10374" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="10394" end="10398" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q131226" start="10401" end="10407" title="lentil" label="lentil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660407" start="10410" end="10421" title="Potted meat" label="tinned meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q723912" start="10752" end="10764" title="freeze-drying" label="freeze-dried"/>
<link wikidata="Q843389" start="10768" end="10774" title="Canning" label="canned"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="10805" end="10816" title="staple food" label="staple food"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996478" start="11026" end="11035" title="bulk food" label="bulk food"/>
<link wikidata="Q180846" start="11149" end="11160" title="supermarket" label="supermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q13030962" start="11196" end="11212" title="convenience food" label="convenience food"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514687" start="11235" end="11250" title="Drying (food)" label="dehydrated food"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="11302" end="11306" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520009" start="11327" end="11341" title="grain elevator" label="grain elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387165" start="11443" end="11453" title="hopper car" label="hopper car"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737837" start="11537" end="11547" title="irradiation" label="irradiated"/>
<link wikidata="Q159341" start="11587" end="11591" title="Mold (fungus)" label="mold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="11596" end="11602" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="11912" end="11917" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="11923" end="11932" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="12229" end="12238" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016145" start="12358" end="12379" title="refrigerated car" label="refrigerated rail car"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="12866" end="12875" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="12880" end="12891" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q592197" start="12968" end="12978" title="cold chain" label="cold chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504307" start="13056" end="13069" title="Reefer ship" label="freezer ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707967" start="13152" end="13161" title="dry goods" label="dry goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q843389" start="13169" end="13176" title="canning" label="canning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514687" start="13178" end="13194" title="Food dehydration" label="Food dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503967" start="13196" end="13204" title="pickling" label="pickling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503716" start="13206" end="13212" title="Curing (food preservation)" label="curing"/>
<link wikidata="Q258313" start="13238" end="13244" title="Pantry" label="Pantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899148" start="13246" end="13252" title="Larder" label="Larder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349300" start="13254" end="13265" title="Root cellar" label="Root cellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796951" start="13317" end="13327" title="Cool store" label="Cool store"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796951" start="13370" end="13384" title="Cool warehouse" label="Cool warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q213643" start="13424" end="13428" title="Silo" label="Silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55075456" start="13475" end="13489" title="2800 Polar Way" label="2800 Polar Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q843389" start="13542" end="13549" title="Canning" label="Canning"/>
<link wikidata="Q338215" start="13553" end="13565" title="Home canning" label="Home canning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163138" start="13568" end="13576" title="Candying" label="Candying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637030" start="13579" end="13591" title="Food science" label="Food science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016763" start="13601" end="13631" title="Food and Bioprocess Technology" label="Food and Bioprocess Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q910172" start="13641" end="13655" title="Food chemistry" label="Food chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631525" start="13659" end="13675" title="Food engineering" label="Food engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q909821" start="13679" end="13690" title="Food safety" label="Food safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810993" start="13694" end="13711" title="Food microbiology" label="Food microbiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039642" start="13715" end="13730" title="Food technology" label="Food technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="13733" end="13751" title="Dietary supplement" label="Dietary supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514687" start="13754" end="13770" title="Food dehydration" label="Food dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q15121266" start="13773" end="13791" title="Food fortification" label="Food fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q173514" start="13794" end="13811" title="Food preservation" label="Food preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519385" start="13814" end="13827" title="Food rheology" label="Food rheology"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739826" start="13830" end="13852" title="Food storage container" label="Food storage container"/>
<link wikidata="Q25380418" start="13856" end="13870" title="Food packaging" label="Food packaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="13873" end="13888" title="Food supplement" label="Food supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874546" start="13891" end="13917" title="Hoarding (animal behavior)" label="Hoarding (animal behavior)"/>
<link wikidata="Q533025" start="13920" end="13933" title="Nutraceutical" label="Nutraceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503967" start="13936" end="13944" title="Pickling" label="Pickling"/>
<link wikidata="Q74048276" start="13947" end="13956" title="Preserves" label="Preserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349300" start="13959" end="13970" title="Root cellar" label="Root cellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906643" start="13973" end="13996" title="Shaker-style pantry box" label="Shaker-style pantry box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932269" start="13999" end="14012" title="Storage clamp" label="Storage clamp"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292035" wikidata="Q1501196" url="?curid=292035" title="Catalan Company">
<text>The Catalan Company or the Great Catalan Company (; , , , or ) was a company of mercenaries led by Roger de Flor in the early 14th century and hired by Byzantine Emperor Andronikos II Palaiologos to combat the increasing power of the Anatolian beyliks. It was formed by &quot;almogavar&quot; veterans of the War of the Sicilian Vespers, who had remained unemployed after the signing in 1302 of the Peace of Caltabellotta between the Crown of Aragon and the French dynasty of the Angevins.

== Origin ==
The military demands of the Reconquista stimulated the formation of the elite light infantry known as the &quot;almogavars&quot; on the Iberian peninsula during the 13th century. These troops were used quite effectively by the Crown of Aragon for other imperial ventures in the Mediterranean, particularly the War of the Sicilian Vespers. They were typically organized in companies (&quot;societates&quot;) of 20 to 50 men, following a chief of recognized military skill. The signing of the Peace of Caltabellotta in 1302 terminated that struggle in Sicily, leaving the &quot;almogavars&quot; without immediate employment.

James II of Aragon and his brother Frederick III of Sicily saw the threat posed to civil order. While Frederick would have liked to retain some of them for the defense of Sicily, they could not, by custom, be forced to do so. Instead, many of the &quot;almogavars&quot; were recruited into a &quot;company of companies&quot;, led by the mercenary Roger de Flor, to be paid in Byzantine service.

The organization was referred to by the (hostile) Angevin and papal chancelleries as the &quot;[Magna] Societas [exercitus] Catalanorum&quot;, the [Great] Catalan [military] Company. The Sicilian chancellery referred to them as &quot;Francorum&quot;, &quot;Frankish&quot;, as Western Europeans were called in Byzantium, However, the written letters produced by the Company were mainly in Catalan.

== Arrival at Constantinople ==
The Great Catalan Company departed from Messina with 36 ships (including 18 galleys) transporting about 8,000 men (1,500 cavalry, 4,000 &quot;almogavar&quot; foot soldiers and an indeterminate number of servants and auxiliary personnel). The exact figures are a matter of dispute, for although the numbers provided by Ramon Muntaner are trusted by later historians Francisco de Moncada and George Paquimeres, the contemporary Byzantine historian Nicephorus Gregoras gives a total number of only 1,000 men.

After a brief stop at Monemvasia, the Company arrived at Constantinople in January 1303, where it was received by the Emperor and housed in the district of Blachernae. Emperor Andronikos II Palaiologos arranged the wedding of Roger de Flor to his niece, the 15 year old princess Maria Asanina, daughter of the Tsar of Bulgaria Ivan Asen III and Irene Palaiologina. De Flor was named &quot;Megas Doux&quot; (Great Dux, i.e. Commander of the Imperial forces).

The arrival of the new mercenary contingent upset the balance of power that supported the Byzantine Empire. It especially irritated the Genoese, who saw the arrival of the Catalan Company as an intrusion by the House of Barcelona into the area of influence of the Republic of Genoa: the Eastern Mediterranean and the Byzantine Empire. Armed conflict was not long in breaking out, with 3,000 Genoese killed (including their leader Rosso del Finar) in what was called the in September 1303.

== Campaigns in Anatolia ==
=== Battle of the Cyzicus (1303) ===
After those incidents and the recent defeat of the Byzantines in the Battle of Bafeus, the Emperor ordered Roger de Flor to move his &quot;almogavars&quot; as soon as possible to the battle front in Anatolia, in modern-day Turkey. Transported there in the fleet commanded by the Catalan Admiral Ferran d&#x27;Aunés, Roger de Flor&#x27;s troops disembarked at Cape Artake, near the ruins of ancient Cyzicus. They soon achieved a great victory against the Karasid Turks in the Battle of the Cyzicus in October 1303. The &quot;almogavars&quot; made a surprise attack on the Oghuz Turkish camp located at Cape Artake, killing about 3,000 cavalry and 10,000 infantry and capturing many women and children.

After this victory, Roger de Flor decided to postpone a planned march to the besieged town of Philadelphia and spent the winter on Cape Artake, a position that provided good defenses and an easy means of supply. During this period temporarily left the company after a disagreement with Roger de Flor, putting himself in the service of the Duke of Athens. Roger de Flor, on the other hand, took advantage of the lull to travel with his wife to Constantinople with four galleys, claim payment from the Emperor and discuss with him the next campaign. Emperor Andronikos happily paid Roger de Flor and entrusted him with the liberation of Philadelphia.

On his return to Cyzicus, Roger de Flor found that his undisciplined troops had already spent twice or triple their pay and had been out plundering. Greek historians say that the region of Cyzicus was devastated by the looting of the almogavars, to the point that the sister of Andronikos had to go to the city to exhort Roger to move his troops immediately to Philadelphia.

=== Battle of Germe ===

The 1304 campaign began with a month&#x27;s delay because of continuous disputes between the &quot;almogavars&quot; and their Alan allies, which caused 300 deaths in the forces of the latter. Finally, in early May, Roger de Flor began the campaign to raise the siege of Philadelphia with 6,000 almogavars and 1,000 Alans. Philadelphia at that time was suffering from a siege by Yakup bin Ali Şir, governor of the Germiyanids from the powerful emirate of Germiyan-oğhlu. After a few days, the &quot;almogavars&quot; arrived at the Byzantine city of Achyraus and descended by the valley of the River Kaikos until they arrived at the city of Germe (now known as Soma), a Byzantine fortification that had previously fallen to the Turks. The Turks who were there tried to flee as fast as possible, but their rearguard was attacked by the troops of Roger de Flor in what came to be called the .

=== Battle of Aulax and liberation of Philadelphia ===
After the victory in Germe, the Company resumed its march, passing through Chliara (modern Kırkağaç) and Thyatira and entered the valley of the Hermos River. On their way, they stopped in various places, abusing the Byzantine governors for their lack of courage. Roger de Flor even planned to hang some of them; naming the Bulgarian captain Sausi Crisanislao, who finally obtained a pardon.

Upon learning of the imminent arrival of the Great Company, Bey Yakup bin Ali Şir, head of the coalition of the Turkish troops from the emirates of Germiyan-oğhlu and Aydın-oğhlu, decided to lift the siege of Philadelphia and face the Company in a suitable location (Aulax) with his 8,000 cavalry and 12,000 infantry.

Roger de Flor took command of the Company cavalry, dividing it into three contingents (Alans, Catalans and Greeks), while Corbarán of Alet did the same with the infantry. The Catalans achieved a great victory over the Turks in what would come to be known as the , with only 500 Turkish infantry and 1,000 cavalrymen managing to escape alive. After this battle de Flor made a triumphant entrance into Philadelphia, being received by its magistrates and the bishop Teolepto.

Having already accomplished the principal mission entrusted to him by the emperor, Roger de Flor decided to consolidate the defence of Philadelphia by conquering the nearby fortresses which had fallen into the hands of the Turks. Thus, the &quot;almogavars&quot; marched north towards the fortress of Kula, forcing the Turks who were there to flee. The Greek garrison of Kula received Roger de Flor as a liberator, but he, not appreciating how a seemingly impregnable fortress could be allowed to fall into the hands of the Turks without a battle, beheaded the governor and condemned the commander to the gallows. The same harshness was applied when, days later, the &quot;almogavars&quot; took the fortification of Furnes, further north. Then, Roger de Flor returned with his troops to Philadelphia to claim payment for his successful campaign.

=== Occupation of Magnesia ===
The captains of the Company then resolved to attack the maritime provinces of the Turks. From Philadelphia. the Company retreated through the valley of the river Hermos and entered the prefecture of the city of Magnesia (modern Manisa), the only territory of Anatolia that remained under the control of the Byzantines. Magnesia had solid walls and was a few miles from the island of Chios, where the Catalan Company fleet was anchored under the command of Ferran d&#x27;Aunés. In those circumstances, Roger de Flor decided to occupy the city and establish his headquarters there, and to transfer there his spoils of war and to garrison it with his troops. From the viewpoint of the Greeks, Roger de Flor began to act not so much as a mercenary or military leader but as the governor of all Anatolia, thus winning the enmity of the prefect Nostongos Ducas and the governor of the city of Magnesia, Demetrios Ataliota. Nostongo Ducas traveled to Constantinople to report the situation to the emperor, thereby causing consternation in the capital.

=== Battle of Tire ===
After leaving his spoils and a small garrison of &quot;almogavars&quot; in Magnesia, the troops of Roger de Flor arrived at the city of Nif (Nymphaion), where he received a request for aid from two inhabitants of Tire. It appeared that the surviving Turkish troops of the battle of Aulax had united with those of the Emirate of Menteşe-oğhlu and begun a joint attack on Tire. Roger de Flor divided his force into two and ordered one half to return to Magnesia. The remaining troops under de Flor made a forced march to arrive at the walls of Tire in the dead of night, entering the city without being spotted by the besieging Turks. The began the following morning, when the Turks assembled on a plain near the city to prepare the assault, expecting to find in Tire only a small garrison of Greek soldiers.

Inside Tire, Roger de Flor ordered his seneschal to prepare a detachment of 200 men on horseback and 2,000 &quot;almogavars&quot;. When the Turks approached the walls, the troops led by Corberán of Alet rushed out of the city and attacked the Turks, who in a short time suffered the loss of 700 men on horseback and even more infantrymen. In panic, the rest of the Turkish cavalry fled to the mountains chased by the &quot;almogávar&quot; cavalry. Corberán of Alet decided to continue the attack on the retreating Turks as they began to climb the mountains, ordering his cavalrymen to dismount and climb after them. In response, the Turks harassed the &quot;almogavars&quot; by throwing stones and firing arrows, one of which killed Corberán of Alet, striking his head at a moment when his helmet had been removed. The &quot;almogavar&quot; troops, shocked by the death of the seneschal of the company, interrupted their pursuit and retreated to Tire carrying the corpse of Corberán of Alet, thus allowing the surviving Turks to escape.

When the troops returned to Tire and informed Roger de Flor of the death of his seneschal, he ordered that Corberán of Alet be buried with all honors in the Church of San George, located two leagues from the city, and that his tomb be beautifully decorated. The Company remained stationed in Tire for eight more days.

=== Arrival of Bernat of Rocafort ===
In the course of the Battle of Tire, Bernat de Rocafort arrived at Constantinople from the Kingdom of Sicily. Bernat had not joined the company the previous year after he had refused to accept the terms of the Peace of Caltabellotta, which forced him to return two castles he had conquered in the Kingdom of Naples. Finally, in July 1304, he decided to join the company and weighed anchor for Constantinople with 200 cavalrymen, 1,000 almogavars and two galleys.

There, he was received by Andronikos, who informed him that the company was on the island of Chios. Bernat then made for Chios, where he met the fleet captained by Ferran d&#x27;Aunés, and together they sailed to Ania (now Kuşadası). Once in Ania, they were received by Ramon Muntaner, who led Bernat to Ephesus, where he met Roger de Flor, who named Bernat the new seneschal of the company (replacing the late Corberán of Alet) and gave him his daughter (who had been engaged to Corberan) in marriage and provided him with 100 horses and money for his men.

Roger de Flor and Bernat de Rocafort then marched to Ania but not without first asking for further war contributions in Ephesus, again accompanied by numerous abuses and looting by the &quot;almogavars&quot;. After his departure, Roger de Flor entrusted the safety of Tire to the Aragonese Diego de Orós with 30 cavalry men and 100 infantrymen.

=== Battle of Ania ===
For their part, the surviving troops of the Emirate of Aydin managed to regroup around Ania and frightened its population. In the face of that provocation, the &quot;almogavars&quot; decided to charge immediately against them in complete disorder and without receiving orders from any of their captains. In spite of the disorder, they were victorious at the and killed 1,000 cavalrymen and 2,000 Turkish infantry.

After the new victory, the captains decided to return to the eastern provinces and seek a great confrontation with the Turks in the interior of Anatolia since the limited number of soldiers of the Company did not allow a war of occupation.

=== Battle of Kibistra ===
In July 1304, the Company began to march through the regions of Caria and Lycaonia and linked up with the road that the Crusaders had followed two centuries earlier on their way to the Holy Land. Finally, the Company reached the Cilician Gates at the foot of the Taurus Mountains, which separated the region of Cilicia from the Christian Kingdom of Little Armenia.

As the cavalry advanced to reconnoitre the land, they discovered in a valley a large contingent of Turkish troops (20,000 infantry and 10,000 cavalry), who were remnants of previous defeats and were regrouped and ready to ambush the company. Once discovered, the Turks descended to the plain and both armies prepared for a great battle, the , in the open field at Kibistra on August 15, 1304.

In spite of the numerical disparity between the forces, Roger de Flor did not avoid the combat but put himself at the head of the cavalry. Bernat de Rocafort and Marulli did the same with the &quot;almogavars&quot;, who showed great spirit and celebrated the victory before even engaging in combat and uttering their famous war cry &quot;Awake iron, awake!&quot; while they hit the ground with the end of their spears.

At last, the troops of the Company rushed to meet the Turkish troops, and the battle begun. At first, the Turks asserted their numerical advantage, but even as the battle seemed to be swinging in favor of the Turks, the &quot;almogavars&quot; charged again and managed to breach and destroy their line. The battle continued until twilight before the remains of the Turkish army fled away, chased by the almogavar cavalry until almost dawn. The &quot;almogavars&quot; spent the night with their weapons in hand and waited for a Turkish counterattack, which never occurred.

The following morning, Roger de Flor proceeded to survey the battlefield and was surprised by the magnitude of his victory. No fewer than 6,000 cavalry and 12,000 Turkish infantrymen had been killed in the battle. The &quot;almogavars&quot; then began to shout out their wish to continue the march through the Taurus mountains to Little Armenia and to quickly recover what the Byzantine Empire had lost over many centuries, but their captains judged the idea reckless.

== De Flor&#x27;s murder and Catalan revenge ==

After the important victory of Kibistra, the Company decided to return to Ania and spend the winter there as the a lack of knowledge of the terrain made an advance very dangerous. During the retreat, crossing country that had been conquered by the Turks, Greek historians report numerous examples of looting, abuses and cruelty by the &quot;almogavar&quot; soldiers, worse according to them than was suffered under the Ottoman yoke.

=== Siege of Magnesia ===
Arriving at Magnesia, however, the company was informed of a terrible event. The local population, with its captain, Ataliote, at the head and with the support of the Alans, had beheaded the garrison and stolen its treasure. Informed, Roger de Flor immediately laid siege to the city.

However, the siege had to be lifted shortly afterwards by order of Andronikos, who requested the help of the company to defend the prince of Bulgaria (Roger&#x27;s brother-in-law) from an uprising led by his own uncle. The historian Nicephorus Gregoras, however, claimed that the Emperor&#x27;s request was a pretext to disguise the impossibility of the Company breaking the resistance of Magnesia. The 500 Alans who still remained on the side of the Company also deserted.

=== Murder of Roger de Flor and massacre of Adrianople ===
After two years of victorious campaigns against the Turks, the lack of discipline and the character of a foreign army in the heart of the Empire were seen as a growing danger, and on April 30, 1305, the Emperor&#x27;s son (Michael IX Palaiologos) ordered mercenary Alans to murder Roger de Flor and exterminate the Company in Adrianople while it attended a banquet organised by the Emperor. About 100 cavalry men and 1,000 infantrymen perished.

After the murder of Roger de Flor, the local Byzantine population rose up against the Catalans in Constantinople and killed many of them, including at the main barracks. Prince Michael ensured that as many as possible were killed before news reached the main force in Gallipoli. Some, however, escaped and carried the news of the massacre to Gallipoli after which the Catalans went on a spree of their own, killing all the local Byzantines. The memory of the devastation would last in the memory of the towns of the area for centuries, just as the monks of Mount Athos would prohibit the entrance of Catalan citizens until 2000.

=== Siege of Gallipoli ===
Byzantine troops, made up of Greeks, Alans and Turcopolos, surrounded Gallipoli. , the new leader of the Company was besieged and sent ambassadors to Sicily to ask for help.

D&#x27;Entença planned a raid against Constantinople, first taking and looting the island of Propóntide and then departing for Recrea with 5 galleys, leaving in Gallipoli a garrison formed by 206 horsemen and 1,256 infantry, commanded by Ramon Muntaner (as captain of Gallipoli) and Bernat de Rocafort (as Seneschal). On the way back to Gallipoli, d&#x27;Entença&#x27;s fleet ran into a larger fleet of 18 Genoese ships. D&#x27;Entança was welcomed aboard but then treacherously captured and taken to a Genoese stronghold in the area. He would later be released.

The small force left in Gallipoli nevertheless agreed to defend the site and their honour to the death and bored holes in the remaining ships to ensure there was no escape. On 21 June 1305, they sallied forth to meet the Byzantine Army and fought with such ferocity that they totally overwhelmed them and killed many thousands of the enemy for the loss of only a few men.

=== Battle of Apros ===

The Catalan Company then marched to Thrace and left a few families behind in Gallipoli. After three days of marching, they came across, near Apros, the Byzantine army of 6,000 cavalry and even more infantry under the Emperor&#x27;s son Prince Michael.

The Catalan forces lined up in front of the Byzantine army, which included a large contingent of Alans as well as many Turcopoles. Despite the Imperial Army&#x27;s numerical superiority, the Alans withdrew after the first charge, and the Turcopoles deserted &quot;en bloc&quot; to the Catalans. The Catalans inflicted heavy losses, and even Prince Michael was injured and had to leave the field, followed by his army. The Catalans had won the day but slept with weapons in hand in case of a Byzantine counterattack.

When 60 Catalan prisoners in Adrianople heard of the victory, they resolved to break out but could only climb on the roof of a tower. The local population were eventually driven to set fire to the tower in which most of the Catalans perished. Those who jumped were set upon by the crowd.

=== Dominion over Thrace ===
The Catalans proceeded to ravage Thrace for two years and were assisted by the return of Ferran Eiximenis d&#x27;Arenós with whose help they captured several towns.

=== Battle of Mount Haemus ===
The Company decided to have a showdown with a tribal group known as the Magasetas, who were based in the vicinity of Mount Haemus and had been involved in the murder of Roger de Flor. They withdrew troops in preparation from the various towns of Thrace such as Pacia, Modico and Rodesto which they had been occupying. Leaving a garrison in Gallipoli to look after the women and their possessions the main bulk of the Catalans set off in search of the Magasetas. After several days, the Catalans located them and counted 3,000 cavalry and 6,000 infantry plus their baggage train.

The battle took place next day on a plain at the foot of the Mount Haemus where the Magasetas made a defensive wall of their wagons. Once again, the superior Catalan cavalry and infantry overwhelmed the enemy, killing their general Gregorio. Of the 9,000 fighting men of the Magasetas, only 300 survived. The women and children tried in vain to escape on tired horses.

== Internal confrontations and the end of the Company ==
===Internal division===
Subsequently, the Catalan Company suffered a period of internal confrontation provoked by the disputes and interests of foreign powers eager to control it. Thus Frederic III of Sicily assigned Crown Prince Ferdinand of Majorca to Gallipoli as captain of the company. The move was contested by Bernat de Rocafort, and others such as Berenguer d&#x27;Entença and Ferran Eiximenis d&#x27;Arenós accepted the appointment. The fight ended with the departure of Ferran and the Prince and the death of Entença, which left Bernat de Rocafort as head of the Company. The administrator Ramon Muntaner also would leave the Company and later write a chronicle about its history.

After this period of internal struggle, Bernat de Rocafort offered the services of the company to Charles of Valois to strengthen his aspirations to the Byzantine Empire. In 1309, Thibault de Chepoy, the representative of Charles of Valois, ordered the arrest of Bernat de Rocafort and sent him to Naples, where he would starve to death the same year.

===Move into southern Greece===
By 1308, the resources of the Gallipoli peninsula were exhausted and the company headed west towards southern Greece, reestablishing themselves on the peninsula of Kassandra in Chalcidice. From there, they attacked and pillaged the locality, including Mount Athos Monastery. Unable to capture Thessalonica, they moved further west and south and by 1309 reached the region of Thessaly, in what is now Central Greece.

===Battle of Halmyros===

In 1310, the new leader of the Company Roger Deslaur offered his services to Walter V of Brienne, Duke of Athens, and cleared the duchy of all his enemies in less than a year. The Duke, however, did not pay the amount agreed upon for their services, which unleashed the wrath of the company. The Company decided to declare war on the duke and met him at the Battle of Halmyros on March 15, 1311. The battle itself was a decisive last victory for the Catalans, despite being outnumbered by the Frankish forces of Athens, which included 700 knights. Walter V and most of his knights were killed, which left Athens at the mercy of the Company.

===Duchies of Athens and Neopatras===
In a short space of time, the Company not only assumed the control of the Duchy of Athens but extended its dominions to the city of Thebes and the region of Thessaly, converting the latter into the Duchy of Neopatras, where they established themselves as feudal lords. In 1312, they accepted the overlordship of the Aragonese crown of Sicily and adopted a new seal bearing the head of St George. As a consequence of their taking possession of the duchies in the name of the Crown of Aragon and refusing to return them to their legitimate heirs, the Pope demanded the Company return the territory and excommunicated its members in 1318 after they declined.

Both duchies remained in the hands of the Great Company as vassals of the Crown of Aragon until 1388–1390, when they were defeated by the Navarrese Company, commanded by Pedro de San Superano, Juan de Urtubia and the Florentine troops of Nerio I Acciaioli of Corinth. The descendants of the latter then controlled the duchies until 1456, when they were conquered by the Ottoman Empire. By then, the Catalan Company had ceased to exist.

== See also ==
* Ramon Muntaner
* Chronicle of Muntaner
* Catalan campaign in Asia Minor
* Principality of Catalonia
* Prince Salvador

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
** 
** The Catalan Chronicle of Francisco de Moncada.
* 
** 
** 
* 
* 
* Catalan Company (1302–1388 AD), by David Kuijt and Chris Brantley
* History (14th century). Aragon</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1501196" start="4" end="19" title="Catalan Company" label="Catalan Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501196" start="27" end="48" title="Catalan Company" label="Great Catalan Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="80" end="91" title="Mercenary" label="mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q436817" start="99" end="112" title="Roger de Flor" label="Roger de Flor"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="152" end="169" title="Byzantine Emperor" label="Byzantine Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q37067" start="170" end="195" title="Andronikos II Palaiologos" label="Andronikos II Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q853309" start="234" end="251" title="Anatolian beyliks" label="Anatolian beyliks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138325" start="276" end="285" title="almogavar" label="almogavar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599340" start="308" end="335" title="War of the Sicilian Vespers" label="War of the Sicilian Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q661425" start="398" end="420" title="Peace of Caltabellotta" label="Peace of Caltabellotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="433" end="448" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q939200" start="479" end="487" title="Capetian House of Anjou" label="Angevins"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="531" end="542" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138325" start="615" end="625" title="almogavars" label="almogavars"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="730" end="745" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599340" start="813" end="840" title="War of the Sicilian Vespers" label="War of the Sicilian Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q661425" start="994" end="1016" title="Peace of Caltabellotta" label="Peace of Caltabellotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q312735" start="1127" end="1145" title="James II of Aragon" label="James II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q367226" start="1162" end="1185" title="Frederick III of Sicily" label="Frederick III of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q436817" start="1474" end="1487" title="Roger de Flor" label="Roger de Flor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="1911" end="1918" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="1993" end="2000" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138325" start="2095" end="2104" title="almogavars" label="almogavar"/>
<link wikidata="Q671145" start="2271" end="2285" title="Ramon Muntaner" label="Ramon Muntaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270219" start="2318" end="2338" title="Francisco de Moncada, 3rd Marquis of Aitona" label="Francisco de Moncada"/>
<link wikidata="Q372109" start="2399" end="2418" title="Nicephorus Gregoras" label="Nicephorus Gregoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q654616" start="2482" end="2492" title="Monemvasia" label="Monemvasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="2517" end="2531" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749015" start="2616" end="2626" title="Blachernae" label="Blachernae"/>
<link wikidata="Q37067" start="2636" end="2661" title="Andronikos II Palaiologos" label="Andronikos II Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q436817" start="2686" end="2699" title="Roger de Flor" label="Roger de Flor"/>
<link wikidata="Q379687" start="2770" end="2786" title="Tsar of Bulgaria" label="Tsar of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q285508" start="2787" end="2800" title="Ivan Asen III of Bulgaria" label="Ivan Asen III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360993" start="2805" end="2823" title="Irene Palaiologina, Empress of Bulgaria" label="Irene Palaiologina"/>
<link wikidata="Q136578" start="2849" end="2859" title="Megas Doux" label="Megas Doux"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3009" end="3025" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q661534" start="3130" end="3148" title="House of Barcelona" label="House of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="3183" end="3200" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301962" start="3206" end="3227" title="Eastern Mediterranean" label="Eastern Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509619" start="3543" end="3559" title="Battle of Bafeus" label="Battle of Bafeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="3673" end="3681" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="3697" end="3703" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11921866" start="3769" end="3788" title="Ferran d&amp;#x27;Aunés" label="Ferran d&amp;#x27;Aunés"/>
<link wikidata="Q177298" start="3833" end="3844" title="Erdek" label="Cape Artake"/>
<link wikidata="Q615449" start="3872" end="3879" title="Cyzicus" label="Cyzicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q941887" start="3928" end="3941" title="Karasids" label="Karasid Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636400" start="3949" end="3970" title="Battle of the Cyzicus" label="Battle of the Cyzicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q138280" start="4270" end="4282" title="Alaşehir" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334714" start="4515" end="4529" title="Duke of Athens" label="Duke of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q178054" start="5353" end="5357" title="Alans" label="Alan"/>
<link wikidata="Q138280" start="5497" end="5509" title="Alaşehir" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324889" start="5640" end="5651" title="Germiyanids" label="Germiyanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248715" start="5775" end="5783" title="Achyraus" label="Achyraus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124930" start="5886" end="5890" title="Soma, Manisa" label="Soma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948452" start="6263" end="6271" title="Kırkağaç" label="Kırkağaç"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135603" start="6277" end="6285" title="Thyatira" label="Thyatira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351474" start="6316" end="6328" title="Hermos River" label="Hermos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923433" start="6513" end="6530" title="Hranislav" label="Sausi Crisanislao"/>
<link wikidata="Q717112" start="6731" end="6742" title="Aydınoğlu" label="Aydın-oğhlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q64831" start="7658" end="7662" title="Kula, Manisa" label="Kula"/>
<link wikidata="Q515716" start="8420" end="8430" title="prefecture" label="prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q920866" start="8446" end="8454" title="Magnesia ad Sipylum" label="Magnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q147089" start="8463" end="8469" title="Manisa" label="Manisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q160483" start="8608" end="8623" title="island of Chios" label="island of Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q11921866" start="8691" end="8710" title="Ferran d&amp;#x27;Aunés" label="Ferran d&amp;#x27;Aunés"/>
<link wikidata="Q920866" start="9379" end="9387" title="Magnesia ad Sipylum" label="Magnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014125" start="9440" end="9443" title="Kemalpaşa" label="Nif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014125" start="9445" end="9454" title="Nymphaion (Ionia)" label="Nymphaion"/>
<link wikidata="Q630533" start="9517" end="9521" title="Tire, İzmir" label="Tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079481" start="10151" end="10160" title="Seneschal of Antioch" label="seneschal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898979" start="11544" end="11562" title="Bernat de Rocafort" label="Bernat de Rocafort"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="11574" end="11588" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="11598" end="11615" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q661425" start="11717" end="11739" title="Peace of Caltabellotta" label="Peace of Caltabellotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="11804" end="11821" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Kingdom of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q211952" start="12194" end="12202" title="Kuşadası" label="Kuşadası"/>
<link wikidata="Q47611" start="12275" end="12282" title="Ephesus" label="Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q717112" start="12943" end="12959" title="Emirate of Aydin" label="Emirate of Aydin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193214" start="13646" end="13651" title="Caria" label="Caria"/>
<link wikidata="Q622598" start="13656" end="13664" title="Lycaonia" label="Lycaonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="13767" end="13776" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q128884" start="13811" end="13825" title="Cilician Gates" label="Cilician Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q172556" start="13845" end="13861" title="Taurus Mountains" label="Taurus Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q620864" start="13893" end="13900" title="Cilicia" label="Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q335088" start="13920" end="13945" title="Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia" label="Kingdom of Little Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372030" start="14312" end="14320" title="Heraclea Cybistra" label="Kibistra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898979" start="14481" end="14499" title="Bernat de Rocafort" label="Bernat de Rocafort"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829722" start="14680" end="14698" title="Awake iron!" label="Awake iron, awake!"/>
<link wikidata="Q372109" start="16833" end="16852" title="Nicephorus Gregoras" label="Nicephorus Gregoras"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17357" end="17379" title="Michael IX Palaiologos" label="Michael IX Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="17460" end="17470" title="Edirne" label="Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q780149" start="18137" end="18148" title="Monastic community of Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="18573" end="18582" title="Galipoli" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q37098" start="19610" end="19624" title="Michael IX Palaiologos" label="Prince Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479646" start="19746" end="19756" title="Turcopoles" label="Turcopoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q170427" start="20776" end="20788" title="Mount Haemus" label="Mount Haemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q367226" start="21851" end="21873" title="Frederick III of Sicily" label="Frederic III of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367881" start="21896" end="21916" title="Ferdinand of Majorca" label="Ferdinand of Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q270438" start="22456" end="22473" title="Charles, Count of Valois" label="Charles of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q81045" start="22907" end="22916" title="Kassandra, Chalkidiki" label="Kassandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="22995" end="23006" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="23036" end="23048" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="23118" end="23126" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366648" start="23225" end="23238" title="Roger Deslaur" label="Roger Deslaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q721440" start="23263" end="23282" title="Walter V, Count of Brienne" label="Walter V of Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064142" start="23544" end="23562" title="Battle of Halmyros" label="Battle of Halmyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q334714" start="23940" end="23955" title="Duchy of Athens" label="Duchy of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="23998" end="24004" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="24023" end="24031" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520008" start="24064" end="24082" title="Duchy of Neopatras" label="Duchy of Neopatras"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="24340" end="24355" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="24597" end="24612" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q776942" start="24661" end="24678" title="Navarrese Company" label="Navarrese Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410950" start="24693" end="24714" title="Pedro de San Superano" label="Pedro de San Superano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6301340" start="24716" end="24731" title="Juan de Urtubia" label="Juan de Urtubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q677674" start="24761" end="24778" title="Nerio I Acciaioli" label="Nerio I Acciaioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="24893" end="24907" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q671145" start="24977" end="24991" title="Ramon Muntaner" label="Ramon Muntaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966767" start="24994" end="25015" title="Chronicle of Muntaner" label="Chronicle of Muntaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q279078" start="25018" end="25048" title="Catalan campaign in Asia Minor" label="Catalan campaign in Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15581" start="25051" end="25076" title="Principality of Catalonia" label="Principality of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101439312" start="25079" end="25094" title="Prince Salvador" label="Prince Salvador"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292039" wikidata="Q8979" url="?curid=292039" title="Belfast International Airport">
<text>Belfast International Airport is an international airport northwest of Belfast in Northern Ireland, and is the main airport for the city of Belfast. Until 1983, it was known as Aldergrove Airport, after the nearby village of Aldergrove, County Antrim. In 2024, over 6.7 million passengers travelled through the airport, a 13.0% increase compared with 2023, and the highest number in the airport&#x27;s history. The majority of flights from Belfast International are operated by easyJet, Northern Ireland&#x27;s biggest airline. It features flights to some European metropolitan and several leisure destinations.

Belfast International has a CAA Public Use Aerodrome Licence that allows flights for the public transport of passengers or for flying instruction. The airfield was previously shared with the Royal Air Force base RAF Aldergrove, which closed in 2008. The base is now known as Joint Helicopter Command Flying Station, Aldergrove, and both runways are now owned by the airport. The airport is owned and operated by Vinci Airports which was previously owned by ADC &amp; HAS.

== History ==
===1917–1945===


The airport lies within the parish of Killead, between the small villages of Killead (to the east) and Aldergrove (to the west). The site for the airport was established in 1917, when it was selected to be a Royal Flying Corps (RFC) training establishment during the First World War. The airport remained open at the end of the war for RAF activity.

Civil traffic began in 1922, when flights were conducted to fly newspapers from Chester. The first scheduled passenger service was started in 1933 by the Scottish airline Midland &amp; Scottish Air Ferries. This service consisted of two daily flights each way between Aldergrove and Renfrew Airport, Glasgow. This was subsequently augmented by a twice-daily, return service to Croydon, at that time London&#x27;s airport, with stops at the Isle of Man, Liverpool and Birmingham.

During the Second World War, Aldergrove remained an RAF station particularly for the Coastal Command. So that the airport could accommodate larger, long-range aircraft, a major works programme was undertaken to replace the four existing runways with two new long paved runways, thereby forming the basis of the layout that still exists at the airport today.

===1946–1970===
One of the outcomes of the wartime airfield construction programme was the building of Nutts Corner Airport, just from Aldergrove. On 1 December 1946, the new site replaced Belfast Harbour Airport (now George Best Belfast City Airport) as Northern Ireland&#x27;s civil airport, as the Harbour Airport was considered unsuitable.

By the 1950s civil air traffic had outstripped the facilities at Nutts Corner and aircraft were being regularly diverted to Aldergrove because of adverse weather conditions. In July 1959 the decision was made to move civil flights to Aldergrove to take advantage of the large airfield and this took place in October 1963.

A new terminal and apron were built, with the necessary passenger facilities, and the complex was opened by Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother on 28 October 1963. The first regular jet service to London–Gatwick started in 1966, and in 1968 Aer Lingus and BOAC introduced scheduled services to New York City via Shannon and Prestwick respectively.

===1971–1999===
In 1971, Northern Ireland Airports Limited was formed to operate and develop the airport and its facilities. A major programme of airfield upgrades was undertaken, resulting in improvements to runways, taxiways and the parking apron.

A new International Pier was built together with lounge facilities and car parks, while an additional apron was provided to separate the smaller general aviation aircraft from large commercial jets. In the meantime, British Airways launched the first Belfast to London–Heathrow shuttle service and the first Boeing 747 operated from the airport on a charter service to Toronto via Shannon. The first scheduled service to a European city was started by NLM Cityhopper (now KLM Cityhopper) flying to Amsterdam.

In 1983 the airport, renamed Belfast International, was regularly accommodating the largest civil aircraft in service and with the installation of new technology was capable of all-weather operations. In 1985 passenger numbers reached 1.5 million and British Midland International (BMI) went into competition with British Airways on the London–Heathrow service. Further developments to the terminal occurred throughout the late 1980s and early 1990s, extending the terminal&#x27;s landside and airside area. A new Executive Aviation Terminal was also opened in 1987 and the new cargo centre opened in 1991.

The airport was privatised in 1994. TBI became the new owner of the airport on 13 August 1996, by which time annual passenger numbers had reached 2.5 million.

In 1998, easyJet started operations from the airport with flights to London–Luton. Since then the airline has established a large base at Belfast International and a further twelve domestic routes and twenty-three direct European scheduled routes have been added to the network, making the airline the largest user of the airport.

===Development since the 2000s===

In 2005, Continental Airlines launched the first ever nonstop scheduled service to Newark; this continued to operate under the United Airlines brand until the route&#x27;s termination in January 2017.

In July 2013, it was confirmed that abertis would sell Belfast International Airport, Stockholm Skavsta Airport &amp; Orlando Sanford International Airport to ADC &amp; HAS based in the United States. In February 2015 the airport re-opened the viewing gallery that had been closed for 10 years which provides a view of the apron and the runways that serve the airport. It also includes live ATC, arrival and departure boards, and a live flight radar screen. However, this was later closed again in October 2019.

In 2014, news emerged of talks between the airport and Turkish Airlines. This could have led to a service linking Belfast into the worldwide Turkish route network, but did not materialise.

From 2015, Virgin Atlantic offered weekly services to Orlando using Boeing 747-400 aircraft with occasional services provided by the airline&#x27;s Airbus A330 fleet. These flights served tourist traffic during the summer months (typically June - August). The service was suspended with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, and to date has not returned.

Ryanair opened a base at the airport in 2016, initially operating flights to nine destinations. The airline said it would carry 1.1 million passengers a year out of the airport. In 2017 and 2018, Norwegian Air Shuttle operated long-haul services to Newburgh and Providence.

In April 2018, Vinci Airports acquired an airport portfolio held by Airports Worldwide (previously named ADC &amp; HAS), with the transaction expected to close later that year, Vinci Airports became the new owner of Belfast International Airport.

2018 also saw further suggestions of an international carrier providing access to a global network. This time Qatar Airways was mooted, but again, any such proposal did not come to fruition.

Thomas Cook Airlines had a seasonal base at the airport, until their collapse in September 2019. They operated routes to Europe and some other destinations, operated by an Airbus A321 aircraft. Every July, they operated long-haul flights from Belfast to Cancún and Orlando, operated by their Airbus A330 aircraft. In August 2021, Ryanair announced they would be ending its operations at both of Belfast&#x27;s airports. In July 2022, Ryanair announced that they will be returning to Belfast International Airport, in addition to opening a base.

In summer 2023, work began on a significant terminal expansion, to accommodate new security scanning equipment. This is to be operational by summer 2024.

==Airlines and destinations==
===Passenger===

The following airlines operate regular scheduled flights to and from Belfast–International:

===Cargo===
==General aviation==
Woodgate Aviation has a base at the airport, featuring a private jet terminal, with facilities to accommodate small aircraft. Woodgate Aviation is Belfast International Airport&#x27;s only FBO to provide hangarage. Their 33,000 sq ft hangar was constructed in 2015, and at the time of completion, access to hangar floor was through Europe&#x27;s largest hydraulic door.

Belfast International Airport welcomed Global Trek Aviation, as the third FBO on the airfield, during 2015. This was part of the Airports commercial drive to develop the non-scheduled, Military and GA development at the airport. This had notable success with an increase in growth across these movement types at Belfast International Airport.

==Traffic and statistics==
===Traffic figures===
Belfast International handled over 6.7 million passengers in 2024. The airport is the busiest in Northern Ireland and the 10th-busiest airport in the UK by passenger traffic in 2024.

===Busiest routes===
==Ground transport ==

===Road===
Travellers by car can reach the airport from Belfast via the M2 motorway. The airport operates four car parks, three on-site car parks and one off-site car park. The on-site short-stay and main car parks are situated within easy walking distance of the terminal building, and an on-demand courtesy bus operates to and from the on-site long-stay car park. The off-site short- or long-stay car park, called &#x27;Park and Fly&#x27;, is located just before the main entrance to the airport, and is also serviced by a courtesy bus.

===Bus===
Translink operates an express bus service 300 to the airport from its Belfast Grand Central. This runs 24 hours a day, every 15 minutes at peak times. Translink also offers bus connections to Antrim railway station. The airport can be reached from Derry and the northwest by the Airporter. The 109A bus service operates from Lisburn bus centre in Lisburn City Centre.

===Train===
The nearest railway station is Antrim railway station, from the airport in Antrim. There are connections to Belfast, Lisburn and Derry.

A new station serving the airport could be constructed on the mothballed Lisburn-Antrim railway line, as set out in the airport master plan. This line remains in serviceable condition and passes close to the airport terminal. It has also been listed in a public review of the future of Northern Ireland railways.

== Accidents and incidents ==
*On 24 March 1996, Vickers Viscount G-OPFE of British World Airlines was damaged beyond economic repair when it made a wheels-up landing.
*On 31 October 2010, a bomb was found inside a Toyota Carina parked in the long-stay car park; Army bomb disposal experts dismantled it. It is believed that the car and bomb had been in the car park since 2009. It was only discovered when workers were getting ready to tow the vehicle out of the car park. Many passengers had to spend the night in hotels or arrange alternative transport as they were unable to get to their cars.

==References==
==External links==

* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8979" start="0" end="29" title="Belfast International Airport" label="Belfast International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="36" end="57" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="71" end="78" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="82" end="98" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8979" start="177" end="195" title="Belfast International Airport" label="Aldergrove Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816016" start="225" end="250" title="Aldergrove, County Antrim" label="Aldergrove, County Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q191551" start="478" end="485" title="easyJet" label="easyJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q795009" start="641" end="644" title="Civil Aviation Authority (United Kingdom)" label="CAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="804" end="819" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275131" start="825" end="839" title="RAF Aldergrove" label="RAF Aldergrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559968" start="1025" end="1039" title="Vinci Airports" label="Vinci Airports"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910694" start="1146" end="1152" title="civil parish (Ireland)" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="1326" end="1344" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1385" end="1400" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170263" start="1549" end="1556" title="Chester" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q97164352" start="1640" end="1674" title="Midland &amp;amp; Scottish Air Ferries" label="Midland &amp;amp; Scottish Air Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313156" start="1752" end="1767" title="Renfrew Airport" label="Renfrew Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="1769" end="1776" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431914" start="1846" end="1853" title="Croydon Airport" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="1909" end="1920" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="1922" end="1931" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="1936" end="1946" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1960" end="1976" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q954113" start="2034" end="2049" title="RAF Coastal Command" label="Coastal Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275508" start="2411" end="2431" title="RAF Nutts Corner" label="Nutts Corner Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8987" start="2526" end="2558" title="George Best Belfast City Airport" label="George Best Belfast City Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q849706" start="2982" end="2990" title="airport terminal" label="terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q573970" start="2995" end="3000" title="Airport apron" label="apron"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="3084" end="3116" title="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother" label="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q8703" start="3170" end="3184" title="Gatwick Airport" label="London–Gatwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q846885" start="3229" end="3233" title="British Overseas Airways Corporation" label="BOAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3267" end="3280" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q584102" start="3285" end="3292" title="Shannon Airport" label="Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8992" start="3297" end="3306" title="Glasgow Prestwick Airport" label="Prestwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q910386" start="3540" end="3547" title="taxiway" label="taxiway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="3718" end="3734" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640723" start="3755" end="3770" title="Commercial aviation" label="commercial jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="3789" end="3804" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="3835" end="3850" title="Heathrow Airport" label="London–Heathrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="3881" end="3891" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061296" start="4045" end="4059" title="KLM Cityhopper" label="KLM Cityhopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q9694" start="4071" end="4080" title="Amsterdam Airport Schiphol" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q157205" start="4334" end="4363" title="British Midland International" label="British Midland International"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="4397" end="4412" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="4420" end="4435" title="Heathrow Airport" label="London–Heathrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q10689331" start="4727" end="4730" title="TBI plc" label="TBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q191551" start="4860" end="4867" title="easyJet" label="easyJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8712" start="4920" end="4932" title="Luton Airport" label="London–Luton"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="5072" end="5078" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="5227" end="5247" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q466786" start="5301" end="5307" title="Newark Liberty International Airport" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="5345" end="5360" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q319730" start="5456" end="5463" title="abertis" label="abertis"/>
<link wikidata="Q664946" start="5506" end="5531" title="Stockholm Skavsta Airport" label="Stockholm Skavsta Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q597631" start="5538" end="5575" title="Orlando Sanford International Airport" label="Orlando Sanford International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5606" end="5619" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q573970" start="5743" end="5748" title="Airport apron" label="apron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548" start="5988" end="6004" title="Turkish Airlines" label="Turkish Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q32277" start="6134" end="6149" title="Virgin Atlantic" label="Virgin Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q929859" start="6177" end="6184" title="Orlando International Airport" label="Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q906937" start="6191" end="6205" title="Boeing 747-400" label="Boeing 747-400"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="6271" end="6282" title="Airbus A330" label="Airbus A330"/>
<link wikidata="Q170614" start="6477" end="6484" title="Ryanair" label="Ryanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q215392" start="6673" end="6694" title="Norwegian Air Shuttle" label="Norwegian Air Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q130864" start="6726" end="6734" title="Stewart International Airport" label="Newburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q787782" start="6739" end="6749" title="T. F. Green Airport" label="Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559968" start="6767" end="6781" title="Vinci Airports" label="Vinci Airports"/>
<link wikidata="Q208033" start="7110" end="7123" title="Qatar Airways" label="Qatar Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q852650" start="7192" end="7212" title="Thomas Cook Airlines" label="Thomas Cook Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278675" start="7364" end="7375" title="Airbus A321" label="Airbus A321"/>
<link wikidata="Q641967" start="7446" end="7452" title="Cancún International Airport" label="Cancún"/>
<link wikidata="Q929859" start="7457" end="7464" title="Orlando International Airport" label="Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="7484" end="7495" title="Airbus A330" label="Airbus A330"/>
<link wikidata="Q170614" start="7522" end="7529" title="Ryanair" label="Ryanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q170614" start="7626" end="7633" title="Ryanair" label="Ryanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q22102034" start="8066" end="8083" title="Woodgate Aviation" label="Woodgate Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q670113" start="8511" end="8514" title="Fixed-base operator" label="FBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087095" start="8607" end="8620" title="Non-scheduled airline" label="non-scheduled"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="8622" end="8630" title="Military" label="Military"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="8635" end="8637" title="General aviation" label="GA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839845" start="8731" end="8745" title="Aircraft type designator" label="movement types"/>
<link wikidata="Q3945016" start="8952" end="8982" title="Busiest airports in the United Kingdom by total passenger traffic" label="10th-busiest airport in the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="9114" end="9121" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q746894" start="9130" end="9141" title="M2 motorway (Northern Ireland)" label="M2 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q180707" start="9608" end="9617" title="Translink (Northern Ireland)" label="Translink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740966" start="9630" end="9649" title="express bus service" label="express bus service"/>
<link wikidata="Q48817446" start="9678" end="9699" title="Belfast Grand Central station" label="Belfast Grand Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q163584" start="9856" end="9861" title="Derry" label="Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698488" start="9883" end="9896" title="the Airporter" label="the Airporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828035" start="9933" end="9940" title="Lisburn" label="Lisburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968882" start="10020" end="10042" title="Antrim railway station" label="Antrim railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558676" start="10199" end="10226" title="Lisburn-Antrim railway line" label="Lisburn-Antrim railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137051" start="10489" end="10505" title="Viscount 800" label="Vickers Viscount"/>
<link wikidata="Q920362" start="10516" end="10538" title="British World Airlines" label="British World Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068992" start="10655" end="10668" title="Toyota Carina" label="Toyota Carina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292052" wikidata="Q4117639" url="?curid=292052" title="Lyman-alpha">
<text>Lyman-alpha, typically denoted by Ly-α, is a spectral line of hydrogen (or, more generally, of any one-electron atom) in the Lyman series. It is emitted when the atomic electron transitions from an &quot;n&quot; = 2 orbital to the ground state (&quot;n&quot; = 1), where &quot;n&quot; is the principal quantum number. In hydrogen, its wavelength of 1215.67 angstroms ( or ), corresponding to a frequency of about , places Lyman-alpha in the ultraviolet (UV) part of the electromagnetic spectrum. More specifically, Ly-α lies in vacuum UV (VUV), characterized by a strong absorption in the air.

==Fine structure==

Because of the spin–orbit interaction, the Lyman-alpha line splits into a fine-structure doublet with the wavelengths of 1215.668 and 1215.674 angstroms. These components are called Ly-α3/2 and Ly-α1/2, respectively.

The eigenstates of the perturbed Hamiltonian are labeled by the &quot;total&quot; angular momentum &quot;j&quot; of the electron, not just the orbital angular momentum &quot;l&quot;. In the &quot;n&quot; = 2, &quot;l&quot; = 1 orbital, there are two possible states, with &quot;j&quot; =  and &quot;j&quot; = , resulting in a spectral doublet. The &quot;j&quot; =  state has a higher energy and so is energetically farther from the &quot;n&quot; = 1 state to which it is transitioning. Thus, the &quot;j&quot; =  state is associated with the more energetic (having a shorter wavelength) spectral line in the doublet.

==Observation==
Since the hydrogen Lyman-alpha radiation is strongly absorbed by the air, its observation in laboratory requires use of vacuumed spectroscopic systems. For the same reason, Lyman-alpha astronomy is ordinarily carried out by satellite-borne instruments, except for observing extremely distant sources whose redshifts allow the line to penetrate the Earth atmosphere.

The line was also observed in antihydrogen. Within the experimental uncertainties, the measured frequency is equal to that of hydrogen, in agreement with predictions of quantum electrodynamics.

==See also==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4117639" start="0" end="11" title="Lyman-alpha" label="Lyman-alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117639" start="34" end="38" title="Lyman-alpha" label="Ly-α"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="45" end="58" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="62" end="70" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333783" start="99" end="116" title="Hydrogen-like atom" label="one-electron atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q871413" start="125" end="137" title="Lyman series" label="Lyman series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="169" end="177" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="216" end="223" title="atomic orbital" label="orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4480008" start="231" end="243" title="ground state" label="ground state"/>
<link wikidata="Q867448" start="292" end="316" title="principal quantum number" label="principal quantum number"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="335" end="345" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q81454" start="357" end="365" title="angstrom" label="angstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="394" end="403" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="441" end="452" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="528" end="537" title="vacuum ultraviolet" label="vacuum UV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="589" end="592" title="air" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570979" start="630" end="652" title="spin–orbit interaction" label="spin–orbit interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402041" start="689" end="703" title="fine structure" label="fine-structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q911364" start="856" end="865" title="Perturbation theory (quantum mechanics)" label="perturbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q660488" start="866" end="877" title="Hamiltonian (quantum mechanics)" label="Hamiltonian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="915" end="931" title="Angular momentum#Angular momentum in quantum mechanics" label="angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916324" start="976" end="1000" title="Azimuthal quantum number" label="orbital angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="1773" end="1781" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="1815" end="1820" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q216121" start="1864" end="1876" title="antihydrogen" label="antihydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q234881" start="2003" end="2026" title="quantum electrodynamics" label="quantum electrodynamics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292053" wikidata="Q1999252" url="?curid=292053" title="Rookwood Cemetery">
<text>Rookwood Cemetery (officially named Rookwood Necropolis) is a heritage-listed cemetery in Rookwood, Sydney, Australia. It is the largest necropolis in the Southern Hemisphere and is the world&#x27;s largest remaining operating cemetery from the Victorian era. It is close to Lidcombe railway station about west of the Sydney central business district. It was added to the New South Wales State Heritage Register on 2 April 1999.

==Description==
Rookwood Cemetery is divided into denominational and operational areas with individual offices, staff, and equipment to run different parts of the entire area. The cemetery is now managed by three trusts. Rookwood Necropolis Land Manager are the custodians of Rookwood on behalf of the NSW Government. The two denominational trusts are responsible for the care and maintenance of a number of burial sections catering to various ethnic and cultural groups within the community. Those trusts are: Rookwood General Cemeteries Reserve Land Manager (Rookwood General Cemetery) and the Catholic Cemeteries and Crematoria. The NSW Cremation Company, which founded and operates The Rookwood Memorial Gardens Crematorium, is the oldest operating crematorium in Australia. The NSW Cremation Company is the only private company operating a &#x27;cemetery&#x27; section within the Necropolis grounds. Today the company is part of the InvoCare company.

Rookwood also contains a number of memorial shrines including those dedicated to victims of The Holocaust and to members of the merchant marines killed in wartime. The Sydney War Cemetery is located in the eastern section of the Necropolis. The Circle of Love is a shrine dedicated to stillborn children or those who died in young infancy.

There are 915,000 people (figures as at 31 December 2014) that have been buried and cremated at Rookwood, which covers an area of . The &quot;Friends of Rookwood Inc&quot; is a voluntary organisation dedicated to preserving the site. As the largest Victorian era cemetery still in operation in the world, Rookwood is of significant national and historical importance.

Some older sections of Rookwood are overgrown with a riot of plants, early horticultural plants, some now large trees or groves, as well as an interesting array of remnant indigenous flora. This results in quite an eclectic mix of flora to be found within the necropolis, including endangered native species such as Downy wattle and small leaved Dillwynia (&quot;Dillwynia parvifolia&quot;).

The Serpentine Canal within the Rookwood General Cemeteries Reserve Land Manager was restored in recent years, repairing and replacing ornamentation, landscaping and vegetation over of the cemetery.

==History==
In 1819, Governor Lachlan Macquarie established Sydney&#x27;s main burial ground near the town&#x27;s brickworks. By the 1840s, the Devonshire Street Cemetery was close to being full so another larger site was needed. A location on the Sydney Common was chosen in 1845, but abandoned in 1859 without ever being used due to complaints from local residents and churches. In Australia, as in Europe, there was an increasing trend to move burial sites outside of the cities for practical, hygienic and other more aesthetic purposes. With a railway line having been completed to Parramatta in 1856, it was decided to locate the new cemetery at a point on the line. Several sites were surveyed and found to be inappropriate. However, in 1862 the Cowper government purchased 80 hectares of land at Haslem&#x27;s Creek from the estate of Edward Cohen. Cohen&#x27;s land had previously formed part of a larger parcel known as &quot;Hyde Park&quot; that had been given to the magistrate and parliamentarian Henry Grattan Douglass in 1833 and subsequently leased out. The site was approved due to its relative isolation and proximity to the railway line.

The cemetery was then divided into sections for the various denominations according to their numbers in the 1861 census. The Church of England section was 21 hectares, the Catholic Church was allocated 14 hectares and a non-denominational area of 23 hectares was also established. Other denominations allocated land in the original 200 acres (80 hectares) were Jews, Independents (Congregationalists), Presbyterians and Wesleyans. The Necropolis Act of 1867 came into force on 1 January 1868 formally dedicating the cemetery and establishing cemetery trusts. The first burial in the cemetery, reported by the &quot;Sydney Morning Herald,&quot; was a pauper, 18-year-old John Whalan, buried on 5 January 1867. This burial was not recorded in the burial register. The first official burial was recorded in the Roman Catholic area: a 14-month-old toddler, Catherine McMullen, on 7 January 1867.

By 1879, more land was needed and the remaining 233 hectares of the former &quot;Hyde Park&quot; were then purchased. By the 1890s the cemetery was home to several buildings including the St Michael the Archangel Chapel and various cottages for section managers and sextons.

Originally known simply as the (Koine Greek meaning &quot;city of the dead&quot;), local residents lobbied officials to have the name of their village changed from Haslem&#x27;s Creek due to its association with the cemetery. In 1879, the villagers got their wish and the area&#x27;s name was changed to Rookwood; however, before long, the Necropolis was also being referred to by that name. The settlement of Rookwood changed its name in 1913 to Lidcombe, as a blend of two mayors&#x27; names, Lidbury and Larcombe (Larcombe was also a monumental stonemason whose business, &#x27;Larcombe Memorials&#x27; exists to this day). The cemetery retained the name Rookwood.

The name Rookwood is most likely an accidental or deliberate corruption of the name Brookwood Cemetery and its associated railway station. At the time of Rookwood&#x27;s opening, Brookwood Cemetery, located in Brookwood, Surrey, England, was one of the largest cemeteries in the world. It is less likely that, as claimed by some sources, Rookwood was named after William Harrison Ainsworth&#x27;s novel &quot;Rookwood&quot;, written in 1834.

==Railway line==

Rookwood was served by a rail spur from the main line from 1867 until 1948. Mortuary stations served each of the three sections of the necropolis, with a fourth at the main junction and a fifth on Regent Street adjacent to Central station. The railway line construction began in November 1864 and from 1 January 1865, trains began their run into the cemetery. It stopped at prearranged stations on the journey from central Sydney to pick up mourners and coffins. Trains ran at 9.30 am and 3 pm. The trains that carried the mourners were known as &#x27;unimproved Redferns&#x27; There were two types of Hearse carriages used for the procession. One consisted of a four-wheeled van that carried up to 10 coffins on its upper and lower shelves. Each of these shelves was designed so it could open onto the platform. There were also eight-wheeled vans that could hold 30 coffins. Both of these vehicles were attached the back of the train for transporting to the cemetery. At the terminus inside the cemetery the coffins were unloaded using &#x27;wheeled hand-propelled litters&#x27; The rail line was used to convey funeral parties to Rookwood until 1948 when the expanded use of processions by road made it obsolete. The stations were offered to the Joint Committee of Necropolis Trustees for the price of £1 but due to maintenance costs the offer was rejected and the platforms within the cemetery were demolished. Cemetery Station No. 1 at the head of the rail spur was sold to Reverend Buckle for £100 in 1951 and was moved to Canberra in 1957 to become the All Saints Church, Canberra.

==Cultural references==
Rookwood Cemetery gave rise to the phrase &quot;crook as Rookwood&quot;, meaning chronically ill, as &quot;crook&quot; is Australian slang for being unwell. A novel by Chris Nyst published in 2005 uses the phrase as its title.

==Notable interments==
Rookwood Cemetery has or had several notable interments, including three recipients of the Victoria Cross.

* Eric Bailey (1906–1945), recipient of the George Cross
* Barcroft Boake (1866–1892), poet
* James Barnet (1827–1904), NSW Government Architect
* Aaron Buzacott (1800–1864), Congregational minister, missionary at Rarotonga and founder of Takamoa Theological College; reinterred from Devonshire Street Cemetery
* Joseph Cahill (1891–1959), Premier of New South Wales
* The Clarke brothers, Thomas (1840–1867) and John (1846–1867), bushrangers
* Francis Lyon Cohen (1862–1934), the first Jewish chaplain in the British Army
* Peter Dawson (1882–1961), bass-baritone singer
* John Fairfax (1804–1877), newspaper proprietor
* Eugene Falleni (1875–1938), murderer
* Lilian Fowler (1886–1954), Australia&#x27;s first female mayor
* John Frazer (1827–1884), politician and businessman
* Albert Henry Fullwood (1863–1930), painter
* Jimmy Governor (1875–1901), outlaw
* John Gowing (1835–1908), co-founder of Gowings store
* William Ewart Hart (1885–1943), aviator
* John &#x27;Chow&#x27; Hayes (1911–1993), Underworld Figure
* Mary Healy (Mother Gertrude) (1865–1952), Sister of Charity and hospital administrator
* John &#x27;Barney&#x27; Hines (1878–1958), veteran WWI soldier, known for prowess as &#x27;souvenir&#x27; collector from Germans
* Livingston Hopkins (1846–1947), illustrator &amp; cartoonist, professionally known as &#x27;Hop&#x27;
* Charles Hoskins (1851–1926), industrialist associated with the iron and steel industry
* Sallie-Anne Huckstep (1954–1986), Sydney underworld figure
* David Jones (1793–1873), founder of David Jones stores
* Samuel Joseph (1824–1898), merchant, politician, Jewish community leader
* Peter Kenna (1930–1987), playwright
* Jack Lang (1876–1975), Premier of New South Wales
* Louisa Lawson (1848–1920), suffragist
* Charles Frederick Maynard (1897–1946), Indigenous leader
* Peter Dodds McCormick (1834–1916), songwriter (&quot;Advance Australia Fair&quot;)
* George McRae (1858–1923), architect
* Bea Miles (1902–1973), well-known Sydney eccentric
* Bob Nichols (1809–1857), politician, first Auditor-General of NSW
* Yip Ho Nung (1909–1979), restaurateur and Chinese community leader
* Sergeant John Paton (1833–1914), recipient of the Victoria Cross, awarded in Indian Mutiny
* Jacob Pitman (1810–1890), advocate of shorthand (whose epitaph is written phonetically)
* Roy Rene (1891–1954), comedian
* Abe Saffron (1919–2006), businessman and underworld figure
* Andrew George Scott (1842–1880), bushranger (disinterred 1995; reinterred in North Gundagai Anglican cemetery)
* Rose Scott (1847–1925), feminist
* Achille Simonetti (1838–1890), sculptor
* Kenneth Slessor (1901–1971), poet
* Captain Richard Been Stannard (1902–1977), Royal Naval Reserve, recipient of the Victoria Cross, awarded in Norway campaign, World War II (cremated)
* Mei Quong Tart (1850–1903), Sydney merchant and restaurateur
* James Toohey (1850–1895), brewer
* Sergeant John Woods Whittle (1882–1946), recipient of the Victoria Cross, awarded in World War I.

==War graves==
As at May 2020, Rookwood Necropolis contains the graves of a total 704 Commonwealth service personnel that are registered by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission, 435 from World War I and 274 from World War II, besides three Dutch war graves.
The commission also erected a memorial to 132 Commonwealth service personnel of World War II who were cremated at Rookwood Crematorium and whose ashes remain here.

Four Japanese Imperial Navy crewmen of midget submarines M-14 and M-21 who died in the World War II Attack on Sydney Harbour during 31 May–8 June 1942 were cremated with naval honours at Rookwood Cemetery. The ashes were returned to Japan later that year.

===Sydney War Cemetery===
Within the grounds of Rookwood Cemetery is enclosed the CWGC&#x27;s Sydney War Cemetery, whose entrance is on the west side on the necropolis railway. It was established in 1942 during World War II for service personnel and there are now 732 buried or commemorated by name here. Most of those buried here died at the Concord Military Hospital in Sydney. The British war graves within the cemetery are of servicemen who died as prisoners of war in Japanese hands and had been cremated; after the war, their ashes were brought to Sydney and buried here. Here is also buried a civilian employee of the Admiralty and there is one French war grave.

Within the entrance building is the New South Wales Cremation Memorial, which commemorates 199 service personnel of World War II who were cremated within the state of New South Wales and whose ashes were subsequently scattered or buried at places where commemoration by a CWGC memorial was not possible.

Within the cemetery stands the Sydney Memorial to almost 750 personnel of the Australian Army, Royal Australian Air Force and Australian Merchant Navy who died in World War II in the eastern and southern regions of Australia and waters south of 20 degrees Latitude who have no known grave.

==Chapels==
==Monuments and memorials==
==Graves and mausoleums==
==Buildings==
==References==
==External links==
* Rookwood Catholic Cemetery
* (Crematorium)
* Rookwood Cemetery
* Rookwood Independent Cemetery 
* Friends of Rookwood Inc.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1999252" start="0" end="17" title="Rookwood Cemetery" label="Rookwood Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999252" start="36" end="55" title="Rookwood Cemetery" label="Rookwood Necropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q386354" start="90" end="98" title="Rookwood, Sydney, New South Wales" label="Rookwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098674" start="137" end="147" title="List of necropolises" label="necropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="155" end="174" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="245" end="258" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543598" start="275" end="299" title="Lidcombe railway station" label="Lidcombe railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852577" start="318" end="350" title="Sydney central business district" label="Sydney central business district"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955397" start="372" end="411" title="New South Wales State Heritage Register" label="New South Wales State Heritage Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112564" start="732" end="746" title="Government of New South Wales" label="NSW Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q157570" start="1183" end="1194" title="crematorium" label="crematorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051834" start="1368" end="1376" title="InvoCare" label="InvoCare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="1479" end="1492" title="The Holocaust" label="The Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="1977" end="1990" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670992" start="2413" end="2425" title="Acacia pubescens" label="Downy wattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q664671" start="2443" end="2452" title="Dillwynia" label="Dillwynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528895" start="2711" end="2719" title="Governor of New South Wales" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q467694" start="2720" end="2737" title="Lachlan Macquarie" label="Lachlan Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267881" start="2834" end="2860" title="Devonshire Street Cemetery" label="Devonshire Street Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736183" start="3238" end="3250" title="Main Suburban railway line" label="railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139752" start="3276" end="3286" title="Parramatta railway station" label="Parramatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q22020026" start="3699" end="3721" title="Henry Grattan Douglass" label="Henry Grattan Douglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="3972" end="3989" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4019" end="4034" title="Roman Catholic" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129937" start="5006" end="5012" title="Sexton (office)" label="sexton"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="5048" end="5059" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043002" start="5463" end="5471" title="Lidcombe, New South Wales" label="Lidcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794820" start="5564" end="5574" title="stonemason" label="stonemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q990618" start="5769" end="5787" title="Brookwood Cemetery" label="Brookwood Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184630" start="5807" end="5822" title="Brookwood railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645375" start="5895" end="5912" title="Brookwood, Surrey" label="Brookwood, Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q518359" start="6048" end="6074" title="William Harrison Ainsworth" label="William Harrison Ainsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366231" start="6094" end="6102" title="Rookwood (novel)" label="Rookwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373736" start="6343" end="6356" title="Regent Street railway station" label="Regent Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585639" start="6369" end="6384" title="Central railway station, Sydney" label="Central station"/>
<link wikidata="Q855743" start="6748" end="6754" title="Hearse" label="Hearse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058713" start="7560" end="7582" title="Cemetery Station No. 1 railway station" label="Cemetery Station No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="7674" end="7682" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4504666" start="7705" end="7732" title="All Saints Church, Canberra" label="All Saints Church, Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187776" start="7918" end="7937" title="Crook as Rookwood" label="novel by Chris Nyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="8101" end="8115" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386072" start="8120" end="8131" title="Eric George Bailey" label="Eric Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143510" start="8162" end="8174" title="George Cross" label="George Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860006" start="8177" end="8191" title="Barcroft Boake (poet)" label="Barcroft Boake"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053101" start="8212" end="8224" title="James Barnet" label="James Barnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661888" start="8265" end="8279" title="Aaron Buzacott" label="Aaron Buzacott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="8293" end="8307" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational"/>
<link wikidata="Q471793" start="8332" end="8341" title="Rarotonga" label="Rarotonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677155" start="8357" end="8384" title="Takamoa Theological College" label="Takamoa Theological College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267881" start="8402" end="8428" title="Devonshire Street Cemetery" label="Devonshire Street Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q15525050" start="8431" end="8444" title="Joseph Cahill" label="Joseph Cahill"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527950" start="8458" end="8484" title="Premier of New South Wales" label="Premier of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127513" start="8491" end="8506" title="Clarke brothers" label="Clarke brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081560" start="8563" end="8581" title="Francis Lyon Cohen" label="Francis Lyon Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373691" start="8612" end="8620" title="Royal Army Chaplains&amp;#x27; Department" label="chaplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="8628" end="8640" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699181" start="8643" end="8655" title="Peter Dawson (bass-baritone)" label="Peter Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q810480" start="8669" end="8682" title="bass-baritone" label="bass-baritone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570933" start="8692" end="8704" title="John Fairfax" label="John Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787015" start="8741" end="8755" title="Eugene Falleni" label="Eugene Falleni"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756797" start="8780" end="8793" title="Lilian Fowler" label="Lilian Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q21535418" start="8845" end="8856" title="John Frazer (politician)" label="John Frazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710452" start="8899" end="8920" title="Albert Henry Fullwood" label="Albert Henry Fullwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505979" start="8944" end="8958" title="Jimmy Governor" label="Jimmy Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235900" start="8981" end="8992" title="John Gowing" label="John Gowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17421396" start="9036" end="9054" title="William Ewart Hart" label="William Ewart Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q18379509" start="9078" end="9105" title="John &amp;#x27;Chow&amp;#x27; Hayes" label="John &amp;#x27;Chow&amp;#x27; Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q24188602" start="9139" end="9167" title="Mary Healy (Mother Gertrude)" label="Mary Healy (Mother Gertrude)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239370" start="9228" end="9257" title="John Hines (Australian soldier)" label="John &amp;#x27;Barney&amp;#x27; Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q15490606" start="9359" end="9377" title="Livingston Hopkins" label="Livingston Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q21536294" start="9463" end="9478" title="Charles Hoskins" label="Charles Hoskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404984" start="9552" end="9572" title="Sally Anne Huckstep" label="Sallie-Anne Huckstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235741" start="9613" end="9624" title="David Jones (merchant)" label="David Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235753" start="9649" end="9667" title="David Jones Limited" label="David Jones stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q20811094" start="9670" end="9683" title="Samuel Joseph (Australian politician)" label="Samuel Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175153" start="9745" end="9756" title="Peter Kenna" label="Peter Kenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q933146" start="9783" end="9792" title="Jack Lang (Australian politician)" label="Jack Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527950" start="9806" end="9832" title="Premier of New South Wales" label="Premier of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q541929" start="9835" end="9848" title="Louisa Lawson" label="Louisa Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064437" start="9875" end="9900" title="Charles Frederick Maynard" label="Charles Frederick Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544059" start="9934" end="9955" title="Peter Dodds McCormick" label="Peter Dodds McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q170601" start="9987" end="10009" title="Advance Australia Fair" label="Advance Australia Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542369" start="10019" end="10031" title="George McRae" label="George McRae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875663" start="10057" end="10066" title="Bea Miles" label="Bea Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542882" start="10110" end="10121" title="George Nichols (Australian politician)" label="Bob Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053795" start="10178" end="10189" title="Yip Ho Nung" label="Yip Ho Nung"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252051" start="10256" end="10266" title="John Paton (VC)" label="John Paton"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="10324" end="10337" title="Indian Mutiny" label="Indian Mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q11865624" start="10340" end="10352" title="Jacob Pitman" label="Jacob Pitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q181066" start="10378" end="10387" title="shorthand" label="shorthand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511868" start="10430" end="10438" title="Roy Rene" label="Roy Rene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666436" start="10463" end="10474" title="Abe Saffron" label="Abe Saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036742" start="10524" end="10543" title="Captain Moonlite" label="Andrew George Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733575" start="10607" end="10615" title="Gundagai" label="Gundagai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367933" start="10637" end="10647" title="Rose Scott" label="Rose Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q21535108" start="10672" end="10689" title="Achille Simonetti (sculptor)" label="Achille Simonetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q788563" start="10714" end="10729" title="Kenneth Slessor" label="Kenneth Slessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324073" start="10758" end="10779" title="Richard Been Stannard" label="Richard Been Stannard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778989" start="10793" end="10812" title="Royal Naval Reserve" label="Royal Naval Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10875" end="10887" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809936" start="10901" end="10915" title="Mei Quong Tart" label="Mei Quong Tart"/>
<link wikidata="Q20739753" start="10964" end="10976" title="James Toohey (New South Wales politician)" label="James Toohey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182741" start="11008" end="11026" title="John Woods Whittle" label="John Woods Whittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="11084" end="11095" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="11242" end="11276" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth War Graves Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="11287" end="11298" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11312" end="11324" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="11528" end="11550" title="Japanese Imperial Navy" label="Japanese Imperial Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q634415" start="11562" end="11579" title="midget submarines" label="midget submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659473" start="11623" end="11647" title="Attack on Sydney Harbour" label="Attack on Sydney Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11991" end="12003" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="12851" end="12877" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12882" end="12906" title="Merchant navy#Australian Merchant Navy" label="Australian Merchant Navy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292056" wikidata="Q1680241" url="?curid=292056" title="Prix Décembre">
<text>The , originally known as the &quot;Prix Novembre&quot;, is one of France&#x27;s premier literary awards. It was founded under the name &quot;Prix Novembre&quot; in 1989 by Philippe Dennery (Michel Dennery, according to other sources). In 1998, the founder resigned after he disapproved awarding of the prize to Michel Houellebecq&#x27;s novel &quot;Atomised&quot;. The prize then got a new patron – Pierre Bergé – and a new name: &quot;Prix Decembre&quot;.

Winners:
* &quot;Prix Novembre&quot;:
**1989 – Guy Dupré, &quot;Les Manoeuvres d&#x27;automne&quot;
**1990 – François Maspero, &quot;Les Passagers du Roissy-Express&quot;
**1991 – Raphaël Confiant, &quot;Eau de café&quot;
**1992 – Henri Thomas, &quot;La Chasse au trésor&quot; and Roger Grenier, &quot;Regardez la neige qui tombe&quot;
**1993 – René de Obaldia. &quot;Exobiographie&quot;
**1994 – Jean Hatzfeld, &quot;L&#x27;Air de guerre&quot; and Éric Holder, &quot;La Belle Jardinière&quot;
**1995 – Jean Échenoz, &quot;Les Grandes Blondes&quot;
**1996 – Régis Debray, &quot;Loués soient nos seigneurs: une éducation politique&quot;
**1997 – Lydie Salvayre, &quot;La Compagnie des spectres&quot;
**1998 – Michel Houellebecq, &quot;Les Particules élémentaires&quot;
* &quot;Prix Decembre&quot;:
**1999 – Claude Askolovitch, &quot;Voyage au bout de la France: Le Front National tel qu&#x27;il est&quot;
**2000 – Anthony Palou, &quot;Camille&quot;
**2001 – Chloé Delaume, &quot;Le Cri du sablier&quot;
**2002 – Pierre Michon, &quot;Abbés&quot; and &quot;Corps du Roi&quot;
**2003 – Régis Jauffret, &quot;Univers, univers&quot;
**2004 – Philippe Forest, &quot;Sarinagara&quot;
**2005 – Charles Dantzig, &quot;Dictionnaire égoïste de la littérature française&quot;
**2006 – Pierre Guyotat, &quot;Coma&quot;
**2007 – Yannick Haenel, &quot;Cercle&quot;
**2008 – Mathias Énard, &quot;Zone&quot;
**2009 – Jean-Philippe Toussaint, &quot;La Vérité sur Marie&quot;
**2010 – Frédéric Schiffter, &quot;Philosophie sentimentale&quot;
**2011 – Jean-Christophe Bailly, &quot;Le Dépaysement. Voyages en France&quot; &amp; Olivier Frébourg, &quot;Gaston et Gustave&quot;
**2012 – Mathieu Riboulet, &quot;Les Œuvres de miséricorde&quot;
**2013 – Maël Renouard, &quot;La Réforme de l&#x27;opéra de Pékin&quot;
**2014 - Elisabeth Roudinesco, &quot;Sigmund Freud, en son temps et dans le nôtre&quot;
**2015 - Christine Angot, &quot;Un amour impossible&quot;
**2016 - Alain Blottière, &quot;Comment Baptiste est mort&quot;, Gallimard
**2017 - Grégoire Bouillier, &quot;Le Dossier M&quot;, Flammarion
**2018 - Michael Ferrier, &quot;François, portrait d’un absent&quot;, Gallimard
**2019 - Claudie Hunzinger, &quot;Les Grands Cerfs&quot;, Grasset
**2020 - Grégory Le Floch, &quot;Parcourir le monde et d&#x27;y rôder&quot;, Christian Bourgois
**2021 - , &quot;Le Poulailler métaphysique&quot;, Le Pommier
**2022 - Lola Lafon, &quot;Quand tu écouteras cette chanson&quot;, Stock
**2023 - Kevin Lambert, &quot;Que notre joie demeure&quot;, Le Nouvel Attila

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1680241" start="4" end="4" title="Prix Décembre" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="67" end="73" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q103114" start="312" end="330" title="Michel Houellebecq" label="Michel Houellebecq"/>
<link wikidata="Q700483" start="350" end="358" title="Atomised" label="Atomised"/>
<link wikidata="Q770037" start="400" end="412" title="Pierre Bergé" label="Pierre Bergé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121748" start="506" end="515" title="Guy Dupré" label="Guy Dupré"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085338" start="568" end="584" title="François Maspero" label="François Maspero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068218" start="639" end="655" title="Raphaël Confiant" label="Raphaël Confiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q640963" start="690" end="702" title="Henri Thomas" label="Henri Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237856" start="740" end="753" title="Roger Grenier" label="Roger Grenier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221840" start="804" end="819" title="René de Obaldia" label="René de Obaldia"/>
<link wikidata="Q764937" start="856" end="869" title="Jean Hatzfeld" label="Jean Hatzfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591180" start="908" end="919" title="Éric Holder" label="Éric Holder"/>
<link wikidata="Q353882" start="962" end="974" title="Jean Échenoz" label="Jean Échenoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q378116" start="1017" end="1029" title="Régis Debray" label="Régis Debray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269234" start="1104" end="1118" title="Lydie Salvayre" label="Lydie Salvayre"/>
<link wikidata="Q103114" start="1167" end="1185" title="Michel Houellebecq" label="Michel Houellebecq"/>
<link wikidata="Q700483" start="1193" end="1220" title="Atomised" label="Les Particules élémentaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976907" start="1265" end="1283" title="Claude Askolovitch" label="Claude Askolovitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q205150" start="1323" end="1337" title="National Front (France)" label="Front National"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852911" start="1372" end="1385" title="Anthony Palou" label="Anthony Palou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964194" start="1416" end="1429" title="Chloé Delaume" label="Chloé Delaume"/>
<link wikidata="Q732644" start="1470" end="1483" title="Pierre Michon" label="Pierre Michon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347384" start="1541" end="1555" title="Régis Jauffret" label="Régis Jauffret"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379844" start="1595" end="1610" title="Philippe Forest" label="Philippe Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064052" start="1644" end="1659" title="Charles Dantzig" label="Charles Dantzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385406" start="1731" end="1745" title="Pierre Guyotat" label="Pierre Guyotat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599497" start="1773" end="1787" title="Yannick Haenel" label="Yannick Haenel"/>
<link wikidata="Q339677" start="1817" end="1830" title="Mathias Énard" label="Mathias Énard"/>
<link wikidata="Q430204" start="1858" end="1881" title="Jean-Philippe Toussaint" label="Jean-Philippe Toussaint"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090201" start="1924" end="1942" title="Frédéric Schiffter" label="Frédéric Schiffter"/>
<link wikidata="Q607534" start="1990" end="2012" title="Jean-Christophe Bailly" label="Jean-Christophe Bailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351045" start="2066" end="2082" title="Olivier Frébourg" label="Olivier Frébourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298851" start="2123" end="2139" title="Mathieu Riboulet" label="Mathieu Riboulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15132785" start="2188" end="2201" title="Maël Renouard" label="Maël Renouard"/>
<link wikidata="Q274705" start="2260" end="2280" title="Elisabeth Roudinesco" label="Elisabeth Roudinesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q276347" start="2348" end="2363" title="Christine Angot" label="Christine Angot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829582" start="2406" end="2421" title="Alain Blottière" label="Alain Blottière"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118443" start="2481" end="2499" title="Grégoire Bouillier" label="Grégoire Bouillier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308675" start="2547" end="2562" title="Michael Ferrier" label="Michael Ferrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q18945" start="2627" end="2644" title="Claudie Hunzinger" label="Claudie Hunzinger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2693" end="2709" title="Grégory Le Floch" label="Grégory Le Floch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258767" start="2851" end="2861" title="Lola Lafon" label="Lola Lafon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48721599" start="2924" end="2937" title="Kevin Lambert" label="Kevin Lambert"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292058" wikidata="Q736447" url="?curid=292058" title="John Crowley (author)">
<text>John Crowley (born December 1, 1942) is an American author of fantasy, science fiction, historical fiction, and non-fiction. Crowley studied at Indiana University and has a second career as a documentary film writer.

Crowley is best known as the author of &quot;Little, Big&quot; (1981), a work which received World Fantasy Award for Best Novel and has been called &quot;a neglected masterpiece&quot; by Harold Bloom, and his &quot;Ægypt&quot; series of novels which revolve around the same themes of Hermeticism, memory, families and religion. Some of his nonfiction writing has appeared bimonthly in &quot;Harper&#x27;s Magazine&quot; in the form of his &quot;Easy Chair&quot; column, which ended in 2016.

== Biography ==
John Crowley was born in Presque Isle, Maine, in 1942; his father was then an officer in the US Army Air Corps. He grew up in Vermont, northeastern Kentucky and (for the longest stretch) Indiana, where he went to high school and college. He moved to New York City after college to make movies, and did find work in documentary films, an occupation he still pursues. He published his first novel (&quot;The Deep&quot;) in 1975, and his twelfth (&quot;Ka: Dar Oakley in the Ruin of Ymr&quot;) in 2017. Since 1993 he has taught creative writing at Yale University. In 1992 he received the Award in Literature from the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters.

His first published novels were science fiction: &quot;The Deep&quot; (1975) and &quot;Beasts&quot; (1976). &quot;Engine Summer&quot; (1979) was nominated for the 1980 American Book Award in a one-year category Science Fiction;
it appears in David Pringle&#x27;s &quot;Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels&quot;. In 1981 came &quot;Little, Big&quot;, covered in Pringle&#x27;s sequel, &quot;Modern Fantasy: The 100 Best Novels&quot;.

In 1987 Crowley embarked on an ambitious four-volume novel, &quot;Ægypt&quot;, comprising &quot;The Solitudes&quot; (originally published as &quot;Ægypt&quot;), &quot;Love &amp; Sleep&quot;, &quot;Dæmonomania,&quot; and &quot;Endless Things&quot;, published in May 2007. This series and &quot;Little, Big&quot; were cited when Crowley received the prestigious American Academy of Arts and Letters Award for Literature.

He is also the recipient of an Ingram Merrill Foundation grant. James Merrill, the organization&#x27;s founder, greatly loved &quot;Little, Big&quot;, and was blurbed praising Crowley on the first edition of &quot;Love &amp; Sleep&quot;. His recent novels are &quot;The Translator&quot;, recipient of the Premio Flaiano (Italy); &quot;Lord Byron’s Novel: The Evening Land&quot;, which contains an entire imaginary novel by the poet; and the aforementioned &quot;Four Freedoms&quot;, about workers at an Oklahoma defense plant during World War II. A novella, &quot;The Girlhood of Shakespeare&#x27;s Heroines&quot;, appeared in 2002. A museum-quality 25th anniversary edition of &quot;Little, Big&quot;, featuring the art of Peter Milton and a critical introduction by Harold Bloom, is now complete.

Crowley&#x27;s short fiction is collected in three volumes: &quot;Novelty&quot; (containing the World Fantasy Award-winning novella &quot;Great Work of Time&quot;), &quot;Antiquities&quot;, and &quot;Novelties &amp; Souvenirs&quot;, an omnibus volume containing nearly all his short fiction through its publication in 2004. A collection of essays and reviews entitled &quot;In Other Words&quot; was published in early 2007.

Most of the ideas he has for books occur about ten years before he actually starts working on the books.

In 1989 Crowley and his wife Laurie Block founded Straight Ahead Pictures to produce media (film, video, radio and internet) on American history and culture. Crowley has written scripts for short films and documentaries, many historical documentaries for public television; his work has received numerous awards and has been shown at the New York Film Festival, the Berlin Film Festival, and many others. His scripts include &quot;The World of Tomorrow&quot; (on the 1939 World&#x27;s Fair), &quot;No Place to Hide&quot; (on the bomb shelter obsession), &quot;The Hindenburg&quot; (for HBO), and &quot;FIT: Episodes in the History of the Body&quot; (American fitness practices and beliefs over the decades; with Laurie Block).

Crowley&#x27;s correspondence with literary critic Harold Bloom, and their mutual appreciation, led in 1993 to Crowley taking up a post at Yale University, where he teaches courses in Utopian fiction, fiction writing, and screenplay writing. Bloom claimed on Contentville.com that &quot;Little, Big&quot; ranks among the five best novels by a living writer, and included &quot;Little, Big&quot;, &quot;Ægypt&quot; (&quot;The Solitudes&quot;), and &quot;Love &amp; Sleep&quot; in his canon of literature (in the appendix to &quot;The Western Canon&quot;, 1994). In his Preface to &quot;Snake&#x27;s-Hands&quot;, Bloom identifies Crowley as his &quot;favorite contemporary writer&quot;, and the &quot;Ægypt&quot; series as his &quot;favorite romance...after &quot;Little, Big&quot;&quot;.

Crowley has also taught at the Clarion West Writers&#x27; Workshop held annually in Seattle, Washington.

== Awards ==
* 1982: &quot;Little, Big&quot; received the World Fantasy Award for Best Novel and the Mythopoeic Fantasy Award
* 1990: &quot;Great Work of Time&quot; received the World Fantasy Award for Best Novella
* 1992: American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters Award in Literature
* 1997: &quot;Gone&quot; received the Locus Award for Best Short Story
* 1999: &quot;La Grande oeuvre du temps&quot;, the French language edition of &quot;Great Work of Time&quot; (translated by Monique LeBailly), won the Grand Prix de l&#x27;Imaginaire, Nouvelle étrangère (Grand Prize for translated story)
* 2003: &quot;The Translator&quot; received the Italian &quot;Premio Flaiano&quot;
* 2006: World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement
* 2007: Bulgakov Award of Portal SF Assembly (Kyiv, Ukraine)
* 2018: &quot;Spring Break&quot; received the Edgar Award
* 2018: &quot;Ka: Dar Oakley in the Ruin of Ymr&quot; received the Mythopoeic Fantasy Award
* 2021: &quot;Kra, Dar Duchesne dans les ruines de l’Ymr&quot;, the French language edition of &quot;Ka: Dar Oakley in the Ruin of Ymr&quot;, received the Grand Prix de l&#x27;Imaginaire for Foreign Novel

== Bibliography ==

=== Novels ===
* &quot;The Deep&quot;, Doubleday (1975), illustrated by John Cayea, and Anne Yvonne Gilbert in 1984
* &quot;Beasts&quot;, Doubleday (1976), illustrated by John Cayea, and Anne Yvonne Gilbert in 1983
* &quot;Engine Summer&quot;, Doubleday (1979) — John W. Campbell Memorial Award runner-up, American Book Award and BSFA Award finalist, 1980, illustrated by Gary Friedman, and Anne Yvonne Gilbert in 1983
* &quot;Little, Big&quot;, Bantam (1981) — 1982 World Fantasy Award and Mythopoeic Award winner; Locus runner-up; BSFA, Hugo, and Nebula nominee, illustrated by Anne Yvonne Gilbert in 1983
* &quot;The Translator&quot;, William Morrow (2002)
* &quot;Lord Byron&#x27;s Novel: The Evening Land&quot;, William Morrow (2005)
* &quot;Four Freedoms&quot;, William Morrow (2009)
* &quot;The Chemical Wedding: by Christian Rosencreutz: A Romance in Eight Days by Johann Valentin Andreae in a New Version&quot;, Small Beer Press (2016)
* &quot;Ka: Dar Oakley in the Ruin of Ymr&quot;, Saga Press (2017) — Mythopoeic Award winner; World Fantasy Award nominee
* &quot;Flint and Mirror&quot;: &quot;A Novel of History and Magic&quot;, Tor Books (2022)

====The Ægypt Cycle====
* &quot;Ægypt&quot;, Bantam (1987); revised and republished 2007 under intended original title, &quot;The Solitudes&quot; — 1988 World Fantasy Award and Arthur C. Clarke Award nominee
* &quot;Love &amp; Sleep&quot;, Bantam (1994); revised 2008 — 1995 WFA nominee
* &quot;Dæmonomania&quot;, Bantam (2000); revised 2008
* &quot;Endless Things&quot;, Small Beer Press (2007); revised 2009 — 2008 Locus Award fifth place

=====Note=====
Crowley&#x27;s short story &quot;Flint and Mirror&quot; (2018) was presented as &quot;recently discovered among uncatalogued papers of the novelist Fellowes Kraft&quot; (one of the &quot;Ægypt&quot;&#x27;s protagonists). He expanded the story into a 2022 novel of the same name, though the link to &quot;Ægypt&quot; was omitted.

=== Short fiction ===
* &quot;Antiquities&quot; (1977, in &quot;Whispers: An Anthology of Fantasy and Horror&quot;)
* &quot;Somewhere to Elsewhere&quot; (1978 but printed as 1977, in &quot;The Little Magazine&quot;; an earlier draft of part of the first chapter and all of the second chapter of &quot;Little, Big&quot;)
* &quot;Where Spirits Gat Them Home&quot; (1978, in &quot;Shadows&quot; anthology; later revised as &quot;Her Bounty to the Dead&quot;)
* &quot;The Single Excursion of Caspar Last&quot; (1979, in &quot;Gallery&quot; magazine; later incorporated into &quot;Great Work of Time&quot;)
* &quot;The Reason for the Visit&quot; (1980, in &quot;Interfaces&quot; anthology)
* &quot;The Green Child&quot; (1981, in &quot;Elsewhere&quot; anthology)
* &quot;Novelty&quot; (1983, in &quot;Interzone&quot; magazine)
* &quot;Snow&quot; (1985, in &quot;Omni&quot; magazine) — 1985 Locus Award third place
* &quot;The Nightingale Sings at Night&quot; (1989, in &quot;Novelty&quot;)
* &quot;Great Work of Time&quot; (novella, 1989, in &quot;Novelty&quot;), Bantam (1991) — 1990 World Fantasy Award and 1999 Grand Prix de l&#x27;Imaginaire winner
* &quot;In Blue&quot; (novella, 1989, in &quot;Novelty&quot;)
* &quot;Missolonghi 1824&quot; (1990, in &quot;Isaac Asimov&#x27;s Science Fiction Magazine&quot;)
* &quot;Exogamy&quot; (1993, in &quot;Omni Best Science Fiction Three&quot; anthology)
* &quot;Gone&quot; (1996, in &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot;) — 1997 Locus Award winner
* &quot;Lost and Abandoned&quot; (1997, in &quot;Black Swan, White Raven&quot; anthology)
* &quot;An Earthly Mother Sits and Sings&quot; (2000, published as an original chapbook by Dreamhaven Press, illustrated by Charles Vess; included into &quot;Flint and Mirror&quot;)
* &quot;The War Between the Objects and the Subjects&quot; (2002, in &quot;J. K. Potter&#x27;s Embrace the Mutation&quot; anthology)
* &quot;The Girlhood of Shakespeare&#x27;s Heroines&quot; (novella, 2002, in &quot;Conjunctions: 39, The New Wave Fabulists&quot;, edited by Peter Straub), Subterranean Press (2005)
* &quot;Little Yeses, Little Nos&quot; (2005, in &quot;The Yale Review&quot;)
* &quot;Conversation Hearts&quot; (2008; published as a chapbook by Subterranean Press)
* &quot;And Go Like This&quot; (2011, in &quot;Naked City&quot; anthology)
* &quot;Tom Mix&quot; (vignette, 2012, online; republished as &quot;In the Tom Mix Museum&quot;)
* &quot;Glow Little Glowworm&quot; (2012, in &quot;Conjunctions: 59, Colloquy&quot;)
* &quot;The Million Monkeys of M. Borel&quot; (2016, in &quot;Conjunctions: 67, Other Aliens&quot;)
* &quot;This Is Our Town&quot; (2017, in &quot;Totalitopia&quot;)
* &quot;Mount Auburn Street&quot; (2017, in &quot;The Yale Review&quot;)
* &quot;Spring Break&quot; (2017, in &quot;New Haven Noir&quot; anthology) — 2018 Edgar Award winner
* &quot;Flint and Mirror&quot; (2018, in &quot;The Book of Magic&quot; anthology; expanded into a novel of the same name)
* &quot;Anosognosia&quot; (2019, in &quot;And Go Like This&quot;)
* &quot;Poker Night at the Elks Club 1938&quot; (2022, in &quot;Conjunctions: 79, Onword&quot;; 2024, in &quot;Two Chapters in a Family Chronicle&quot;)
* &quot;Percy and Lulu Go to Vermont&quot; (2024, in &quot;Two Chapters in a Family Chronicle&quot;)
* &quot;The Sixties: A Forged Diary&quot; (2024, Ninepin Press)
* &quot;An Apologue&quot; (dated 2021 but 2024, an appendix to limited editions of &quot;Little, Big&quot; that connects this novel with &quot;Ka&quot;)

===Collections===
* &quot;Novelty&quot;, Bantam (1989); collects &quot;The Nightingale Sings At Night&quot;, &quot;Great Work of Time&quot;, &quot;In Blue&quot; and the previously published &quot;Novelty&quot;.
* &quot;Antiquities: Seven Stories&quot;, Incunabula (1993); collects all of his stories to that point which were not included in &quot;Novelty&quot;.
* &quot;Novelties and Souvenirs: Collected Short Fiction&quot;, Perennial (2004); collects all of his short fiction up to that point, with the exception of &quot;The Girlhood of Shakespeare&#x27;s Heroines&quot;.
* &quot;Totalitopia&quot;, PM Press (2017); collects four stories (&quot;This Is Our Town&quot;, &quot;Gone&quot;, &quot;In the Tom Mix Museum&quot;, &quot;And Go Like This&quot;), three essays and the interview.
* &quot;And Go Like This: Stories&quot;, Small Beer Press (2019); collects all of his short fiction from 2002-2019.
* &quot;Two Chapters in a Family Chronicle&quot;, Ninepin Press (2024).

=== Omnibuses ===
* &quot;Beasts/Engine Summer/Little Big&quot;, QPBC (1991)
* &quot;Three Novels&quot; (1994; later published as &quot;Otherwise: Three Novels by John Crowley&quot;. It includes &quot;The Deep&quot;, &quot;Beasts&quot;, &quot;Engine Summer&quot;).

=== Documentary scripts===
* &quot;America Lost and Found&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Hindenberg: Ship of Doom&quot; (1980)
* &quot;No Place to Hide&quot; (1983; 30 min)
* &quot;America and Lewis Hine&quot; (1984, with Laurie Block and Daniel Allentuck; 60 min)
* &quot;The World of Tomorrow&quot; (1984; 76 min)
* &quot;Are We Winning Mommy? America and the Cold War&quot; (1986, with Laurie Block; 87 min)
* &quot;A $10 Horse and a $40 Saddle&quot; (1987)
* &quot;Fit: Episodes in the History of the Body&quot; (1991, with Laurie Block; 74 min)
* &quot;Pearl Harbor: Surprise and Remembrance&quot; (1991)
* &quot;&quot; (1992; 90 min)
* &quot;Nobody&#x27;s Girls: Five Women of the West&quot; (1995; 90 min)
* &quot;Morning Sun&quot; (2003, written with Carma Hinton and Geremie Barmé; 117 min)

=== Nonfiction ===
==== Essay collections ====
* &quot;In Other Words&quot;, Subterranean Press (2007).
* &quot;Reading Backwards: Essays &amp; Reviews, 2005-2018&quot;, Subterranean Press (2019).
* &quot;Two Talks on Writing&quot;, Ninepin Press (2024); includes &quot;Practicing the Arts of Peace&quot; and &quot;The Uses of Allegory&quot;.
* &quot;Seventy-Four Dreams&quot;, Ninepin Press (2024).

==== Articles ====
Crowley&#x27;s articles and essay-reviews have appeared in Lapham&#x27;s Quarterly, the Boston Review, Tin House, and Harper&#x27;s. 

=== Audio books ===
* &quot;Ægypt&quot;, Blackstone Audiobooks (2007; unabridged reading of &quot;The Solitudes&quot; by the author.)
* &quot;Little, Big&quot;, Blackstone Audiobooks (2011; unabridged reading by the author.)
* &quot;Ka: Dar Oakley in the Ruin of Ymr&quot;, Brilliance Audio (2017; unabridged reading by the author.)

== References ==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Snake&#x27;s-Hands: The Fiction of John Crowley&quot;, edited by Alice K. Turner and Michael Andre-Driussi, Cosmos (Canton, OH), 2003.

== External links ==
*
* 
*John Crowley Collection at the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q736447" start="0" end="12" title="John Crowley (author)" label="John Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="62" end="69" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="71" end="86" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="88" end="106" title="historical fiction" label="historical fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q213051" start="112" end="123" title="non-fiction" label="non-fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079140" start="144" end="162" title="Indiana University Bloomington" label="Indiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906934" start="263" end="274" title="Little, Big" label="Little, Big"/>
<link wikidata="Q594886" start="311" end="330" title="World Fantasy Award" label="World Fantasy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q345612" start="405" end="417" title="Harold Bloom" label="Harold Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385024" start="427" end="451" title="Ægypt" label="&amp;quot;Ægypt&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q192933" start="502" end="513" title="Hermeticism" label="Hermeticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="609" end="631" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q986013" start="751" end="770" title="Presque Isle, Maine" label="Presque Isle, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="1271" end="1286" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="1341" end="1391" title="American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729540" start="1449" end="1457" title="The Deep (John Crowley)" label="The Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876880" start="1481" end="1487" title="Beasts (John Crowley)" label="Beasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377731" start="1508" end="1521" title="Engine Summer" label="Engine Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q572316" start="1562" end="1581" title="National Book Award" label="American Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1587" end="1620" title="List of winners of the National Book Award#Miscellaneous 1980 to 1985" label="one-year category Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818247" start="1636" end="1649" title="David Pringle" label="David Pringle"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1663" end="1699" title="Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels" label="Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906934" start="1726" end="1737" title="Little, Big" label="Little, Big"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1785" end="1820" title="Modern Fantasy: The 100 Best Novels" label="Modern Fantasy: The 100 Best Novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385024" start="1895" end="1900" title="Ægypt" label="Ægypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15032905" start="1925" end="1938" title="The Solitudes (novel)" label="The Solitudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15032905" start="1976" end="1981" title="The Solitudes (novel)" label="Ægypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690221" start="1996" end="2012" title="Love &amp;amp; Sleep" label="Love &amp;amp; Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385385" start="2026" end="2037" title="Dæmonomania" label="Dæmonomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385024" start="2055" end="2069" title="Endless Things" label="Endless Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="2189" end="2225" title="American Academy of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996952" start="2280" end="2305" title="Ingram Merrill Foundation" label="Ingram Merrill Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368437" start="2313" end="2326" title="James Merrill" label="James Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402271" start="2408" end="2413" title="blurb" label="blurb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690221" start="2463" end="2479" title="Love &amp;amp; Sleep" label="Love &amp;amp; Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475177" start="2711" end="2724" title="Four Freedoms (novel)" label="Four Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175899" start="2973" end="2985" title="Peter Milton" label="Peter Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600262" start="3187" end="3205" title="Great Work of Time" label="Great Work of Time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3630" end="3653" title="Straight Ahead Pictures" label="Straight Ahead Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q130871" start="3946" end="3966" title="Berlin Film Festival" label="Berlin Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q172754" start="4052" end="4069" title="World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q309252" start="4239" end="4246" title="physical fitness" label="fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="4447" end="4462" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q358998" start="4492" end="4507" title="Utopian fiction" label="Utopian fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127036" start="5127" end="5162" title="Clarion West Writers Workshop" label="Clarion West Writers&amp;#x27; Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906934" start="5229" end="5240" title="Little, Big" label="Little, Big"/>
<link wikidata="Q898527" start="5260" end="5294" title="World Fantasy Award for Best Novel" label="World Fantasy Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5303" end="5327" title="Mythopoeic Awards#Mythopoeic Fantasy Awards" label="Mythopoeic Fantasy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600262" start="5342" end="5360" title="Great Work of Time" label="Great Work of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405409" start="5380" end="5416" title="World Fantasy Award for Best Novella" label="World Fantasy Award for Best Novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="5425" end="5475" title="American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q754655" start="5534" end="5545" title="Locus Award" label="Locus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="5618" end="5633" title="French language" label="French language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027922" start="5718" end="5749" title="Grand Prix de l&amp;#x27;Imaginaire" label="Grand Prix de l&amp;#x27;Imaginaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625727" start="5896" end="5936" title="World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement" label="World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q833154" start="6044" end="6055" title="Edgar Award" label="Edgar Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027922" start="6303" end="6334" title="Grand Prix de l&amp;#x27;Imaginaire" label="Grand Prix de l&amp;#x27;Imaginaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729540" start="6397" end="6405" title="The Deep (John Crowley)" label="The Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="6413" end="6422" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6446" end="6456" title="John Cayea" label="John Cayea"/>
<link wikidata="Q14766926" start="6462" end="6481" title="Anne Yvonne Gilbert" label="Anne Yvonne Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876880" start="6498" end="6504" title="Beasts (Crowley novel)" label="Beasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="6512" end="6521" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6545" end="6555" title="John Cayea" label="John Cayea"/>
<link wikidata="Q14766926" start="6561" end="6580" title="Anne Yvonne Gilbert" label="Anne Yvonne Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377731" start="6597" end="6610" title="Engine Summer" label="Engine Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="6618" end="6627" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030402" start="6637" end="6668" title="John W. Campbell Memorial Award" label="John W. Campbell Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6680" end="6699" title="National Book Award#&amp;quot;American Book Awards&amp;quot;" label="American Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q787680" start="6704" end="6714" title="BSFA Award" label="BSFA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525100" start="6746" end="6759" title="Gary Friedman" label="Gary Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14766926" start="6765" end="6784" title="Anne Yvonne Gilbert" label="Anne Yvonne Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906934" start="6801" end="6812" title="Little, Big" label="Little, Big"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609948" start="6820" end="6826" title="Bantam Books" label="Bantam"/>
<link wikidata="Q594886" start="6841" end="6860" title="World Fantasy Award" label="World Fantasy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q243960" start="6865" end="6881" title="Mythopoeic Award" label="Mythopoeic Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q754655" start="6890" end="6895" title="Locus Award" label="Locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853889" start="6907" end="6911" title="BSFA" label="BSFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="6913" end="6917" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q266012" start="6923" end="6929" title="Nebula Award for Best Novel" label="Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q14766926" start="6954" end="6973" title="Anne Yvonne Gilbert" label="Anne Yvonne Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015856" start="7012" end="7026" title="William Morrow and Company" label="William Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015856" start="7091" end="7105" title="William Morrow and Company" label="William Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475177" start="7121" end="7134" title="Four Freedoms (novel)" label="Four Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015856" start="7142" end="7156" title="William Morrow and Company" label="William Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456034" start="7172" end="7192" title="Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz" label="The Chemical Wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q60854" start="7247" end="7270" title="Johann Valentin Andreae" label="Johann Valentin Andreae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542657" start="7295" end="7311" title="Small Beer Press" label="Small Beer Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456994" start="7368" end="7378" title="Saga Press" label="Saga Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q118995540" start="7449" end="7465" title="Flint and Mirror" label="Flint and Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="7515" end="7524" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385024" start="7541" end="7546" title="Ægypt" label="Ægypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15032905" start="7565" end="7570" title="The Solitudes (novel)" label="Ægypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q708830" start="7710" end="7732" title="Arthur C. Clarke Award" label="Arthur C. Clarke Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690221" start="7749" end="7765" title="Love &amp;amp; Sleep" label="Love &amp;amp; Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385385" start="7828" end="7839" title="Dæmonomania" label="Dæmonomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385024" start="7883" end="7897" title="Endless Things" label="Endless Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542657" start="7905" end="7921" title="Small Beer Press" label="Small Beer Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8698" end="8705" title="Shadows (anthology)#Shadows (first volume)" label="Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518979" start="8842" end="8849" title="Gallery (magazine)" label="Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q507109" start="9116" end="9125" title="Interzone (magazine)" label="Interzone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548155" start="9150" end="9154" title="Snow (Crowley short story)" label="Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q663053" start="9177" end="9181" title="Omni (magazine)" label="Omni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600262" start="9313" end="9331" title="Great Work of Time" label="Great Work of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q144949" start="9577" end="9621" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction" label="Isaac Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="9751" end="9796" title="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q85757677" start="10011" end="10027" title="Dreamhaven Press" label="Dreamhaven Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611704" start="10044" end="10056" title="Charles Vess" label="Charles Vess"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10177" end="10189" title="J. K. Potter" label="J. K. Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161170" start="10318" end="10330" title="Conjunctions (journal)" label="Conjunctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q364189" start="10376" end="10388" title="Peter Straub" label="Peter Straub"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632210" start="10391" end="10409" title="Subterranean Press" label="Subterranean Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599084" start="10472" end="10487" title="The Yale Review" label="The Yale Review"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11671" end="11684" title="Ninepin Press" label="Ninepin Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600262" start="11955" end="11973" title="Great Work of Time" label="Great Work of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015544" start="12093" end="12103" title="Incunabula (publisher)" label="Incunabula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912901" start="13794" end="13805" title="Morning Sun (film)" label="Morning Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043163" start="13832" end="13844" title="Carma Hinton" label="Carma Hinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104033" start="13849" end="13862" title="Geremie Barmé" label="Geremie Barmé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632210" start="13951" end="13969" title="Subterranean Press" label="Subterranean Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="15002" end="15021" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="15029" end="15058" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292059" wikidata="Q468851" url="?curid=292059" title="Brian Jacques">
<text>James Brian Jacques (, as in &quot;Jakes&quot;; 15 June 1939 – 5 February 2011), known professionally as Brian Jacques, was an English author known for his &quot;Redwall&quot; series of children&#x27;s fantasy novels and &quot;Castaways of the Flying Dutchman&quot; series. He also completed two collections of short stories entitled &quot;The Ribbajack &amp; Other Curious Yarns&quot; and &quot;Seven Strange and Ghostly Tales&quot;.

== Early life ==
James Brian Jacques was born in Liverpool on 15 June 1939. Jacques&#x27; parents were James Alfred Jacques, a truck driver and Ellen Ryan, both born in Liverpool. His father&#x27;s family were from Lancashire, his mother&#x27;s family all had Irish roots. Jacques&#x27; maternal grandfather, Matthew Ryan, was from Wexford, Ireland. Jacques was the middle child: he had an older brother, Tony, and a younger brother, James. 

Jacques grew up in Kirkdale near to the Liverpool Docks. He was known by his middle name, Brian, because his father and younger brother were also named James. His father loved literature and read his boys adventure stories by Daniel Defoe, Sir Thomas Mallory, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, Robert Louis Stevenson, and Edgar Rice Burroughs, but also &quot;The Wind in the Willows&quot; with its cast of animals. Jacques showed early writing talent. 

At age ten, assigned to write an animal story, he wrote about a bird that cleaned a crocodile&#x27;s teeth. His teacher could not believe that a ten-year-old wrote it, and caned him for refusing to admit copying the story. He attended St John&#x27;s Roman Catholic school in Kirkdale, where his favourite teacher was Austin Thomas, a former Second World War army captain. Thomas had a major impact on Jacques: &quot;I was fourteen at the time when Mr. Thomas introduced the class to poetry and Greek literature. It was because of him, I saved seven shillings and sixpence to buy &quot;The Iliad&quot; and &quot;The Odyssey&quot; at this dusty used book shop.&quot;

== Career ==
Jacques left school at age fifteen, as was usual at the time, and set out to find adventure as a merchant sailor. When he returned to Liverpool, he began a varied career, spending time as a railway fireman, longshoreman, long-distance truck driver, bus driver, postmaster, and a stand-up entertainer. However, he often visited the local public library to continue his love of reading, and continued to develop his writing abilities. He published a succession of humorous poems and short stories through the 1970s, and in 1981 won a long term Residency at the Everyman Theatre, Liverpool, where his plays &quot;Brown Bitter&quot;, &quot;Wet Nellies&quot; and &quot;Scouse&quot; were performed.

In the 1980s, Jacques worked as a milkman, on a round which included the Royal Wavertree School for the Blind. He got to know the children there, and volunteered to read to them. However, he became dissatisfied with the state of children&#x27;s literature, with too much adolescent angst, and began to write stories for them. So that the visually impaired children would be able to picture the scenes he was writing for them, he developed a highly descriptive style, emphasizing sound, smell, taste, gravity, balance, temperature, touch, and kinesthetics. From these short stories and reading sessions emerged &quot;Redwall&quot;, an 800-page handwritten manuscript.

=== &quot;Redwall&quot; ===
During his time at the Everyman Theatre, Jacques had met and become friends with Alan Durband, an English teacher at C.F. Mott College of Education, a writer, and co-founder of the Everyman. Wanting Durband&#x27;s opinion of &quot;Redwall&quot;, Jacques gave him the completed manuscript. Impressed, Durband then showed it to his own publisher without telling Jacques. Durband reportedly told his publishers: &quot;This is the finest children&#x27;s tale I&#x27;ve ever read, and you&#x27;d be foolish not to publish it&quot;; Jacques was summoned to London to meet with the publishers, who gave him a contract to write the next five books in the series.

&quot;Redwall&quot; was unusual for its length. Although it is now common for children&#x27;s books to have 350 pages, and the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; books far exceed that, at the time it was commonly regarded that 200 pages were the maximum that would hold a child&#x27;s attention. It set the tone for the series as a whole, centering on the triumph of good over evil, with peaceful mice, badgers, voles, hares, moles and squirrels defeating rats, weasels, ferrets, snakes and stoats. Jacques did not shy away from the reality of battle, and many of the &quot;good&quot; creatures die. 

&quot;Redwall&quot; alludes to the surrounding human civilization - for example, with a scene featuring a horse-drawn cart. The subsequent books ignore humans completely, portraying an Iron Age society from the misty past building castles, bridges and ships to the scale of forest creatures, writing their own literature and drawing their own maps. Jacques was highly involved in the audio books of his work, even personally enlisting his sons and others to voice Redwall inhabitants. Jacques said that the characters in his stories are based on people he encountered in his life. He based Gonff, the self-proclaimed &quot;Prince of Mousethieves&quot;, on himself when he was a young boy hanging around the docks of Liverpool. Mariel is based on his granddaughter. Constance the Badgermum is based on his maternal grandmother. Other characters are a combination of many of the people he had met in his travels.

Jacques lived through the rationing during and after the Second World War, when he fantasized about the dishes in his aunt&#x27;s illustrated Victorian cookbook. Groaning boards spread with sumptuous feasts are common scenes in his stories, described in intricate sensory detail. The war also informed his depictions of gruesome battles. Jacques was known to be old-fashioned in his living; he thought an old typewriter to be more reliable than a computer, and he was known to be not fond of video games and other modern technology, though he allowed an animated television series to be produced based on his work, which aired on PBS in the United States. In the series, he introduced himself at the beginning of each episode and answered children&#x27;s questions at the end, though the UK and Canadian airings omitted the Q&amp;A session. He never felt that he fit the image of a &quot;writer sitting in his garden.&quot; Nevertheless, he was deeply touched by his success at reaching children. He was also pleased to be recognized by the people of Liverpool. His novels have sold more than 20 million copies worldwide and have been published in 28 languages.

== Personal life ==
Jacques lived with his wife, Maureen, in Liverpool. They had two sons: Marc is a carpenter and bricklayer, and David a contemporary artist and muralist.

Jacques had musical interests. In the 1960s, he formed a folk music band with two of his brothers; the band is called the Liverpool Fishermen. He hosted a radio show called &quot;Jakestown&quot; on BBC Radio Merseyside from 1986 to 2006, featuring selections from his favourite operas.

=== Death ===
In 2011, Jacques was admitted to the Royal Liverpool Hospital to undergo emergency surgery for an aortic aneurysm. He died from a heart attack at 71 years old on 5 February 2011.

== Recognition ==
In June 2005, he was awarded an Honorary Doctorate of Letters by the University of Liverpool. A prize was created at Bristol Grammar School, known as the &#x27;Brian Jacques Award for Most Improved Creative Writing&#x27;, and is awarded to a student in Year 8 as book tokens.

==Books==

===&quot;Redwall&quot; series===
# &quot;Redwall&quot; (1986)
# &quot;Mossflower&quot; (1988)
# &quot;Mattimeo&quot; (1989)
# &quot;Mariel of Redwall&quot; (1991)
# &quot;Salamandastron&quot; (1992)
# &quot;Martin the Warrior&quot; (1993)
# &quot;The Bellmaker&quot; (1994)
# &quot;Outcast of Redwall&quot; (1995)
# &quot;The Pearls of Lutra&quot; (1996)
# &quot;The Long Patrol&quot; (1997)
# &quot;Marlfox&quot; (1998)
# &quot;The Legend of Luke&quot; (1999)
# &quot;Lord Brocktree&quot; (2000)
# &quot;The Taggerung&quot; (2001)
# &quot;Triss&quot; (2002)
# &quot;Loamhedge&quot; (2003)
# &quot;Rakkety Tam&quot; (2004)
# &quot;High Rhulain&quot; (2005)
# &quot;Eulalia!&quot; (2007)
# &quot;Doomwyte&quot; (2008)
# &quot;The Sable Quean&quot; (2010)
# &quot;The Rogue Crew&quot; (2011) (posthumous)

====&quot;Tribes of Redwall&quot; series====
* &quot;Tribes of Redwall Badgers&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Tribes of Redwall Otters&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Tribes of Redwall Mice&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Tribes of Redwall Squirrels&quot; (Unreleased)
* &quot;Tribes of Redwall Hares&quot; (Unreleased)

====Miscellaneous &quot;Redwall&quot; books====
* &quot;The Great Redwall Feast&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Redwall Map &amp; Riddler&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Redwall Friend &amp; Foe&quot; (2000)
* &quot;A Redwall Winter&#x27;s Tale&quot; (2003)
* &quot;The Redwall Cookbook&quot; (2005)

===&quot;Castaways of the Flying Dutchman&quot; series===
* &quot;Castaways of the Flying Dutchman&quot; (2001)
* &quot;The Angel&#x27;s Command&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Voyage of Slaves&quot; (2006)

=== &quot;Urso Brunov&quot; ===

* &quot;The Tale of Urso Brunov: Little Father of All Bears&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Urso Brunov and the White Emperor&quot; (2008)

===Other works===
* &quot;Seven Strange and Ghostly Tales&quot; (1991)
* &quot;The Ribbajack &amp; Other Curious Yarns&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Get Yer Wack&quot; (Anvil Press, 1971)
* &quot;YENNOWORRAMEANLIKE&quot; (Raven Books, 1972)
* &quot;According to Jacques - A Mersey Bible&quot; (Raven Books, 1975)
* &quot;Jakestown, My Liverpool&quot; (Raven Books, 1979)

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q468851" start="0" end="19" title="Brian Jacques" label="James Brian Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q468851" start="105" end="118" title="Brian Jacques" label="Brian Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247790" start="162" end="169" title="Redwall" label="Redwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745946" start="227" end="259" title="Castaways of the Flying Dutchman" label="Castaways of the Flying Dutchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760629" start="340" end="379" title="The Ribbajack" label="The Ribbajack &amp;amp; Other Curious Yarns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457483" start="396" end="427" title="Seven Strange and Ghostly Tales" label="Seven Strange and Ghostly Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="485" end="494" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="651" end="661" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="696" end="701" title="Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q209126" start="768" end="775" title="Wexford" label="Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="777" end="784" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415637" start="898" end="906" title="Kirkdale, Merseyside" label="Kirkdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398514" start="919" end="934" title="Liverpool Docks" label="Liverpool Docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q40946" start="1105" end="1117" title="Daniel Defoe" label="Daniel Defoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q309907" start="1119" end="1137" title="Sir Thomas Mallory" label="Sir Thomas Mallory"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="1139" end="1161" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Sir Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="1163" end="1185" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q148234" start="1191" end="1211" title="Edgar Rice Burroughs" label="Edgar Rice Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q936276" start="1228" end="1251" title="The Wind in the Willows" label="The Wind in the Willows"/>
<link wikidata="Q835119" start="1387" end="1429" title="Egyptian plover" label="bird that cleaned a crocodile&amp;#x27;s teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1664" end="1680" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="1908" end="1917" title="The Iliad" label="The Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="1934" end="1945" title="The Odyssey" label="The Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q155930" start="2099" end="2114" title="merchant sailor" label="merchant sailor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061525" start="2561" end="2588" title="Everyman Theatre, Liverpool" label="Everyman Theatre, Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374796" start="2769" end="2805" title="Royal School for the Blind (Liverpool)" label="Royal Wavertree School for the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q131539" start="2925" end="2951" title="children&amp;#x27;s literature" label="children&amp;#x27;s literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617336" start="3312" end="3319" title="Redwall (novel)" label="Redwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706552" start="3473" end="3485" title="Alan Durband" label="Alan Durband"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401788" start="3509" end="3539" title="C.F. Mott College of Education" label="C.F. Mott College of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q535297" start="5578" end="5587" title="Rationing in the United Kingdom" label="rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q973259" start="6106" end="6132" title="Redwall (TV series)" label="animated television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6125121" start="7068" end="7077" title="Jakestown" label="Jakestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834920" start="7087" end="7107" title="BBC Radio Merseyside" label="BBC Radio Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374408" start="7227" end="7251" title="Royal Liverpool University Hospital" label="Royal Liverpool Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q616003" start="7288" end="7303" title="aortic aneurysm" label="aortic aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q499510" start="7457" end="7480" title="University of Liverpool" label="University of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968912" start="7505" end="7527" title="Bristol Grammar School" label="Bristol Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617336" start="7717" end="7724" title="Redwall (novel)" label="Redwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576767" start="7746" end="7756" title="Mossflower" label="Mossflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q683464" start="7778" end="7786" title="Mattimeo" label="Mattimeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063726" start="7808" end="7825" title="Mariel of Redwall" label="Mariel of Redwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346562" start="7847" end="7861" title="Salamandastron" label="Salamandastron"/>
<link wikidata="Q664389" start="7883" end="7901" title="Martin the Warrior" label="Martin the Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064024" start="7923" end="7936" title="The Bellmaker" label="The Bellmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063735" start="7958" end="7976" title="Outcast of Redwall" label="Outcast of Redwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063707" start="7998" end="8017" title="The Pearls of Lutra" label="The Pearls of Lutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399558" start="8039" end="8054" title="The Long Patrol" label="The Long Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234346" start="8076" end="8083" title="Marlfox" label="Marlfox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223417" start="8105" end="8123" title="The Legend of Luke" label="The Legend of Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209154" start="8145" end="8159" title="Lord Brocktree" label="Lord Brocktree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225994" start="8181" end="8194" title="The Taggerung" label="The Taggerung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204428" start="8216" end="8221" title="Triss" label="Triss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977275" start="8243" end="8252" title="Loamhedge" label="Loamhedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211639" start="8274" end="8285" title="Rakkety Tam" label="Rakkety Tam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135390" start="8307" end="8319" title="High Rhulain" label="High Rhulain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060319" start="8341" end="8349" title="Eulalia!" label="Eulalia!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036906" start="8371" end="8379" title="Doomwyte" label="Doomwyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522576" start="8401" end="8416" title="The Sable Quean" label="The Sable Quean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522537" start="8438" end="8452" title="The Rogue Crew" label="The Rogue Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840399" start="8533" end="8558" title="Tribes of Redwall Badgers" label="Tribes of Redwall Badgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840402" start="8580" end="8604" title="Tribes of Redwall Otters" label="Tribes of Redwall Otters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840401" start="8626" end="8648" title="Tribes of Redwall Mice" label="Tribes of Redwall Mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737906" start="8825" end="8848" title="The Great Redwall Feast" label="The Great Redwall Feast"/>
<link wikidata="Q468851" start="8870" end="8895" title="Redwall Map &amp;amp; Riddler" label="Redwall Map &amp;amp; Riddler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306438" start="8917" end="8941" title="Redwall Friend &amp;amp; Foe" label="Redwall Friend &amp;amp; Foe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659182" start="8963" end="8991" title="A Redwall Winter&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="A Redwall Winter&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759995" start="9013" end="9033" title="The Redwall Cookbook" label="The Redwall Cookbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745946" start="9114" end="9146" title="Castaways of the Flying Dutchman" label="Castaways of the Flying Dutchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713731" start="9168" end="9192" title="The Angel&amp;#x27;s Command" label="The Angel&amp;#x27;s Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q14876643" start="9214" end="9230" title="Voyage of Slaves" label="Voyage of Slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457483" start="9433" end="9464" title="Seven Strange and Ghostly Tales" label="Seven Strange and Ghostly Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760629" start="9486" end="9525" title="The Ribbajack" label="The Ribbajack &amp;amp; Other Curious Yarns"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292061" wikidata="Q3007352" url="?curid=292061" title="Culture of Liberia">
<text>The culture of Liberia reflects this nation&#x27;s diverse ethnicities and long history. Liberia is located in West Africa on the Atlantic Coast.

== Languages ==

The official language of Liberia is English. There are also more than 16 indigenous languages. Among the most widely studied Liberian languages in schools and universities are Kpelle and Bassa languages and to a lesser extent, Vai. Loma and Mende also have their own unique alphabets but are studied less.

Both languages are noted for their unique alphabets and phonetics that are not based on the Latin alphabet, or any European language but emerged from visions of each language&#x27;s inventor. Bassa alphabet was popularized by Dr. Thomas Narvin Lewis in the early 20th century, after attending studies in the U.S at Syracuse University. He modeled it after he came into contact with former slaves of Bassa origin in Brazil and the West Indies who were still using the alphabet. Vai is another well known ancient script from Liberia, but distinct from the Bassa alphabet.

Among the listed alphabets, Bassa Vah is compared to include Armenian, Coptic (used by Egyptian Coptic and Coptic Church), Avestan used in Ancient Persia to write sacred hymns of Zoroastrianism, Georgian language in Republic of Georgia, Mongolian, Meroitic alphabet of ancient Sudan and parts of Nile Valley, and many other ancient scripts, Greek-based and Cyrillic alphabets. Some Vah letters resemble certain letters from the Ge&#x27;ez alphabet of Ethiopia and Eritrea, N&#x27;ko alphabet in Guinea, and Armenian alphabet.

The syllabary of Vai also been compared to Hiragana and Katakana scripts also syllabary for Japanese language. However many linguists hold that Bassa and Vai alphabets are unique in their own right for being African languages with alphabets alongside Ge&#x27;ez, N&#x27;ko, and Tifinagh (used to write Berber languages) that are neither influenced by Latin or Western writing system.

=== Religion ===
According To the 2008 National Census, 85.5% of Liberia&#x27;s population practices Christianity. Muslims comprise 12.2% of the population, largely coming from the Mandingo and Vai ethnic groups.

=== Belief in traditional supernatural world ===
Regardless of public statements of identification with Christianity, a &quot;vast majority&quot; of Liberians believe a supernatural world of ancestral and bush spirits that impact daily life. Ethnic groups in all regions of Liberia participate in the traditional religious practices of the Poro and Sande secret societies, with the exception of the Krahn ethnic group, who have their own secret society.

&quot;Liberian religious culture is characterised by a predisposition towards secrecy (encapsulated in the concept of &quot;ifa mo&quot; - &quot;do not speak it&quot;) and an ingrained belief in the intervention of mysterious forces in human affairs&quot;. &quot;Both elite and non-elite Liberians usually attribute events to the activities of secret powers and forces&quot;.

&quot;Beliefs include the conviction that there are deep and hidden things about an individual that only diviners, priests, and other qualified persons can unravel. This presupposes that whatever exists or happens in the physical realm has foundations in the spirit world&quot;.

=== Secret societies ===
While still belonging to Christian or Muslim denominations, ethnic groups in all regions participate in religious secret societies associated with the spirit world, including the Poro and Sande gender-based secret societies. The Sande society champions women&#x27;s social and political interests and promotes their solidarity vis-a-vis the Poro society, a complementary secret society for men. The Poro society is found among the Bassa, Gola, Kissi, Kpelle, Loma, People and Vai of Liberia.

== Polygamy ==
One-third of married Liberian women between the ages of 15–49 are in polygamous marriages. Customary law allows men to have up to four wives.

== Media culture ==
Numerous newspapers, radio stations and TV programs are broadcast and can be heard in the capital Monrovia, coastal cities and towns and countryside. Radio, newspapers and online news articles are the main form of mass communication in Liberia in recent years, surpassing TV stations as the most accessible forms of media to Liberians. Many popular FM radio stations have their headquarters in Monrovia along with several major national newspapers.

Many radio stations are community-based, operated by joint United Nations and community councils, activists, youth groups, universities and neighborhood programs. The major radio stations in Liberia are UNMIL Radio, Radio ELWA, Truth Radio, ELBC Radio, and STAR radio. All have programs available to listen to online. There are currently no AM radio stations (which existed before the war) but there are a few shortwave stations. Radio also serves to promote peace, reconciliation and connect the country both rural and urban Liberians through community based apprenticeship programs for youths and young adults.

A famous news blackboard in Monrovia is &quot;The Daily Talk&quot;. &quot;The Daily Talk&quot; is accessible for free. According to &quot;The New York Times&quot;, the blackboard is &quot;the most widely read report&quot; in Monrovia, as many Monrovians lack the money or the electricity necessary for access to the conventional mass media.

The most widely read newspapers include the &quot;Liberia Herald&quot;, &quot;The Analyst&quot;, &quot;Liberian Observer&quot;, &quot;The News&quot;, &quot;The Heritage&quot;, and &quot;The Inquirer&quot;, among others. Several Liberian journalists have been awarded national and international awards and acclaim around the world for their commitment to press freedom and promotion of Democracy in post war countries and regions.

== The arts ==

=== Music ===

Liberia has its own ancient music and instruments. While Liberian music is part of wider West African music heritage, it is also distinct from its neighbors. There are several different types of drums used in traditional music. Drums are among the most widely used instruments in ceremonies both official and nonofficial, weddings, christenings, naming ceremonies, holidays, graduations, etc. Next to drums, beaded gourd rattles called Saasaa are also used in mainstream music by many Liberian singers, musicians, and ensembles across the country.

Songs are sung in both English and all indigenous languages. Other instruments similar to the xylophone include Yomo Gor. Music is a main highlight of Liberian culture not only used as entertainment but to educate society on issues ranging from culture, politics, history to human rights.

Religious music is also popular. Christian music is heavily influenced by its counterpart in the United States, regardless of region. Islamic nasheeds popular in many countries with Muslim communities are almost unheard of in Liberia. Instead, music for Liberian Muslims is based on Quranic citations, adhan and music related to everyday life called suku. Aside from religious and traditional music, rap and Highlife are widely popular genres, especially with younger Liberians and American music aficionados, and can be heard in discothèques, parties, clubs and on radios throughout the country. Jazz, funk, soul, rap and a new music style or Liberian rap called Hipco combining rap, R&amp;B, traditional rhymes, and joint Liberian and American influences are part of the wider music of Liberia.

=== Crafts ===

Liberia is renowned for its detailed decorative and ornate masks, large and miniature wood carvings of realistic human faces, famous people, scenes of everyday life, and accessories particularly combs, spoons, and forks which are often enlarged sculptures. Sculptures are produced in both the countryside and cities. Liberian wood curved sculptures are heavily influenced by ancient history predating modern Liberia, folklore, proverbs, spirituality, rural life and show the artist&#x27;s strong observations for grand detail and their connections to the people and objects sculpted. Liberian artists both in the country and diaspora have also gained recognition for various styles of paintings in abstract, perspective, and graphic art.

Due to its strong relationship with the United States, Liberia has also produced its own American-influenced quilts. The American free people of color and former slaves who emigrated to Liberia brought with them their sewing and quilting skills and was originally done by Americo-Liberians beginning in the 19th century. Queen Victoria invited Martha Ann Ricks, on behalf of Liberian Ambassador Edward Wilmot Blyden, to Windsor Castle on 16 July 1892.

Ricks, a former slave from Tennessee, had saved for more than fifty years, to afford the voyage from Liberia to England to personally thank the Queen for the British navy&#x27;s actions against the slave trade. Ricks shook hands with the Queen and presented her with a Coffee Tree quilt, which Victoria later sent to the 1893 World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition for display. A mystery remains as to where the quilt is today.

The census of 1843 indicated a variety of occupations, including hatter, milliner, seamstress, and tailor. Liberia hosted National Fairs in 1857 and 1858 in which prizes were awarded for various needle arts. However, today, Liberians from all ethnic groups make quilts, although quilting is not as popular as it once was when the country was adapting American customs, culture, and lifestyle in the mid-19th century. In modern times, Liberian presidents would present quilts as official government gifts, and when current Liberian President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf moved into the Executive Mansion, she reportedly had a Liberian-made quilt installed in her presidential office.

=== Literature ===
A literary tradition has existed in Liberia for over a century. Liberia had no written tradition until the 19th century. Numerous Liberian authors throughout the years have contributed to the writings of various genres. They have written on folk art, ancient proverbs, everyday life in countryside, city life, religion and observation of their own lives. Culture, tradition, identity, society, taboo subjects, human rights, equality and diversity within Liberia, multiculturalism, Pan-Africanism, colonialism and its reverberating consequences today, post-colonial African countries and future of the country have been featured in novels, books, magazines, and novelettes since the 19th century. The first novel by an African published in English was written by a Liberian, Joseph Jeffrey Walters, a Vai convert to Christianity studying at Oberlin College in the United States. The book titled &quot;Guanya Pau: A Story of an African Princess&quot; was published in 1891 by Lauer and Mattil of Cleveland, Ohio, and deals with the issue of child marriage and women&#x27;s rights.

Poetry is a prominent canon of Liberian literature. Many authors have presented their pose in all poetic styles. Often adding their own unique perspectives, writing styles and observation of the material and spiritual worlds into their books. Liberia&#x27;s prominent writers also share a variety of genres that cross several decades.

In the 19th century, Edward Wilmot Blyden was the most renowned Liberian author. A diplomat, educator, statesman and writer, Blyden was considered one of the early fathers of Pan Africanism along with W. E. B. Du Bois and Marcus Garvey. His writings revolved around the need for Africans to develop their own identity, be culturally, spiritually and politically aware of their own potential and preside over their own self-rule and to disprove the European view of Africans as culture-less. These writings inspired many Liberian authors in later years and still do today. A national hero in Liberia, Blyden is known in world history and on the African continent as the genius behind the phrase &quot;Africa for Africans!&quot; and later inspired Marcus Garvey&#x27;s Back to Africa Movement. 

During the 20th century and in the first decade of the 21st century, other authors have taken a less political but prominent role in Liberian literature. Several authors are renowned for their detailed and deep observation of Liberian life both in the country and abroad in the Diaspora in Europe or United States. Authors Bai T. Moore, E. G. Bailey, Roland T. Dempster, Wilton G. S. Sankawulo, have all reflected on Liberian culture, tradition, modernization and the pain of exile, loneliness, loss and remembrance in fiction, and non-fiction works.

Bai T. Moore&#x27;s novella &quot;Murder in the Cassava Patch&quot; is required reading for many Liberian high-school students. Published in 1968, the book is based on the true story of a murder, and explores the most taboo subjects in mid-20th-century Liberia as the story reveals the lives of the main characters and their hometown. E. G. Bailey is a spoken-word artist, theatre and radio producer.

Politician and author Wilton G. S. Sankawulo published many collections of poems and stories that later became praised anthologies on Liberian folklore and wider African literary tradition, entitled &quot;More Modern African Stories&quot;. His most celebrated book is &quot;Sundown at Dawn: A Liberian Odyssey&quot;. According to the book&#x27;s publisher, Dusty Spark Publishing, it is regarded as &quot;one of the literary achievements of postwar Liberia and contemporary Africa.&quot;

== Cuisine ==

Liberian cuisine has rice as its staple. Other ingredients include cassava, fish, bananas, citrus fruit, plantains, coconut, okra and sweet potatoes. Heavy stews spiced with habanero and scotch bonnet chillies are popular and eaten with fufu.

== See also ==

* Kwi (Liberia)

== References ==
== External links ==
* Africa&#x27;s Plea by Roland T. Dempster
* Liberian Literature: “The Name of the Sound, and the Sound of the Name&quot;
* Sea Breeze Journal of Contemporary Liberian writers
* Liberian Art &amp; Artifacts</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3007352" start="4" end="22" title="Culture of Liberia" label="culture of Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="130" end="144" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q35673" start="340" end="346" title="Kpelle language" label="Kpelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34949" start="351" end="356" title="Bassa language" label="Bassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36939" start="391" end="394" title="Vai language" label="Vai"/>
<link wikidata="Q35885" start="396" end="400" title="Loma language" label="Loma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478672" start="405" end="410" title="Mende language" label="Mende"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="563" end="577" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q48366" start="586" end="603" title="European language" label="European language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9779" start="669" end="677" title="alphabet" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="786" end="805" title="Syracuse University" label="Syracuse University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11932" start="1103" end="1111" title="Armenian alphabet" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q321083" start="1113" end="1119" title="Coptic alphabet" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29572" start="1165" end="1172" title="Avestan" label="Avestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28926" start="1181" end="1195" title="Ancient Persia" label="Ancient Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q484692" start="1212" end="1217" title="hymns" label="hymns"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="1221" end="1235" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108" start="1237" end="1254" title="Georgian language" label="Georgian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="1258" end="1277" title="Georgia (country)" label="Republic of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="1279" end="1288" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164926" start="1290" end="1307" title="Meroitic alphabet" label="Meroitic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="1319" end="1324" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="1338" end="1349" title="Nile Valley" label="Nile Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="1399" end="1407" title="Cyrillic" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35667" start="1470" end="1480" title="Ge&amp;#x27;ez" label="Ge&amp;#x27;ez"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="1493" end="1501" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="1506" end="1513" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062587" start="1515" end="1524" title="N&amp;#x27;ko" label="N&amp;#x27;ko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="1537" end="1543" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q48332" start="1612" end="1620" title="Hiragana" label="Hiragana"/>
<link wikidata="Q82946" start="1625" end="1633" title="Katakana" label="Katakana"/>
<link wikidata="Q208503" start="1847" end="1855" title="Tifinagh" label="Tifinagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="1937" end="1951" title="writing system" label="writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="2019" end="2026" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="2055" end="2067" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="2069" end="2075" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q819186" start="2135" end="2143" title="Mandinka people" label="Mandingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002234" start="2148" end="2151" title="Vai people" label="Vai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647007" start="2508" end="2512" title="Poro" label="Poro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963459" start="2517" end="2522" title="Sande society" label="Sande"/>
<link wikidata="Q265962" start="2567" end="2572" title="Krahn people" label="Krahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647007" start="3484" end="3488" title="Poro" label="Poro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963459" start="3493" end="3498" title="Sande society" label="Sande"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647007" start="3646" end="3658" title="Poro" label="Poro society"/>
<link wikidata="Q810462" start="3736" end="3741" title="Bassa people (Liberia)" label="Bassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534501" start="3743" end="3747" title="Gola people" label="Gola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743773" start="3749" end="3754" title="Kissi people" label="Kissi"/>
<link wikidata="Q930128" start="3756" end="3762" title="Kpelle people" label="Kpelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859406" start="3764" end="3768" title="Loma people" label="Loma"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110031" start="3770" end="3776" title="Mano people" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002234" start="3781" end="3784" title="Vai people" label="Vai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748" start="4370" end="4378" title="Monrovia" label="Monrovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="4485" end="4499" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496972" start="4683" end="4693" title="STAR radio" label="STAR radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q235585" start="5054" end="5064" title="blackboard" label="blackboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627949" start="5086" end="5100" title="The Daily Talk" label="The Daily Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5178" end="5196" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154206" start="5369" end="5379" title="Mass media in Liberia" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q3831665" start="5432" end="5446" title="Liberia Herald" label="Liberia Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541130" start="5485" end="5502" title="Liberian Observer" label="Liberian Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="5736" end="5749" title="press freedom" label="press freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201472" start="5780" end="5788" title="post war" label="post war"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="5933" end="5945" title="West African" label="West African"/>
<link wikidata="Q11404" start="6072" end="6077" title="Drums" label="Drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339237" start="6259" end="6264" title="gourd" label="gourd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088357" start="6362" end="6371" title="Musical ensemble" label="ensembles"/>
<link wikidata="Q165666" start="6487" end="6496" title="xylophone" label="xylophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065742" start="6683" end="6698" title="Religious music" label="Religious music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452410" start="6716" end="6731" title="Christian music" label="Christian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q783874" start="6825" end="6833" title="nasheeds" label="nasheeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="6966" end="6971" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="7083" end="7086" title="rapping" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q28490034" start="7347" end="7352" title="Hipco" label="Hipco"/>
<link wikidata="Q337907" start="7583" end="7596" title="wood carvings" label="wood carvings"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="8122" end="8130" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q911059" start="8222" end="8233" title="graphic art" label="graphic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267945" start="8508" end="8525" title="Americo-Liberians" label="Americo-Liberians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="8557" end="8571" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43191656" start="8580" end="8596" title="Martha Ann Ricks" label="Martha Ann Ricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q384338" start="8631" end="8651" title="Edward Wilmot Blyden" label="Edward Wilmot Blyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="8656" end="8670" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="8716" end="8725" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="8847" end="8866" title="Royal Navy" label="British navy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="9015" end="9048" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q43179" start="9654" end="9675" title="Ellen Johnson Sirleaf" label="Ellen Johnson Sirleaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153484" start="10050" end="10058" title="folk art" label="folk art"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="10290" end="10304" title="Pan-Africanism" label="Pan-Africanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="10306" end="10317" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307927" start="10583" end="10605" title="Joseph Jeffrey Walters" label="Joseph Jeffrey Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q616591" start="10649" end="10664" title="Oberlin College" label="Oberlin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q384338" start="11246" end="11266" title="Edward Wilmot Blyden" label="Edward Wilmot Blyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q158060" start="11426" end="11442" title="W. E. B. Du Bois" label="W. E. B. Du Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q272504" start="11447" end="11460" title="Marcus Garvey" label="Marcus Garvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839012" start="11992" end="12006" title="Back to Africa" label="Back to Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4843149" start="12342" end="12354" title="Bai T. Moore" label="Bai T. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12356" end="12368" title="E. G. Bailey" label="E. G. Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360453" start="12370" end="12388" title="Roland T. Dempster" label="Roland T. Dempster"/>
<link wikidata="Q888828" start="12390" end="12412" title="Wilton G. S. Sankawulo" label="Wilton G. S. Sankawulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110069" start="12605" end="12632" title="Murder in the Cassava Patch" label="Murder in the Cassava Patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428637" start="12924" end="12935" title="spoken-word" label="spoken-word"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="13498" end="13502" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="13544" end="13551" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q600396" start="13553" end="13557" title="Fish (food)" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="13559" end="13565" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="13568" end="13580" title="citrus fruit" label="citrus fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q165449" start="13582" end="13591" title="Plantain (cooking)" label="plantains"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="13593" end="13600" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q80531" start="13602" end="13606" title="okra" label="okra"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="13611" end="13623" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920963" start="13633" end="13637" title="stew" label="stew"/>
<link wikidata="Q764375" start="13651" end="13659" title="habanero" label="habanero"/>
<link wikidata="Q466854" start="13664" end="13677" title="scotch bonnet" label="scotch bonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q941004" start="13714" end="13718" title="fufu" label="fufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110018" start="13739" end="13752" title="Kwi (Liberia)" label="Kwi (Liberia)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292062" wikidata="Q536913" url="?curid=292062" title="Garth Nix">
<text>Garth Richard Nix (born 19 July 1963) is an Australian writer who specialises in children&#x27;s and young adult fantasy novels, notably the &quot;Old Kingdom&quot;, &quot;Seventh Tower&quot; and &quot;Keys to the Kingdom&quot; series. He has frequently been asked if his name is a pseudonym, to which he has responded, &quot;I guess people ask me because it sounds like the perfect name for a writer of fantasy. However, it is my real name.&quot;

==Biography==
Born in Melbourne, Nix was raised in Canberra. He attended Turner Primary School, Lyneham High School and Dickson College for schooling. While at Dickson College, Nix joined the Australian Army Reserve. After a period working for the Australian government, he traveled in Europe before returning to Australia in 1983 and undertaking a BA in professional writing at University of Canberra. 

He worked in a Canberra bookshop after graduation, before moving to Sydney in 1987, where he worked his way up in the publishing field. He was a sales rep and publicist before becoming a senior editor at HarperCollins. In 1993 he commenced further travel in Asia, the Middle East and Eastern Europe before becoming a marketing consultant, founding his own company, Gotley Nix Evans Pty Ltd. From 1999 to 2002 he worked as a literary agent with Curtis Brown (Australia) Pty Ltd before becoming a full-time author.

In addition to his work as a fantasy novelist, Nix has written a number of scenarios and articles for the role playing field, including those for &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; and &quot;Traveller&quot;. These have appeared in related publications such as &quot;White Dwarf&quot;, &quot;Multiverse&quot; and &quot;Breakout!&quot;. He has also written case studies, articles and news items in the information technology field, his work appearing in publications such as &quot;Computerworld&quot; and &quot;PC World&quot;.

Nix currently lives in Sydney with his wife Anna McFarlane, a publisher, and their sons Thomas and Edward.

==Bibliography==
===Picture books===
====Very Clever Baby====
This series was self-published, and republished by Text Publishing. Described as books for &quot;Very Clever Babies Aged 3–6 Months&quot;, they contain such words as ichthyologist, as used by the character Freddy the Fish.
* &quot;Very Clever Baby&#x27;s First Reader&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Very Clever Baby&#x27;s Ben Hur&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Very Clever Baby&#x27;s Guide to the Greenhouse Effect&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Very Clever Baby&#x27;s First Christmas&quot; (1998)

===Young adult and children&#x27;s literature===
====&quot;The Old Kingdom&quot;====
=====Novels=====
* &quot;Sabriel&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Lirael&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Abhorsen&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Clariel&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Goldenhand&quot; (2016)
* &quot;Terciel and Elinor&quot; (2021)

=====Short fiction=====
* &quot;Nicholas Sayre and the Creature in the Case&quot; (2005). A novella produced for World Book Day and originally entitled &quot;The Creature in the Case&quot;. Reprinted under the new title in the collection &quot;Across the Wall: A Tale of the Abhorsen and Other Stories&quot;.)
* &quot;The Nine Gates of Death: An Extract of the Journal of Idrach the Lesser Necromancer&quot; (2009). A short story released on oldkingdom.com.au
* &quot;An Essay on Free Magic&quot;. Short text released on the Old Kingdom website.
* &quot;To Hold the Bridge&quot;. A novella original published in the &quot;Legends of Australian Fantasy&quot; anthology edited by Jack Dann and Jonathan Strahan. Reprinted in the collection &quot;To Hold the Bridge&quot;.
* &quot;Doctor Crake Crosses the Wall&quot;. Short story included in the Australian edition of Goldenhand, also published on the official Australian Old Kingdom website.

=====Omnibus=====
* &quot;The Old Kingdom Chronicles&quot; (&quot;The Abhorsen Chronicles&quot; in the United States) (2009). This contained the first three Abhorsen books and &quot;The Creature in the Case&quot;.

====The Seventh Tower====

# &quot;The Fall&quot; (2000)
# &quot;Castle&quot; (2000)
# &quot;Aenir&quot; (2001)
# &quot;Above the Veil&quot; (2001)
# &quot;Into Battle&quot; (2001)
# &quot;The Violet Keystone&quot; (2001)

====The Keys to the Kingdom====

# &quot;Mister Monday&quot; (2003)
# &quot;Grim Tuesday&quot; (2004)
# &quot;Drowned Wednesday&quot; (2005)
# &quot;Sir Thursday&quot; (2006)
# &quot;Lady Friday&quot; (2007)
# &quot;Superior Saturday&quot; (2008)
# &quot;Lord Sunday&quot; (2010)

====The Left-Handed Booksellers of London====
# &quot;The Left-Handed Booksellers of London&quot; (2020)
# &quot;The Sinister Booksellers of Bath&quot; (2023)
# &quot;The Even-Handed Booksellers of Edinburgh&quot; (forthcoming)

====Troubletwisters (co-written with Sean Williams)====
# &quot;Troubletwisters&quot; (2011)
# &quot;The Monster&quot; (2012)
# &quot;The Mystery&quot; (2013)
# &quot;The Missing&quot; (2014)

====Have Sword, Will Travel (co-written with Sean Williams)====
# &quot;Have Sword, Will Travel&quot; (2017)
# &quot;Let Sleeping Dragons Lie&quot; (2018)

====Works in multi-author series====
* &quot;Spirit Animals Book 3: Blood Ties&quot; (2014, with Sean Williams)
* &quot;Serena and the Sea Serpent&quot; (2000), part of &quot;Aussie Bites&quot; series

====Collection====
* 2007 &quot;One Beastly Beast: Two Aliens, Three Inventors, Four Fantastic Tales&quot; - a book of short stories for younger readers
** &quot;Serena and the Sea Serpent&quot; 
** &quot;Bill the Inventor&quot;
** &quot;Blackbread the Pirate&quot;

====Standalone novels====
* &quot;The Ragwitch&quot; (1990), a children&#x27;s fantasy novel
* &quot;Shade&#x27;s Children&quot; (1997)
* &quot;A Confusion of Princes&quot; (2012), a young adult space opera novel
* &quot;Newt&#x27;s Emerald&quot; (2015), a fantasy romance
* &quot;Frogkisser!&quot; (2017), a children&#x27;s fantasy novel
* &quot;Angel Mage&quot; (2019), a young adult fantasy sci-fi novel
* &quot;We Do Not Welcome Our Ten-Year-Old Overlord&quot; (2024)

===Works for adults===
====Sir Hereward and Mister Fitz====
# 2007 &quot;Sir Hereward and Mister Fitz Go to War Again&quot;, in &quot;Jim Baen&#x27;s Universe&quot;
# 2008 &quot;Beyond the Sea Gate of the Scholar-Pirates of Sarsköe&quot;, in &quot;Fast Ships, Black Sails&quot; edited by Jeff VanderMeer and Ann VanderMeer
# 2010 &quot;A Suitable Present for a Sorcerous Puppet&quot;, in &quot;Swords and Dark Magic&quot;, edited by Lou Anders and Jonathan Strahan
# 2013 &quot;Losing Her Divinity&quot;, in &quot;Rags &amp; Bones: New Twists on Timeless Tales&quot;, edited by Melissa Marr and Tim Pratt
# 2014 &quot;A Cargo of Ivories&quot;, in &quot;Rogues&quot;, edited by George R. R. Martin and Gardner Dozois
# 2014 &quot;Home is the Haunter&quot;, in &quot;Fearsome Magics&quot;, edited by Jonathan Strahan
# 2017 &quot;A Long, Cold Trail&quot;, in &quot;The Book of Swords&quot;, edited by Gardner Dozois
# 2020 &quot;Cut Me Another Quill, Mister Fitz&quot;, in &quot;The Book of Dragons&quot; , edited by Jonathan Strahan
# 2023 &quot;The Field of Fallen Foe&quot;, in the collection &quot;Sir Hereward and Mister Fitz: Stories of the Witch Knight and the Puppet Sorcerer&quot; (2023)
* The first three stories are collected in &quot;Sir Hereward and Mister Fitz: Three Adventures&quot; (2011).
* All nine stories are collected in &quot;Sir Hereward and Mister Fitz: Stories of the Witch Knight and the Puppet Sorcerer&quot; (2023).

==== Collections ====
** &quot;The Princess and the Beastly Beast&quot;
* 2005 &quot;Across the Wall: A Tale of the Abhorsen and Other Stories&quot;
** 2005 &quot;Nicholas Sayre and the Creature in the Case&quot; (published for World Book Day)
** 2001 &quot;Under the Lake&quot; (from &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot;)
** 2005 &quot;Charlie Rabbit&quot; (from &quot;Kids&#x27; Night In&quot; collected for War Child)
** 1996 &quot;From the Lighthouse&quot; (from &quot;Fantastic Worlds&quot; anthology edited by Paul Collins)
** 2001 &quot;The Hill&quot; (from &quot;X-Changes: Stories for a New Century&quot;)
** 2001 &quot;Lightning Bringer&quot; (from &quot;Love &amp; Sex&quot; anthology edited by Michael Cart)
** 1987 &quot;Down to the Scum Quarter&quot; (from&quot;Myths and Legends&quot;, reprinted in&quot;Breakout!&quot; magazine in 1988)
** 2002 &quot;Heart&#x27;s Desire&quot; (from &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot;)
** 2000 &quot;Hansel&#x27;s Eyes&quot; (from &quot;A Wolf at the Door&quot; anthology edited by Ellen Datlow and Terri Windling)
** 2003 &quot;Hope Chest&quot; (from &quot;Firebirds&quot; anthology edited by Sharyn November)
** 1999 &quot;My New Really Epic Fantasy Series&quot; (from Swancon Program Book)
** 2000 &quot;Three Roses&quot; (from &quot;Eidolon&quot; magazine, Autumn 2000)
** 2004 &quot;Endings&quot; (from &quot;Gothic! Ten Original Dark Tales&quot; anthology edited by Deborah Noyes)
* 2015 &quot;To Hold the Bridge&quot;
** 2010 &quot;To Hold the Bridge: An Old Kingdom Story&quot; (from&quot;Legends of Australian Fantasy&quot; anthology, edited by Jack Dann and Jonathan Strahan)
** 2011 &quot;Vampire Weather&quot; (from &quot;Teeth&quot; anthology, edited by Ellen Datlow and Terri Windling)
** 2008 &quot;Strange Fishing in the Western Highlands&quot; (from &quot;Hellboy: Oddest Jobs&quot;, edited by Christopher Golden_
** 2008 &quot;Old Friends&quot; (from &quot;Dreaming Again&quot; anthology, edited by Jack Dann)
** 2011 &quot;The Quiet Knight&quot; (from &quot;Geektastic&quot; anthology edited by Holly Black and Cecil Castellucci)
** 2012 &quot;You Won&#x27;t Feel a Thing&quot; (from &quot;After&quot; anthology edited by Ellen Datlow and Terri Windling)
** 2012 &quot;A Handful of Ashes&quot; (from &quot;Under My Hat&quot; anthology, edited by Jonathan Strahan)
** 2012 &quot;The Big Question&quot; (from &quot;Elsewhere&quot;, Edinburgh Festival Special)
** 2009 &quot;Stop!&quot; (from &quot;The Dragon Book&quot; anthology edited by Jack Dann and Gardner Dozois)
** 2008 &quot;Infestation&quot; (from &quot;The Starry Rift&quot; anthology edited by Jonathan Strahan)
** 2011 &quot;The Heart of the City&quot; (from &quot;Subterranean Online&quot; magazine)
** &quot;Ambrose and the Ancient Spirits of East and West&quot; (from &quot;The Thackery T. Lambshead Cabinet of Curiosities&quot; anthology edited by Ann VanderMeer and Jeff VanderMeer)
** 2007 &quot;Holly and Iron&quot; (from &quot;Wizards&quot; anthology, edited by Jack Dann and Gardner Dozois)
** 2011 &quot;The Curious Case of the Moondawn Daffodils Murder: As Experienced by Sir Magnus Holmes and Almost-Doctor Susan Shrike&quot; (from &quot;Ghosts by Gaslight&quot; anthology edited by Jack Dann and Nick Gevers)
** 2009 &quot;An Unwelcome Guest&quot; (from &quot;Troll&#x27;s-Eye View&quot; anthology edited by Ellen Datlow and Terri Windling)
** 2010 &quot;The Highest Justice&quot; (from &quot;Zombies vs. Unicorns&quot; anthology edited by Holly Black and Justine Larbalestier)
** 2012 &quot;Master Haddad&#x27;s Holiday&quot; (a bonus story from the Australian printing of &quot;A Confusion of Princes&quot;)
** 2012 &quot;Sidekick of Mars&quot; (originally from the &quot;Under the Moons of Mars&quot; anthology edited by John Joseph Adams)
** 2011 &quot;Peace in Our Time&quot; (originally from the &quot;Steampunk!&quot; anthology edited by Kelly Link and Gavin J. Grant)
* 2011 &quot;Sir Hereward and Mister Fitz: Three Adventures&quot;
** 2007 &quot;Sir Hereward and Mister Fitz Go To War Again&quot; (from &quot;Jim Baen&#x27;s Universe&quot;)
** 2008 &quot;Beyond the Sea Gate of the Scholar-Pirates of Sarsköe&quot; (from &quot;Fast Ships, Black Sails&quot; anthology edited by Jeff and Ann VanderMeer)
** 2010 &quot;&#x27;A Suitable Present for a Sorcerous Puppet&#x27;&quot; (from &quot;Swords and Dark Magic&quot; anthology edited by Lou Anders and Jonathan Strahan)

==== Uncollected stories ====
* 1984 &quot;Sam, Cars and the Cuckoo&quot; in &quot;Warlock&quot; magazine no. 2
* 1996 &quot;The Kind Old Sun Will Know&quot; first published in &quot;Eidolon&quot; magazine
* 2005 &quot;Read It in the Headlines!&quot; in &quot;Daikaiju! Giant Monster Tales&quot;, edited by Robert Hood and Robin Pen
* 2006 &quot;Dog Soldier&quot; first published in &quot;Jim Baen&#x27;s Universe&quot;, 2006
* 2007 &quot;Bad Luck, Trouble, Death and Vampire Sex&quot; first published in &quot;Eclipse&quot;, edited by Jonathan Strahan
* 2009 &quot;The Nine Gates of Death: An Extract of the Journal of Idrach the Lesser Necromancer&quot; – first published on oldkingdom.com.au
* 2010 &quot;The Highest Justice&quot; in &quot;Zombies vs. Unicorns&quot;, edited by Justine Larbalestier and Holly Black
* 2013 &quot;Crossing the Line&quot; first published in &quot;Fearie Tales&quot;, edited by Stephen Jones
* 2013 &quot;Fire Above, Fire Below&quot; first published by Tor.com
* 2014 &quot;Shay Corsham Worsted&quot; first published in &quot;Fearful Symmetries&quot;, edited by Ellen Datlow
* 2014 &quot;Happy Go Lucky&quot; first published in &quot;Kaleidoscope&quot;, edited by Alisa Krasnostein and Julia Rios
* 2015 &quot;By Frogsled and Lizardback to Outcast Venusian Lepers&quot; in &quot;Old Venus&quot;, edited by George R. R. Martin and Gardner Dozois
* 2019 &quot;Dislocation Space&quot; first published by Tor.com
* 2020 &quot;The Case of the Somewhat Mythic Sword&quot; first published by Tor.com
* 2020 &quot;The Necessary Arthur&quot; first published by Tor.com

====Novels====
* &quot;The Calusari&quot; (1997), an adaptation of the &quot;X-Files&quot; episode of the same name
* &quot;The Massif&quot; (forthcoming), an epic sci-fi novel

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Interview by &quot;BookBanter&quot;
* The Old Kingdom Chronicles (official)
* The Keys to the Kingdom (official)
* Garth Nix at Libraries Australia Authorities with catalogue search </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q536913" start="0" end="17" title="Garth Nix" label="Garth Richard Nix"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="113" end="120" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15624191" start="147" end="158" title="The Old Kingdom" label="Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565852" start="172" end="185" title="The Seventh Tower" label="Seventh Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540209" start="202" end="221" title="The Keys to the Kingdom" label="Keys to the Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="500" end="508" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708803" start="545" end="564" title="Lyneham High School" label="Lyneham High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273786" start="569" end="584" title="Dickson College" label="Dickson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862909" start="641" end="664" title="Australian Army Reserve" label="Australian Army Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640648" start="828" end="850" title="University of Canberra" label="University of Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="922" end="928" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="1058" end="1071" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="1520" end="1542" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164069" start="1559" end="1568" title="Traveller (role-playing game)" label="Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q682202" start="1634" end="1645" title="White Dwarf (magazine)" label="White Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327819" start="1659" end="1669" title="Multiverse" label="Multiverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755724" start="1847" end="1860" title="Computerworld" label="Computerworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q707291" start="1877" end="1885" title="PC World" label="PC World"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056193" start="2115" end="2130" title="Text Publishing" label="Text Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q60242" start="2230" end="2243" title="Ichthyology" label="ichthyologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101665" start="2646" end="2653" title="Sabriel" label="Sabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722425" start="2675" end="2681" title="Lirael" label="Lirael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473891" start="2703" end="2711" title="Abhorsen" label="Abhorsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15624191" start="2733" end="2740" title="Clariel" label="Clariel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15624191" start="2762" end="2772" title="Goldenhand" label="Goldenhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q15624191" start="2794" end="2812" title="Terciel and Elinor" label="Terciel and Elinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q166051" start="2940" end="2954" title="World Book Day" label="World Book Day"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3071" end="3128" title="Across the Wall: A Tale of the Abhorsen and Other Stories" label="Across the Wall: A Tale of the Abhorsen and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733185" start="4018" end="4026" title="The Fall (Garth Nix novel)" label="The Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049973" start="4048" end="4054" title="Castle (novel)" label="Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565852" start="4076" end="4081" title="Aenir" label="Aenir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668668" start="4103" end="4117" title="Above the Veil" label="Above the Veil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565852" start="4139" end="4150" title="Into Battle (novel)" label="Into Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772752" start="4172" end="4191" title="The Violet Keystone" label="The Violet Keystone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267492" start="4247" end="4260" title="Mister Monday" label="Mister Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489766" start="4282" end="4294" title="Grim Tuesday" label="Grim Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306399" start="4316" end="4333" title="Drowned Wednesday" label="Drowned Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177964" start="4355" end="4367" title="Sir Thursday" label="Sir Thursday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410046" start="4389" end="4400" title="Lady Friday" label="Lady Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470757" start="4422" end="4439" title="Superior Saturday" label="Superior Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028046" start="4461" end="4472" title="Lord Sunday" label="Lord Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q552911" start="4753" end="4766" title="Sean Williams (author)" label="Sean Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q552911" start="4954" end="4967" title="Sean Williams (author)" label="Sean Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q552911" start="5162" end="5175" title="Sean Williams (author)" label="Sean Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759284" start="5568" end="5580" title="The Ragwitch" label="The Ragwitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460252" start="5635" end="5656" title="Shade&amp;#x27;s Children" label="Shade&amp;#x27;s Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656070" start="5678" end="5700" title="A Confusion of Princes" label="A Confusion of Princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="5729" end="5740" title="space opera" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q116864362" start="5881" end="5891" title="Angel Mage" label="Angel Mage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527263" start="6080" end="6124" title="Sir Hereward and Mister Fitz Go to War Again" label="Sir Hereward and Mister Fitz Go to War Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038440" start="6295" end="6310" title="Jeff VanderMeer" label="Jeff VanderMeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766726" start="6315" end="6329" title="Ann VanderMeer" label="Ann VanderMeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685335" start="6440" end="6450" title="Lou Anders" label="Lou Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274539" start="6455" end="6471" title="Jonathan Strahan" label="Jonathan Strahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606880" start="6585" end="6597" title="Melissa Marr" label="Melissa Marr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055713" start="6602" end="6611" title="Tim Pratt" label="Tim Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17139220" start="6660" end="6666" title="Rogues (anthology)" label="Rogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q181677" start="6684" end="6703" title="George R. R. Martin" label="George R. R. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q720562" start="6708" end="6722" title="Gardner Dozois" label="Gardner Dozois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274539" start="6805" end="6821" title="Jonathan Strahan" label="Jonathan Strahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q720562" start="6906" end="6920" title="Gardner Dozois" label="Gardner Dozois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274539" start="7022" end="7038" title="Jonathan Strahan" label="Jonathan Strahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385020" start="7536" end="7593" title="Across the Wall (book)" label="Across the Wall: A Tale of the Abhorsen and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149913" start="7988" end="8000" title="Paul Collins (fantasy writer)" label="Paul Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q27517634" start="8178" end="8190" title="Michael Cart" label="Michael Cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810264" start="8526" end="8538" title="Ellen Datlow" label="Ellen Datlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518754" start="8543" end="8557" title="Terri Windling" label="Terri Windling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490520" start="8638" end="8653" title="Sharyn November" label="Sharyn November"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8916" end="8929" title="Deborah Noyes" label="Deborah Noyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112002" start="9098" end="9107" title="Jack Dann" label="Jack Dann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274539" start="9112" end="9128" title="Jonathan Strahan" label="Jonathan Strahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810264" start="9211" end="9223" title="Ellen Datlow" label="Ellen Datlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518754" start="9228" end="9242" title="Terri Windling" label="Terri Windling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995311" start="9355" end="9373" title="Christopher Golden" label="Christopher Golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112002" start="9461" end="9470" title="Jack Dann" label="Jack Dann"/>
<link wikidata="Q266173" start="9558" end="9569" title="Holly Black" label="Holly Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055993" start="9574" end="9591" title="Cecil Castellucci" label="Cecil Castellucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810264" start="9685" end="9697" title="Ellen Datlow" label="Ellen Datlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518754" start="9702" end="9716" title="Terri Windling" label="Terri Windling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274539" start="9809" end="9825" title="Jonathan Strahan" label="Jonathan Strahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112002" start="10001" end="10010" title="Jack Dann" label="Jack Dann"/>
<link wikidata="Q720562" start="10015" end="10029" title="Gardner Dozois" label="Gardner Dozois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274539" start="10117" end="10133" title="Jonathan Strahan" label="Jonathan Strahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766726" start="10376" end="10390" title="Ann VanderMeer" label="Ann VanderMeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038440" start="10395" end="10410" title="Jeff VanderMeer" label="Jeff VanderMeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112002" start="10494" end="10503" title="Jack Dann" label="Jack Dann"/>
<link wikidata="Q720562" start="10508" end="10522" title="Gardner Dozois" label="Gardner Dozois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112002" start="10719" end="10728" title="Jack Dann" label="Jack Dann"/>
<link wikidata="Q14979122" start="10733" end="10744" title="Nick Gevers" label="Nick Gevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810264" start="10845" end="10857" title="Ellen Datlow" label="Ellen Datlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518754" start="10862" end="10876" title="Terri Windling" label="Terri Windling"/>
<link wikidata="Q266173" start="10977" end="10988" title="Holly Black" label="Holly Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427377" start="10993" end="11013" title="Justine Larbalestier" label="Justine Larbalestier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242102" start="11261" end="11278" title="John Joseph Adams" label="John Joseph Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190926" start="11382" end="11392" title="Kelly Link" label="Kelly Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528159" start="11397" end="11411" title="Gavin J. Grant" label="Gavin J. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038440" start="11724" end="11728" title="Jeff VanderMeer" label="Jeff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766726" start="11733" end="11747" title="Ann VanderMeer" label="Ann VanderMeer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11835" end="11856" title="Swords and Dark Magic" label="Swords and Dark Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685335" start="11883" end="11893" title="Lou Anders" label="Lou Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274539" start="11898" end="11914" title="Jonathan Strahan" label="Jonathan Strahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969508" start="12000" end="12007" title="Warlock (magazine)" label="Warlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209159" start="12177" end="12206" title="Daikaiju! Giant Monster Tales" label="Daikaiju! Giant Monster Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340218" start="12224" end="12235" title="Rob Hood" label="Robert Hood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12240" end="12249" title="Robin Pen" label="Robin Pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274539" start="12453" end="12469" title="Jonathan Strahan" label="Jonathan Strahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427377" start="12698" end="12718" title="Justine Larbalestier" label="Justine Larbalestier"/>
<link wikidata="Q266173" start="12723" end="12734" title="Holly Black" label="Holly Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160428" start="12827" end="12840" title="Stephen Jones (author)" label="Stephen Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810264" start="13011" end="13023" title="Ellen Datlow" label="Ellen Datlow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13113" end="13130" title="Alisa Krasnostein" label="Alisa Krasnostein"/>
<link wikidata="Q98034005" start="13135" end="13145" title="Julia Rios" label="Julia Rios"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356841" start="13228" end="13237" title="Old Venus" label="Old Venus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292063" wikidata="Q2903751" url="?curid=292063" title="Carol Berg">
<text>Carol Berg (born 1948) is the author of fantasy novels, including the books from the &quot;Rai-Kirah&quot; series, &quot;Song of the Beast&quot;, the books from &quot;The Bridge of D&#x27;Arnath&quot; series, the &quot;Lighthouse&quot; novels, and &quot;Collegia Magica&quot;. She also writes the Chimera series under the pen name Cate Glass.

Berg holds a degree in mathematics from Rice University, and a degree in computer science from the University of Colorado. Before writing full-time, she designed software. She lives in Colorado, and is the mother of three boys.

== Bibliography ==

=== The Rai-Kirah series ===
# &quot;Transformation&quot; () (2000)
# &quot;Revelation&quot; () (2001)
# &quot;Restoration&quot; () (2002)

=== The Bridge of D&#x27;Arnath series===
# &quot;Son of Avonar&quot; () (2004)
# &quot;Guardians of the Keep&quot; () (2004)
# &quot;The Soul Weaver&quot; () (2005)
# &quot;Daughter of Ancients&quot; () (2005)

===The Lighthouse Duet===
# &quot;Flesh and Spirit&quot; () (2007)
# &quot;Breath and Bone&quot; () (2008), the winner of the 2008 Colorado Book Award and the 2009 Mythopoeic Fantasy Award

===The Sanctuary Duet===
In the same setting as The Lighthouse Duet.

# &quot;Dust and Light&quot; () () (2014)
# &quot;Ash and Silver&quot; () () (2015)

===Novels of the Collegia Magica===
# &quot;The Spirit Lens&quot; () (2010)
# &quot;The Soul Mirror&quot; () (2011), the winner of the 2011 Colorado Book Award
# &quot;The Daemon Prism&quot; () (2012)

=== The Chimera series (as Cate Glass) ===

# &quot;An Illusion of Thieves&quot; () (2019)
# &quot;A Conjuring of Assassins&quot; () (2020)
# &quot;A Summoning of Demons&quot; () (2021)

===Other works===
# &quot;Song of the Beast&quot;, fantasy standalone () (2003) and winner of the 2003 Colorado Book Award
#&quot;Unmasking&quot;, a novella set in the world of the Rai-kirah in the collection &quot;Elemental Magic&quot; () (2007)
# &quot;At Fenwick Faire&quot;, a gritty myth; in &quot;Broken Links, Mended Lives,&quot; RMFW Press () (2009) 
# &quot;Seeds&quot;, a short story set in the kingdom of Navronne; in &quot;Blackguards: Tales of Assassins, Mercenaries and Rogues,&quot; Ragnarok Publications () (2015)
#&quot;The Heart&#x27;s Coda,&quot; novelette follow-up to &quot;Song of the Beast&quot;; in &quot;Lace and Blade 4&quot;, Marion Zimmer Bradley Literary Trust () (2018)

==Awards==
*Finalist, (2001) Compton Crook Award, &quot;Transformation&quot;
*Finalist, (2000) Barnes &amp; Noble Maiden Voyage Award, &quot;Transformation&quot;
*Finalist, (2002) Romantic Times Reviewers&#x27; Choice Award for Best Epic Fantasy, &quot;Restoration&quot;
*Winner, (2003) Colorado Book Award, &quot;Song of the Beast&quot;
*Winner, (2005) Geffen Award for Best Translated Fantasy, &quot;Transformation&quot;
*Finalist, (2006) RWA-FFP Prism Award for Best Romantic Fantasy, &quot;Daughter of Ancients&quot;
*Finalist, (2006) Colorado Book Award, &quot;Daughter of Ancients&quot;
*Finalist, (2008) Colorado Book Award, &quot;Flesh and Spirit&quot;
*Winner, (2009) Colorado Book Award, &quot;Breath and Bone&quot;
*Winner, (2009) Mythopoeic Fantasy Award for Adult Literature, &quot;Flesh and Spirit&quot;,&quot;Breath and Bone&quot;
*Finalist, (2010) Colorado Book Award, &quot;The Spirit Lens&quot;
*Winner, (2011) Colorado Book Award, &quot;The Soul Mirror&quot;

==References==
==External links==

* Blog
* Carol Berg at FantasyLiterature.net
* Interview at SFFWorld</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2903751" start="0" end="10" title="Carol Berg" label="Carol Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="40" end="47" title="fantasy fiction" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903751" start="331" end="341" title="Carol Berg" label="Cate Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q842909" start="384" end="399" title="Rice University" label="Rice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206658" start="443" end="465" title="University of Colorado system" label="University of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="529" end="537" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148744" start="1076" end="1095" title="Colorado Book Awards" label="Colorado Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q243960" start="1109" end="1133" title="Mythopoeic Awards" label="Mythopoeic Fantasy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148744" start="1430" end="1449" title="Colorado Book Awards" label="Colorado Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148744" start="1782" end="1801" title="Colorado Book Awards" label="Colorado Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157154" start="2409" end="2428" title="Compton Crook Award" label="Compton Crook Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2475" end="2513" title="Barnes &amp;amp; Noble Maiden Voyage Award" label="Barnes &amp;amp; Noble Maiden Voyage Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2560" end="2625" title="Romantic Times Reviewers&amp;#x27; Choice Award for Best Epic Fantasy" label="Romantic Times Reviewers&amp;#x27; Choice Award for Best Epic Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530024" start="2734" end="2746" title="Geffen Award" label="Geffen Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2821" end="2840" title="RWA-FFP Prism Award" label="RWA-FFP Prism Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q243960" start="3122" end="3146" title="Mythopoeic Fantasy Award" label="Mythopoeic Fantasy Award"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292064" wikidata="Q667282" url="?curid=292064" title="Odense River">
<text>The Odense River () is a river located on the island of Funen, in central Denmark. It is about long and is named after the Funish capital, Odense, which it passes through. Boats can be rented by the river, offering a scenic ride to Fruens Bøge. Excursion boats offer rides to Carlslund, with jazz music some Saturdays during the Summer.

During the Viking Age, the fortress Nonnebakken ensured its controller supremacy over the river.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q26503" start="56" end="61" title="Funen" label="Funen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="74" end="81" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q25331" start="139" end="145" title="Odense" label="Odense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="232" end="243" title="Fruens Bøge" label="Fruens Bøge"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="349" end="359" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566735" start="374" end="385" title="Nonnebakken" label="Nonnebakken"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292066" wikidata="Q2374832" url="?curid=292066" title="Zoe Ball">
<text>Zoe Louise Ball (born 23 November 1970) is a British broadcaster and presenter. She was the first female host of the Radio 1 and Radio 2 breakfast shows for the BBC, and in 2024 was confirmed as the second-highest paid BBC presenter after Gary Lineker.

In 2018, Ball was announced as the new host of &quot;The Radio 2 Breakfast Show&quot; and took over from Chris Evans in January 2019, before stepping down from the programme in December 2024.

Ball presented the children&#x27;s show &quot;Live &amp; Kicking&quot;, alongside Jamie Theakston from 1996 until 1999. In 2005, she was a contestant in the third series of &quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot;. Following this, in 2011 she replaced Claudia Winkleman as host of the BBC Two spin-off show &quot;Strictly Come Dancing: It Takes Two&quot; until her departure in 2021. Ball also hosted the &quot;Strictly Come Dancing Live Tour&quot; in 2011 and 2015.

==Early life==
Zoe Ball was born in Blackpool, Lancashire, and grew up in Farnham Common, Buckinghamshire. She is the daughter of the children&#x27;s TV presenter Johnny Ball and his wife Julia (&quot;née&quot; Anderson). The couple divorced when Zoe was two and she was raised with her father.

Ball was educated at Heston Junior School in the district of Hounslow between 1975 and 1978. Her family then moved to Farnham Common in Buckinghamshire. She attended Farnham Common First School and Farnham Common Middle School before moving to Holy Cross Convent School in Chalfont St Peter and Amersham College of Art and Technology for a &quot;City &amp; Guilds in radio and journalism&quot;.

She also attended the Young Theatre at Beaconsfield where she trained as an actress. Her first TV appearance was as a child in the studio audience of the Saturday morning children&#x27;s show, &quot;Saturday Superstore&quot;, on which her father was appearing as a guest.

==Career==
===Television===
Ball began her television career as a presenter on the pre-school programme &quot;Playdays&quot;. 

Ball became a runner at Granada Television and researcher for &quot;Cool Cube&quot; (1990–1994), a children&#x27;s Saturday afternoon magazine show, produced at Granada&#x27;s studio in Manchester, by Clear Idea Television, and broadcast on the British Satellite Broadcasting channel &quot;Galaxy&quot;. 

In 1994–1996, Ball presented &quot;SMart&quot; with Mark Speight and Jay Burridge. In 1995, Ball hosted &quot;Fully Booked&quot; for the first series. In 1997 and 1998, she was a regular presenter on &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;, usually alternating with fellow presenters and DJs Jayne Middlemiss and Jo Whiley.

In 1996, Ball was a co-host with Jamie Theakston in BBC One&#x27;s Saturday morning children&#x27;s program &quot;Live &amp; Kicking&quot;. In 1998, television personality Chris Evans was a guest of the show, and later employed both Ball and Theakston to co-host the Channel 4 Wednesday night chat/music show &quot;The Priory&quot;, under Ginger Productions.

Ball’s presenting jobs have also included hosting &quot;The Big Breakfast&quot; on Channel 4, 

Ball co-hosted the 2002 Brit Awards with Frank Skinner, In 2005, she co-hosted the BBC reality show &quot;Strictly Dance Fever&quot;. In 2006, Ball co-hosted the ITV programme &quot;Extinct&quot;, alongside Trevor McDonald.

In January 2007, Ball presented the second series of ITV&#x27;s &quot;Soapstar Superstar&quot;, taking over from Fern Britton and Ben Shephard, who hosted the first series. In March 2007, she hosted the ITV talent search &quot;Grease Is the Word&quot;.

Alongside Jamie Theakston, Ball presented Channel 5&#x27;s quiz series &quot;Britain&#x27;s Best Brain&quot; in 2009. Ball has guest presented several episodes of &quot;The One Show&quot; as a stand-in for Alex Jones.

On 4 August 2013, as hostess of a special entitled &quot;Doctor Who Live: The Next Doctor&quot;, she revealed Peter Capaldi as the incoming Twelfth Doctor and hosted his first interview in that capacity.

In November 2013, Ball co-hosted the BBC One Children in Need telethon, alongside Sir Terry Wogan, Fearne Cotton, Nick Grimshaw and Tess Daly. In 2014, Ball presented a BBC Two spin-off from &quot;The Voice UK&quot; called &quot;The Voice: Louder on Two&quot;. The show aired for one series of ten episodes.

In 2015, Ball hosted &quot;EastEnders: Backstage Live&quot;, a spin-off show during the &quot;EastEnders&quot; live week. She co-presented the &quot;BBC Young Dancer&quot; competition with Darcey Bussell on BBC Two.

Ball also narrated two ITV Specials, &quot;The Nation&#x27;s Favourite &#x27;70s Number One&quot; and &quot;The Nation&#x27;s Favourite &#x27;80s Number One&quot; as well as the BBC One series &quot;Don&#x27;t Tell the Bride&quot;. In 2016, Ball co-presented &quot;Can&#x27;t Touch This&quot;, a Saturday night game show for BBC One, alongside Ashley Banjo. 

Ball narrated &quot;The Nation&#x27;s Favourite Carpenters Song&quot;, and guest-presented an episode of &quot;Film 2016&quot;. In 2017, Ball co-presented &quot;The Big Family Cooking Showdown&quot; with Nadiya Hussain on BBC Two.

Since 2020, Ball has appeared alongside her son Woody Fred Cook on &quot;Celebrity Gogglebox&quot;.

In 2021, Ball appeared on &quot;The Masked Dancer&quot;, masked as Llama. She was the sixth celebrity to be unmasked.

In 2023, Ball appeared as herself in Episode 1 of the BBC One comedy &quot;Queen of Oz&quot;. Ball is seen and heard on her radio programme questioning the outrageous antics of spoiled spare to the British crown, Princess Georgiana, played by Catherine Tate.

In 2024, Ball appeared as a panellist on the &quot;New Year&#x27;s Treat&quot; episode of &quot;Taskmaster&quot; for that year.

====&quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot; and &quot;It Takes Two&quot;====

In October 2005, Ball became a contestant on the third series of the BBC One talent show &quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot;, where she was partnered by Ian Waite. Ball and Waite were ranked in third place; they also scored 38/40 (including two tens) for three dances in the series and one in the Christmas special.

In 2011, Ball took over from Claudia Winkleman as the host of &quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot;″s sister show &quot;It Takes Two&quot;, airing every weeknight on BBC Two; in 2014, whilst Winkleman was on leave after her daughter suffered serious burn injuries, Ball co-hosted the main show. On 17 May 2021, Ball announced she was leaving her role as presenter after 10 years.

===Radio===

Although known primarily for her TV work, Ball first worked in radio, after she became co-host of &quot;Radio 1 Breakfast&quot; on BBC Radio 1 in October 1997 with Kevin Greening. She became the sole host, the first female DJ to do so. At this time, her hard-drinking, hard-partying lifestyle contributed to the identification of the so-called &quot;ladette culture&quot; of the late 1990s. She was twice warned by the BBC for swearing on the radio.

Ball left BBC Radio 1 in March 2000. Her final show was on 10 March 2000; she was succeeded by Sara Cox.

Ball returned to radio in mid-2002 when she joined London radio station Xfm, where she presented the weekday drivetime show until December 2003. In January 2004, she took over a Friday evening music show for the station. She also stood in for Ricky Gervais while he filmed the second series of &quot;The Office&quot;. She left Xfm at the end of 2004.

In September 2007, she returned to BBC Radio and co-hosted a show with Sara Cox, celebrating 40 years of BBC Radio 1 and BBC Radio 2.

From 2006, she provided relief presenting duties for BBC Radio 2, fronted specialist documentaries, sat in for Dermot O&#x27;Leary for three weeks in February 2006, and co-presented (with Danny Baker) the hastily conceived replacement for Jonathan Ross&#x27; Saturday morning show, in the wake of Ross&#x27;s suspension due to Sachsgate in 2008.
In 2009, Ball became the usual relief presenter for Ken Bruce&#x27;s weekday mid-morning show on BBC Radio 2. She also began hosting the Saturday breakfast show from 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. on the network from 6 June 2009 as part of a shake-up of weekend programming at Radio 2. Ball left Radio 2 for a while as her last show was broadcast on Saturday 28 January 2012. Her replacement in that slot was Anneka Rice.

Ball covered &quot;The Radio 2 Breakfast Show&quot; for Chris Evans on several occasions.

From 4 March 2017 until 22 December 2018, Ball returned to Radio 2 on permanent basis where she presented the Saturday afternoon slot on BBC Radio 2 between 3–6pm, taking over from Dermot O&#x27;Leary.

On 3 October 2018, she was announced by Chris Evans as the new host of &quot;The Radio 2 Breakfast Show&quot;, which began on 14 January 2019. Rylan Clark replaced Ball in the Saturday mid-afternoon slot.

In August 2024, the BBC confirmed Ball was the second-highest paid BBC presenter after Gary Lineker, with a salary of £950,000, having exceeded that figure for the previous three years.

On 23 September 2024, Ball announced she was returning to Radio 2, six weeks after announcing a break from the show. On 19 November she announced on the show that she would stop being the presenter of the Breakfast Show from 20 December, but would remain working for the station.

==Personal life==
Whilst at BBC Radio 1, Ball began a relationship with the DJ and musician Norman Cook, known as Fatboy Slim. The couple married at Babington House in Somerset in August 1999. In 2003, Ball and Cook separated when Ball revealed that she had had an affair; they later reconciled. The couple have a son, Woody Fred Cook (born 2000), and a daughter, Nelly (born 2010). On 24 September 2016, Cook and Ball announced their separation after 18 years together, and later divorced in 2020

Between 2017 and 2023, Ball was in a relationship with fashion model and carpenter Michael Reed.

==Charity work==
In 2014, she supported Marks &amp; Spencer and Oxfam&#x27;s Love Mum campaign.

In March 2018, Ball took part in the &#x27;Hardest Ride Home&#x27; challenge in which she cycled from Blackpool to Brighton to raise money for Sport Relief and mental health awareness. She set off on 5 March for five days. Highlights of the challenge were broadcast in a one-off documentary, airing on 21 March 2018 on BBC One. She raised £1,198,012.

==Filmography==
=== Radio ===
=== Television ===
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2374832" start="0" end="15" title="Zoe Ball" label="Zoe Louise Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759224" start="117" end="124" title="Radio 1 Breakfast" label="Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q45319422" start="129" end="136" title="The Radio 2 Breakfast Show" label="Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q47778" start="239" end="251" title="Gary Lineker" label="Gary Lineker"/>
<link wikidata="Q45319422" start="307" end="333" title="The Radio 2 Breakfast Show" label="The Radio 2 Breakfast Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964710" start="359" end="370" title="Chris Evans (presenter)" label="Chris Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256896" start="493" end="511" title="Live &amp;amp; Kicking" label="Live &amp;amp; Kicking"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147553" start="529" end="544" title="Jamie Theakston" label="Jamie Theakston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623647" start="604" end="616" title="Strictly Come Dancing (series 3)" label="third series"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070684" start="626" end="647" title="Strictly Come Dancing" label="Strictly Come Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327154" start="692" end="709" title="Claudia Winkleman" label="Claudia Winkleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="725" end="732" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="" start="753" end="788" title="Strictly Come Dancing: It Takes Two" label="Strictly Come Dancing: It Takes Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070684" start="851" end="882" title="Strictly Come Dancing" label="Strictly Come Dancing Live Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q170377" start="944" end="953" title="Blackpool" label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="955" end="965" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q612624" start="982" end="996" title="Farnham Common" label="Farnham Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="998" end="1013" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266287" start="1071" end="1082" title="Johnny Ball" label="Johnny Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022317" start="1265" end="1273" title="Hounslow" label="Hounslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q612624" start="1322" end="1336" title="Farnham Common" label="Farnham Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q48810976" start="1448" end="1473" title="The Grange, Chalfont St Peter" label="Holy Cross Convent School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006494" start="1477" end="1494" title="Chalfont St Peter" label="Chalfont St Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q470188" start="1499" end="1507" title="Amersham" label="Amersham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1550" end="1567" title="City and Guilds of London Institute#Qualifications" label="City &amp;amp; Guilds"/>
<link wikidata="Q812906" start="1639" end="1651" title="Beaconsfield" label="Beaconsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426749" start="1799" end="1818" title="Saturday Superstore" label="Saturday Superstore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203240" start="1983" end="1991" title="Playdays" label="Playdays"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476957" start="2025" end="2043" title="ITV Granada" label="Granada Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="2246" end="2276" title="Sky UK" label="British Satellite Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2803385" start="2342" end="2347" title="SMart" label="SMart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193447" start="2359" end="2371" title="Mark Speight" label="Mark Speight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166446" start="2376" end="2388" title="Jay Burridge" label="Jay Burridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508328" start="2417" end="2429" title="Fully Booked" label="Fully Booked"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="2513" end="2528" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167905" start="2587" end="2603" title="Jayne Middlemiss" label="Jayne Middlemiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q133698" start="2608" end="2617" title="Jo Whiley" label="Jo Whiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147553" start="2653" end="2668" title="Jamie Theakston" label="Jamie Theakston"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="2672" end="2679" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256896" start="2734" end="2752" title="Live &amp;amp; Kicking" label="Live &amp;amp; Kicking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964710" start="2792" end="2803" title="Chris Evans (presenter)" label="Chris Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="2887" end="2896" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563057" start="2959" end="2977" title="Ginger Productions" label="Ginger Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717547" start="3036" end="3053" title="The Big Breakfast" label="The Big Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="3063" end="3072" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="3100" end="3111" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489658" start="3117" end="3130" title="Frank Skinner" label="Frank Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="3159" end="3162" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623660" start="3182" end="3202" title="Strictly Dance Fever" label="Strictly Dance Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="3238" end="3241" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422067" start="3258" end="3265" title="Extinct (2006 TV series)" label="Extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839312" start="3283" end="3298" title="Trevor McDonald" label="Trevor McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390537" start="3371" end="3389" title="Soapstar Superstar" label="Soapstar Superstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444443" start="3414" end="3426" title="Fern Britton" label="Fern Britton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886456" start="3431" end="3443" title="Ben Shephard" label="Ben Shephard"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="3504" end="3507" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598559" start="3528" end="3546" title="Grease Is the Word" label="Grease Is the Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147553" start="3565" end="3580" title="Jamie Theakston" label="Jamie Theakston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="3597" end="3606" title="Channel 5 (British TV channel)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969204" start="3632" end="3657" title="Britain&amp;#x27;s Best Brain" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s Best Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755050" start="3724" end="3736" title="The One Show" label="The One Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717255" start="3761" end="3771" title="Alex Jones (British presenter)" label="Alex Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="3831" end="3863" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who Live: The Next Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q732661" start="3884" end="3897" title="Peter Capaldi" label="Peter Capaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14460218" start="3914" end="3928" title="Twelfth Doctor" label="Twelfth Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="4016" end="4023" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595862" start="4024" end="4040" title="Children in Need" label="Children in Need"/>
<link wikidata="Q734264" start="4065" end="4076" title="Terry Wogan" label="Terry Wogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q542860" start="4078" end="4091" title="Fearne Cotton" label="Fearne Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q547486" start="4093" end="4106" title="Nick Grimshaw" label="Nick Grimshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705560" start="4111" end="4120" title="Tess Daly" label="Tess Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="4148" end="4155" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823010" start="4176" end="4188" title="The Voice UK" label="The Voice UK"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4208" end="4232" title="The Voice: Louder on Two" label="The Voice: Louder on Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q607514" start="4315" end="4341" title="EastEnders" label="EastEnders: Backstage Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q18890195" start="4437" end="4453" title="BBC Young Dancer" label="BBC Young Dancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q291331" start="4477" end="4491" title="Darcey Bussell" label="Darcey Bussell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753125" start="4548" end="4596" title="The Nation&amp;#x27;s Favourite" label="The Nation&amp;#x27;s Favourite &amp;#x27;70s Number One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753125" start="4613" end="4661" title="The Nation&amp;#x27;s Favourite" label="The Nation&amp;#x27;s Favourite &amp;#x27;80s Number One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291989" start="4704" end="4729" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Tell the Bride (British TV series)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Tell the Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q23647038" start="4770" end="4791" title="Can&amp;#x27;t Touch This (game show)" label="Can&amp;#x27;t Touch This"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355392" start="4849" end="4861" title="Ashley Banjo" label="Ashley Banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753125" start="4885" end="4928" title="The Nation&amp;#x27;s Favourite" label="The Nation&amp;#x27;s Favourite Carpenters Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448903" start="4976" end="4985" title="Film... (TV programme)" label="Film 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q28963217" start="5026" end="5057" title="The Big Family Cooking Showdown" label="The Big Family Cooking Showdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q21642574" start="5069" end="5083" title="Nadiya Hussain" label="Nadiya Hussain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993042" start="5170" end="5189" title="Celebrity Gogglebox" label="Celebrity Gogglebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q106153528" start="5230" end="5247" title="The Masked Dancer (British TV series)" label="The Masked Dancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="5371" end="5378" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q115811229" start="5392" end="5403" title="Queen of Oz" label="Queen of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q254766" start="5560" end="5574" title="Catherine Tate" label="Catherine Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899617" start="5673" end="5683" title="Taskmaster (TV series)" label="Taskmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623647" start="5827" end="5839" title="Strictly Come Dancing (series 3)" label="third series"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070684" start="5873" end="5894" title="Strictly Come Dancing" label="Strictly Come Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213835" start="5929" end="5938" title="Ian Waite" label="Ian Waite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327154" start="6122" end="6139" title="Claudia Winkleman" label="Claudia Winkleman"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6209" end="6221" title="Strictly Come Dancing: It Takes Two" label="It Takes Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="6255" end="6262" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759224" start="6587" end="6604" title="Radio 1 Breakfast" label="Radio 1 Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="6614" end="6625" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396394" start="6647" end="6661" title="Kevin Greening" label="Kevin Greening"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6833" end="6848" title="Lad culture#Ladette" label="ladette culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="6944" end="6955" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965251" start="7029" end="7037" title="Sara Cox" label="Sara Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072562" start="7112" end="7115" title="Radio X (United Kingdom)" label="Xfm"/>
<link wikidata="Q23517" start="7283" end="7296" title="Ricky Gervais" label="Ricky Gervais"/>
<link wikidata="Q23829" start="7340" end="7350" title="The Office (UK TV series)" label="The Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965251" start="7463" end="7471" title="Sara Cox" label="Sara Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="7497" end="7508" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="7513" end="7524" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="7580" end="7591" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q900928" start="7638" end="7657" title="Dermot O&amp;#x27;Leary" label="Dermot O&amp;#x27;Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220109" start="7715" end="7726" title="Danny Baker" label="Danny Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q40054" start="7766" end="7779" title="Jonathan Ross" label="Jonathan Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761889" start="7854" end="7863" title="The Russell Brand Show prank calls" label="Sachsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387391" start="7925" end="7934" title="Ken Bruce" label="Ken Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768946" start="8274" end="8285" title="Anneka Rice" label="Anneka Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q45319422" start="8307" end="8333" title="The Radio 2 Breakfast Show" label="The Radio 2 Breakfast Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964710" start="8344" end="8355" title="Chris Evans (presenter)" label="Chris Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q900928" start="8560" end="8579" title="Dermot O&amp;#x27;Leary" label="Dermot O&amp;#x27;Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q45319422" start="8659" end="8685" title="The Radio 2 Breakfast Show" label="The Radio 2 Breakfast Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203796" start="8725" end="8736" title="Rylan Clark" label="Rylan Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q47778" start="8875" end="8887" title="Gary Lineker" label="Gary Lineker"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="9284" end="9295" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q272619" start="9370" end="9381" title="Fatboy Slim" label="Fatboy Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837912" start="9405" end="9420" title="Babington House" label="Babington House"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="9424" end="9432" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q714491" start="9893" end="9912" title="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer" label="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q267941" start="9917" end="9922" title="Oxfam" label="Oxfam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306863" start="10093" end="10105" title="Sport Relief" label="Sport Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="10269" end="10276" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="292067" wikidata="Q1416088" url="?curid=292067" title="Seminorm">
<text>In mathematics, particularly in functional analysis, a seminorm is like a norm but need not be positive definite. Seminorms are intimately connected with convex sets: every seminorm is the Minkowski functional of some absorbing disk and, conversely, the Minkowski functional of any such set is a seminorm.

A topological vector space is locally convex if and only if its topology is induced by a family of seminorms.

==Definition==

Let formula_1 be a vector space over either the real numbers formula_2 or the complex numbers formula_3 
A real-valued function formula_4 is called a if it satisfies the following two conditions:

# Subadditivity/Triangle inequality: formula_5 for all formula_6
# Absolute homogeneity: formula_7 for all formula_8 and all scalars formula_9

These two conditions imply that formula_10 and that every seminorm formula_11 also has the following property:
Some authors include non-negativity as part of the definition of &quot;seminorm&quot; (and also sometimes of &quot;norm&quot;), although this is not necessary since it follows from the other two properties. 

By definition, a norm on formula_1 is a seminorm that also separates points, meaning that it has the following additional property:
A is a pair formula_13 consisting of a vector space formula_1 and a seminorm formula_11 on formula_16 If the seminorm formula_11 is also a norm then the seminormed space formula_13 is called a .

Since absolute homogeneity implies positive homogeneity, every seminorm is a type of function called a sublinear function. A map formula_4 is called a if it is subadditive and positive homogeneous. Unlike a seminorm, a sublinear function is necessarily nonnegative. Sublinear functions are often encountered in the context of the Hahn–Banach theorem. 
A real-valued function formula_4 is a seminorm if and only if it is a sublinear and balanced function.

==Examples==

==Minkowski functionals and seminorms==
Seminorms on a vector space formula_1 are intimately tied, via Minkowski functionals, to subsets of formula_1 that are convex, balanced, and absorbing. Given such a subset formula_23 of formula_24 the Minkowski functional of formula_23 is a seminorm. Conversely, given a seminorm formula_11 on formula_24 the setsformula_28 and formula_29 are convex, balanced, and absorbing and furthermore, the Minkowski functional of these two sets (as well as of any set lying &quot;in between them&quot;) is formula_30

==Algebraic properties==

Every seminorm is a sublinear function, and thus satisfies all properties of a sublinear function, including convexity, formula_31 and for all vectors formula_32:
the reverse triangle inequality: 
formula_33
and also
formula_34 and formula_35

For any vector formula_8 and positive real formula_37
formula_38
and furthermore, formula_39 is an absorbing disk in formula_16

If formula_11 is a sublinear function on a real vector space formula_1 then there exists a linear functional formula_43 on formula_1 such that formula_45 and furthermore, for any linear functional formula_46 on formula_24 formula_48 on formula_1 if and only if formula_50

Other properties of seminorms

Every seminorm is a balanced function. 
A seminorm formula_11 is a norm on formula_1 if and only if formula_28 does not contain a non-trivial vector subspace. 

If formula_54 is a seminorm on formula_1 then formula_56 is a vector subspace of formula_1 and for every formula_58 formula_11 is constant on the set formula_60 and equal to formula_61 

Furthermore, for any real formula_62 
formula_63

If formula_23 is a set satisfying formula_65 then formula_23 is absorbing in formula_1 and formula_68 where formula_69 denotes the Minkowski functional associated with formula_23 (that is, the gauge of formula_23). In particular, if formula_23 is as above and formula_73 is any seminorm on formula_24 then formula_75 if and only if formula_76

If formula_77 is a normed space and formula_32 then formula_79 for all formula_80 in the interval formula_81 

Every norm is a convex function and consequently, finding a global maximum of a norm-based objective function is sometimes tractable.

===Relationship to other norm-like concepts===

Let formula_4 be a non-negative function. The following are equivalent:
If any of the above conditions hold, then the following are equivalent:
If formula_11 is a sublinear function on a real vector space formula_1 then the following are equivalent: 
===Inequalities involving seminorms===

If formula_85 are seminorms on formula_1 then:
If formula_11 is a seminorm on formula_1 and formula_43 is a linear functional on formula_1 then:
===Hahn–Banach theorem for seminorms===

Seminorms offer a particularly clean formulation of the Hahn–Banach theorem: 
:If formula_91 is a vector subspace of a seminormed space formula_13 and if formula_43 is a continuous linear functional on formula_94 then formula_43 may be extended to a continuous linear functional formula_96 on formula_1 that has the same norm as formula_98

A similar extension property also holds for seminorms:

:Proof: Let formula_99 be the convex hull of formula_100 Then formula_99 is an absorbing disk in formula_1 and so the Minkowski functional formula_103 of formula_99 is a seminorm on formula_16 This seminorm satisfies formula_106 on formula_91 and formula_108 on formula_16 formula_110

==Topologies of seminormed spaces==

===Pseudometrics and the induced topology===

A seminorm formula_11 on formula_1 induces a topology, called the , via the canonical translation-invariant pseudometric formula_113; formula_114 
This topology is Hausdorff if and only if formula_115 is a metric, which occurs if and only if formula_11 is a norm. 
This topology makes formula_1 into a locally convex pseudometrizable topological vector space that has a bounded neighborhood of the origin and a neighborhood basis at the origin consisting of the following open balls (or the closed balls) centered at the origin:
formula_118
as formula_119 ranges over the positive reals. 
Every seminormed space formula_13 should be assumed to be endowed with this topology unless indicated otherwise. A topological vector space whose topology is induced by some seminorm is called . 

Equivalently, every vector space formula_1 with seminorm formula_11 induces a vector space quotient formula_123 where formula_124 is the subspace of formula_1 consisting of all vectors formula_8 with formula_127 Then formula_128 carries a norm defined by formula_129 The resulting topology, pulled back to formula_24 is precisely the topology induced by formula_30

Any seminorm-induced topology makes formula_1 locally convex, as follows. If formula_11 is a seminorm on formula_1 and formula_135 call the set formula_39 the ; likewise the closed ball of radius formula_137 is formula_138 The set of all open (resp. closed) formula_11-balls at the origin forms a neighborhood basis of convex balanced sets that are open (resp. closed) in the formula_11-topology on formula_16

====Stronger, weaker, and equivalent seminorms====

The notions of stronger and weaker seminorms are akin to the notions of stronger and weaker norms. If formula_11 and formula_73 are seminorms on formula_24 then we say that formula_73 is than formula_11 and that formula_11 is than formula_73 if any of the following equivalent conditions holds:

# The topology on formula_1 induced by formula_73 is finer than the topology induced by formula_30
# If formula_152 is a sequence in formula_24 then formula_154 in formula_2 implies formula_156 in formula_157
# If formula_158 is a net in formula_24 then formula_160 in formula_2 implies formula_156 in formula_157
# formula_11 is bounded on formula_165
# If formula_166 then formula_167 for all formula_168
# There exists a real formula_169 such that formula_170 on formula_16

The seminorms formula_11 and formula_73 are called if they are both weaker (or both stronger) than each other. This happens if they satisfy any of the following conditions:
===Normability and seminormability===
A topological vector space (TVS) is said to be a (respectively, a ) if its topology is induced by a single seminorm (resp. a single norm). 
A TVS is normable if and only if it is seminormable and Hausdorff or equivalently, if and only if it is seminormable and T1 (because a TVS is Hausdorff if and only if it is a T1 space). 
A is a topological vector space that possesses a bounded neighborhood of the origin. 

Normability of topological vector spaces is characterized by Kolmogorov&#x27;s normability criterion. 
A TVS is seminormable if and only if it has a convex bounded neighborhood of the origin. 
Thus a locally convex TVS is seminormable if and only if it has a non-empty bounded open set.
A TVS is normable if and only if it is a T1 space and admits a bounded convex neighborhood of the origin.

If formula_1 is a Hausdorff locally convex TVS then the following are equivalent: 

Furthermore, formula_1 is finite dimensional if and only if formula_176 is normable (here formula_176 denotes formula_178 endowed with the weak-* topology).

The product of infinitely many seminormable space is again seminormable if and only if all but finitely many of these spaces trivial (that is, 0-dimensional).

===Topological properties===

===Continuity of seminorms===

If formula_11 is a seminorm on a topological vector space formula_24 then the following are equivalent: 
In particular, if formula_13 is a seminormed space then a seminorm formula_73 on formula_1 is continuous if and only if formula_73 is dominated by a positive scalar multiple of formula_30

If formula_1 is a real TVS, formula_43 is a linear functional on formula_24 and formula_11 is a continuous seminorm (or more generally, a sublinear function) on formula_24 then formula_45 on formula_1 implies that formula_43 is continuous.

===Continuity of linear maps===

If formula_194 is a map between seminormed spaces then let
formula_195

If formula_194 is a linear map between seminormed spaces then the following are equivalent:

If formula_96 is continuous then formula_198 for all formula_168

The space of all continuous linear maps formula_194 between seminormed spaces is itself a seminormed space under the seminorm formula_201 
This seminorm is a norm if formula_73 is a norm.

==Generalizations==

The concept of in composition algebras does share the usual properties of a norm.

A composition algebra formula_203 consists of an algebra over a field formula_204 an involution formula_205 and a quadratic form formula_206 which is called the &quot;norm&quot;. In several cases formula_207 is an isotropic quadratic form so that formula_208 has at least one null vector, contrary to the separation of points required for the usual norm discussed in this article.

An or a is a seminorm formula_4 that also satisfies formula_210

Weakening subadditivity: Quasi-seminorms

A map formula_4 is called a if it is (absolutely) homogeneous and there exists some formula_212 such that formula_213
The smallest value of formula_214 for which this holds is called the 

A quasi-seminorm that separates points is called a on formula_16

Weakening homogeneity - formula_216-seminorms

A map formula_4 is called a if it is subadditive and there exists a formula_216 such that formula_219 and for all formula_8 and scalars formula_221formula_222 A formula_216-seminorm that separates points is called a on formula_16

We have the following relationship between quasi-seminorms and formula_216-seminorms:
==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Notes==

Proofs

==References==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Sublinear functions
* The sandwich theorem for sublinear and super linear functionals</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190549" start="32" end="51" title="functional analysis" label="functional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416088" start="55" end="63" title="Seminorm" label="seminorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q956437" start="74" end="78" title="Norm (mathematics)" label="norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233276" start="95" end="112" title="positive definite" label="positive definite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193657" start="154" end="164" title="convex set" label="convex set"/>
<link wikidata="Q649472" start="189" end="209" title="Minkowski functional" label="Minkowski functional"/>
<link wikidata="Q332775" start="218" end="227" title="Absorbing set" label="absorbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q332715" start="228" end="232" title="Absolutely convex set" label="disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455249" start="309" end="333" title="topological vector space" label="topological vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="482" end="493" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="512" end="519" title="Complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189500" start="541" end="561" title="real-valued function" label="real-valued function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934099" start="633" end="646" title="Subadditive function" label="Subadditivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208216" start="647" end="666" title="Triangle inequality" label="Triangle inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132952" start="698" end="718" title="Homogeneous function" label="Absolute homogeneity"/>
<link wikidata="Q956437" start="1112" end="1116" title="Norm (mathematics)" label="norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q338652" start="1526" end="1544" title="sublinear function" label="sublinear function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132952" start="1599" end="1619" title="positive homogeneous" label="positive homogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q866116" start="1753" end="1772" title="Hahn–Banach theorem" label="Hahn–Banach theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q338652" start="1845" end="1854" title="Sublinear function" label="sublinear"/>
<link wikidata="Q778785" start="1859" end="1876" title="balanced function" label="balanced function"/>
<link wikidata="Q193657" start="2052" end="2058" title="Convex set" label="convex"/>
<link wikidata="Q778785" start="2060" end="2068" title="Balanced set" label="balanced"/>
<link wikidata="Q332775" start="2074" end="2083" title="Absorbing set" label="absorbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q338652" start="2487" end="2505" title="sublinear function" label="sublinear function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2530" end="2564" title="Sublinear_function#Properties" label="properties of a sublinear function"/>
<link wikidata="Q319913" start="2576" end="2585" title="convex function" label="convexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208216" start="2634" end="2661" title="reverse triangle inequality" label="reverse triangle inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q332775" start="2810" end="2819" title="Absorbing set" label="absorbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q332715" start="2820" end="2824" title="Absolutely convex set" label="disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q778785" start="3164" end="3181" title="balanced function" label="balanced function"/>
<link wikidata="Q332775" start="3606" end="3615" title="Absorbing set" label="absorbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q649472" start="3673" end="3693" title="Minkowski functional" label="Minkowski functional"/>
<link wikidata="Q319913" start="4013" end="4028" title="convex function" label="convex function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036748" start="4088" end="4106" title="objective function" label="objective function"/>
<link wikidata="Q866116" start="4713" end="4732" title="Hahn–Banach theorem" label="Hahn–Banach theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138624" start="5084" end="5095" title="convex hull" label="convex hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q332775" start="5133" end="5142" title="Absorbing set" label="absorbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q332715" start="5143" end="5147" title="Absolutely convex set" label="disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q649472" start="5172" end="5192" title="Minkowski functional" label="Minkowski functional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116709" start="5509" end="5530" title="translation-invariant" label="translation-invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397059" start="5531" end="5543" title="Pseudometric space" label="pseudometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="5587" end="5596" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q956437" start="5681" end="5685" title="Norm (mathematics)" label="norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572357" start="5725" end="5739" title="Locally convex topological vector space" label="locally convex"/>
<link wikidata="Q96392748" start="5740" end="5756" title="Metrizable topological vector space" label="pseudometrizable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455249" start="5757" end="5781" title="topological vector space" label="topological vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003677" start="5793" end="5800" title="Bounded set (topological vector space)" label="bounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275652" start="5834" end="5852" title="neighborhood basis" label="neighborhood basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393796" start="6287" end="6308" title="Quotient space (linear algebra)" label="vector space quotient"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259417" start="6500" end="6511" title="Pullback" label="pulled back"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572357" start="6621" end="6635" title="Locally convex topological vector space" label="locally convex"/>
<link wikidata="Q193657" start="6894" end="6900" title="Convex set" label="convex"/>
<link wikidata="Q778785" start="6901" end="6909" title="Balanced set" label="balanced"/>
<link wikidata="Q956437" start="7130" end="7135" title="Norm (mathematics)" label="norms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191147" start="7565" end="7568" title="Net (mathematics)" label="net"/>
<link wikidata="Q284347" start="8284" end="8286" title="T1 space" label="T1"/>
<link wikidata="Q284347" start="8338" end="8346" title="T1 space" label="T1 space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455249" start="8452" end="8476" title="topological vector space" label="topological vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q25402330" start="8498" end="8537" title="Kolmogorov&amp;#x27;s normability criterion" label="Kolmogorov&amp;#x27;s normability criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572357" start="8637" end="8651" title="locally convex" label="locally convex"/>
<link wikidata="Q284347" start="8765" end="8773" title="T1 space" label="T1 space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572357" start="8859" end="8873" title="locally convex" label="locally convex"/>
<link wikidata="Q505760" start="9054" end="9069" title="weak-* topology" label="weak-* topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835957" start="10321" end="10340" title="composition algebra" label="composition algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000660" start="10435" end="10455" title="algebra over a field" label="algebra over a field"/>
<link wikidata="Q846862" start="10471" end="10481" title="Involution (mathematics)" label="involution"/>
<link wikidata="Q736753" start="10500" end="10514" title="quadratic form" label="quadratic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968811" start="10600" end="10624" title="isotropic quadratic form" label="isotropic quadratic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555169" start="10662" end="10673" title="null vector" label="null vector"/>
</links>
</doc>
