<doc id="405453" wikidata="Q1412733" url="?curid=405453" title="Jewish diaspora">
<text>The Jewish diaspora (), dispersion () or exile (Galuth, ; ) is the dispersion of Israelites or Jews out of their ancient ancestral homeland (the Land of Israel) and their subsequent settlement in other parts of the globe.

In terms of the Hebrew Bible, the term &quot;galuth&quot; (&quot;exile&quot;) denotes the fate of the Israelites who were taken into exile from the Kingdom of Israel during the 8th century BCE, and the Judahites from the Kingdom of Judah who were taken into exile during the 6th century BCE. While in exile, the Judahites became known as &quot;Jews&quot; (, or ).

The first exile was the Assyrian exile, the expulsion from the Kingdom of Israel begun by Tiglath-Pileser III of Assyria in 733 BCE. This process was completed by Sargon II with the destruction of the kingdom in 722 BCE, concluding a three-year siege of Samaria begun by Shalmaneser V. The next experience of exile was the Babylonian captivity, in which portions of the population of the Kingdom of Judah were deported in 597 BCE and again in 586 BCE by the Neo-Babylonian Empire under the rule of Nebuchadnezzar II.

A Jewish diaspora existed for several centuries before the fall of the Second Temple in 70 CE. The Jewish diaspora in the second Temple period (516 BCE – 70 CE) was created from various factors, including through the creation of political and war refugees, enslavement, deportation, overpopulation, indebtedness, military employment, and opportunities in business, commerce, and agriculture. Before the middle of the first century CE, in addition to Judea, Syria and Babylonia, large Jewish communities existed in the Roman provinces of Egypt, Crete and Cyrenaica, and in Rome itself. In 6 CE the region was organized as the Roman province of Judaea. The Judean population revolted against the Roman Empire in 66 CE in the First Jewish–Roman War, which culminated in the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 CE. During the siege, the Romans destroyed the Second Temple and most of Jerusalem. This watershed moment, the elimination of the symbolic centre of Judaism and Jewish identity motivated many Jews to formulate a new self-definition and adjust their existence to the prospect of an indefinite period of displacement.

In 132 CE, Bar Kokhba led a rebellion against Hadrian, a revolt connected with the renaming of Jerusalem as Aelia Capitolina. After four years of devastating warfare, the uprising was suppressed, and Jews were forbidden access to Jerusalem.

During the Middle Ages, due to increasing migration and resettlement, Jews divided into distinct regional groups that today are generally addressed according to two primary geographical groupings: the Ashkenazi of Northern and Eastern Europe, and the Sephardic Jews of Iberia (Spain and Portugal), North Africa and the Middle East. These groups have parallel histories sharing many cultural similarities as well as a series of massacres, persecutions and expulsions, such as the expulsion from England in 1290, the expulsion from Spain in 1492, and the Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries between 1948 and 1973. Although the two branches comprise many unique ethno-cultural practices and have links to their local host populations (such as Central Europeans for the Ashkenazim and Hispanics and Arabs for the Sephardim), their shared religion and ancestry, as well as their continuous communication and population transfers, has been responsible for a unified sense of cultural and religious Jewish identity between Sephardim and Ashkenazim from the late Roman period to the present.

==Origins and uses of the terms==

Diaspora has been a common phenomenon for many peoples since antiquity, but what is particular about the Jewish instance is the pronounced negative, religious, indeed metaphysical connotations traditionally attached to dispersion and exile (&quot;galut&quot;), two conditions which were conflated. The English term &quot;diaspora&quot;, which entered usage as late as 1876, and the Hebrew word &quot;galut&quot; though covering a similar semantic range, bear some distinct differences in connotation. The former has no traditional equivalent in Hebrew usage.

Steven Bowman argues that diaspora in antiquity connoted emigration from an ancestral mother city, with the emigrant community maintaining its cultural ties with the place of origin. Just as the Greek city exported its surplus population, so did Jerusalem, while remaining the cultural and religious centre or metropolis (&quot;ir-va-em be-yisrael&quot;) for the outlying communities. It could have two senses in Biblical terms, the idea of becoming a &#x27;guiding light unto the nations&#x27; by dwelling in the midst of gentiles, or of enduring the pain of exile from one&#x27;s homeland. The conditions of diaspora in the former case were premised on the free exercise of citizenship or resident alien status. Galut implies by comparison living as a denigrated minority, stripped of such rights, in the host society. Sometimes diaspora and galut are defined as &#x27;voluntary&#x27; as opposed to &#x27;involuntary&#x27; exile. Diaspora, it has been argued, has a political edge, referring to geopolitical dispersion, which may be involuntary, but which can assume, under different conditions, a positive nuance. Galut is more teleological, and connotes a sense of uprootedness. Daniel Boyarin defines diaspora as a state where people have a dual cultural allegiance, productive of a double consciousness, and in this sense a cultural condition not premised on any particular history, as opposed to galut, which is more descriptive of an existential situation, that properly of exile, conveying a particular psychological outlook.

The Greek word διασπορά (dispersion) first appears as a neologism in the translation of the Old Testament known as the Septuagint, where it occurs 14 times, starting with a passage reading: (‘thou shalt be a diaspora (or dispersion) in all kingdoms of the earth’, ), translating &#x27;ləza‘ăwāh&#x27;, whose root suggests &#x27;trouble, terror&#x27;. In these contexts it never translated any term in the original Tanakh drawn from the Hebrew root &quot;glt&quot; (), which lies behind &quot;galah,&quot; and &quot;golah&quot;, nor even &quot;galuth.&quot; &quot;Golah&quot; appears 42 times, and &quot;galuth&quot; in 15 passages, and first occurs in the 2 Kings 17:23&#x27;s reference to the deportation of the Judean elite to Babylonia. Stéphane Dufoix, in surveying the textual evidence, draws the following conclusion:
&quot;galuth&quot; and &quot;diaspora&quot; are drawn from two completely different lexicons. The first refers to episodes, precise and datable, in the history of the people of Israel, when the latter was subjected to a foreign occupation, such as that of Babylon, in which most of the occurrences are found. The second, perhaps with a single exception that remains debatable, is never used to speak of the past and does not concern Babylon; the instrument of dispersion is never the historical sovereign of another country. &quot;Diaspora&quot; is the word for chastisement, but the dispersion in question has not occurred yet: it is potential, conditional on the Jews not respecting the law of God. . . It follows that &quot;diaspora&quot; belongs, not to the domain of history, but of theology.&#x27;

In Talmudic and post-Talmudic Rabbinic literature, this phenomenon was referred to as &quot;galut&quot; (exile), a term with strongly negative connotations, often contrasted with &quot;geula&quot; (redemption). Eugene Borowitz describes Galut as &quot;fundamentally a theological category The modern Hebrew concept of &quot;Tefutzot&quot; תפוצות, &quot;scattered&quot;, was introduced in the 1930s by the Jewish-American Zionist academic Simon Rawidowicz, who to some degree argued for the acceptance of the Jewish presence outside the Land of Israel as a modern reality and an inevitability. The Greek term for diaspora (διασπορά) also appears three times in the New Testament, where it refers to the scattering of Israel, i.e., the Ten Northern Tribes of Israel as opposed to the Southern Kingdom of Judah, although James (1:1) refers to the scattering of all twelve tribes.

In modern times, the contrasting meanings of diaspora/galut have given rise to controversy among Jews. Bowman states this in the following terms,

(Diaspora) follows the Greek usage and is considered a positive phenomenon that continues the prophetic call of Israel to be a &#x27;light unto the nations&#x27; and establish homes and families among the gentiles. The prophet Jeremiah issues this call to the preexilic emigrants in Egypt. . . Galut is a religious–nationalist term, which implies exile from the homeland as a result of collective sins, an exile that will be redeemed at YHWH’s pleasure. Jewish messianism is closely connected with the concept of galut.’

In Zionist debates a distinction was made between &quot;galut&quot; and &quot;golus/gola&quot;. The latter denoted social and political exile, whereas the former, while consequential on the latter, was a psycho-spiritual framework that was not wholly dependent on the conditions of life in diasporic exile, since one could technically remain in &quot;galut&quot; even in Eretz Israel. Whereas Theodor Herzl and his follows thought that the establishment of a Jewish state would put an end to the diasporic exile, Ahad Ha-am thought to the contrary that such a state&#x27;s function would be to &#x27;sustain Jewish nationhood&#x27; in the diaspora.

==Pre-Roman diaspora==

In 722 BCE, the Assyrians, under Sargon II, successor to Shalmaneser V, conquered the Kingdom of Israel, and many Israelites were deported to Mesopotamia. The Jewish proper diaspora began with the Babylonian exile in the 6th century BCE.

After the overthrow of the Kingdom of Judah in 586 BCE by Nebuchadnezzar II of Babylon (see Babylonian captivity) and the deportation of a considerable portion of its inhabitants to Mesopotamia, the Jews had two principal cultural centers: Babylonia and the land of Israel.

Deportees returned to the Samaria after the Neo-Babylonian Empire was in turn conquered by Cyrus the Great. The biblical book of Ezra includes two texts said to be decrees allowing the deported Jews to return to their homeland after decades and ordering the Temple rebuilt. The differences in content and tone of the two decrees, one in Hebrew and one in Aramaic, have caused some scholars to question their authenticity. The Cyrus Cylinder, an ancient tablet on which is written a declaration in the name of Cyrus referring to restoration of temples and repatriation of exiled peoples, has often been taken as corroboration of the authenticity of the biblical decrees attributed to Cyrus, but other scholars point out that the cylinder&#x27;s text is specific to Babylon and Mesopotamia and makes no mention of Judah or Jerusalem. Lester L. Grabbe asserted that the &quot;alleged decree of Cyrus&quot; regarding Judah, &quot;cannot be considered authentic&quot;, but that there was a &quot;general policy of allowing deportees to return and to re-establish cult sites&quot;. He also stated that archaeology suggests that the return was a &quot;trickle&quot; taking place over decades, rather than a single event. There is no sudden expansion of the population base of 30,000 and no credible indication of any special interest in &quot;Yehud&quot;.

Although most of the Jewish people during this period, especially the wealthy families, were to be found in Babylonia, the existence they led there, under the successive rulers of the Achaemenids, the Seleucids, the Parthians, and the Sassanians, was obscure and devoid of political influence. The poorest but most fervent of the exiles returned to Judah / the Land of Israel during the reign of the Achaemenids (c. 550–330 BCE). There, with the reconstructed Temple in Jerusalem as their center, they organized themselves into a community, animated by a remarkable religious ardor and a tenacious attachment to the Torah as the focus of their identity. As this little nucleus increased in numbers with the accession of recruits from various quarters, it awoke to a consciousness of itself, and strove once again for national independence and political enfranchisement and sovereignty.

The first Jewish diaspora in Egypt arose in the last century of pharaonic rule, apparently with the settlement there, either under Ashurbanipal or during the reign of Psammeticus of a colony of Jewish mercenaries, a military class that successively served the Persian, the Ptolemaic and Roman governments down to the early decades of the second century CE, when the revolt against Trajan destroyed them. Their presence was buttressed by numerous Jewish administrators who joined them in Egypt&#x27;s military and urban centres. According to Josephus, when Ptolemy I took Judea, he led 120,000 Jewish captives to Egypt, and many other Jews, attracted by Ptolemy&#x27;s liberal and tolerant policies and Egypt&#x27;s fertile soil, emigrated from Judea to Egypt of their own free will. Ptolemy settled the Jews in Egypt to employ them as mercenaries. Philadelphus subsequently emancipated the Jews taken to Egypt as captives and settled them in cleruchs, or specialized colonies, as Jewish military units. Jews began settling in Cyrenaica (modern-day eastern Libya) around the third century BCE, during the rule of Ptolemy I of Egypt, who sent them to secure the region for his kingdom. By the early first century BCE, the geographer Strabo identified Jews as one of the four main groups residing in the city of Cyrene.

While communities in Alexandria and Rome dated back to before the Maccabean Revolt, the population in the Jewish diaspora expanded after the Pompey&#x27;s campaign in 62 BCE. Under the Hasmonean princes, who were at first high priests and then kings, the Jewish state displayed even a certain luster and annexed several territories. Soon, however, discord within the royal family and the growing disaffection of the pious towards rulers who no longer evinced any appreciation of the real aspirations of their subjects made the Jewish nation easy prey for the ambitions of the now increasingly autocratic and imperial Romans, the successors of the Seleucids. In 63 BCE Pompey invaded Jerusalem, the Jewish people lost their political sovereignty and independence, and Gabinius subjected the Jewish people to tribute.

===Early diaspora populations===

As early as the third century BCE Jewish communities sprang up in the Aegean islands, Greece, Asia Minor, Cyrenaica, Italy and Egypt. In Palestine, under the favourable auspices of the long period of peace—almost a whole century—which followed the advent of the Ptolemies, the new ways were to flourish. By means of all kinds of contacts, and particularly thanks to the development of commerce, Hellenism infiltrated on all sides in varying degrees. The ports of the Mediterranean coast were indispensable to commerce and, from the very beginning of the Hellenistic period, underwent great development. In the Western diaspora Greek quickly became dominant in Jewish life and little sign remains of profound contact with Hebrew or Aramaic, the latter probably being the more prevalent. Jews migrated to new Greek settlements that arose in the Eastern Mediterranean and former subject areas of the Persian Empire on the heels of Alexander the Great&#x27;s conquests, spurred on by the opportunities they expected to find. The proportion of Jews in the diaspora in relation to the size of the nation as a whole increased steadily throughout the Hellenistic era and reached astonishing dimensions in the early Roman period, particularly in Alexandria. It was not least for this reason that the Jewish people became a major political factor, especially since the Jews in the diaspora, notwithstanding strong cultural, social and religious tensions, remained firmly united with their homeland. Smallwood writes that, &#x27;It is reasonable to conjecture that many, such as the settlement in Puteoli attested in 4 BCE went back to the late (pre-Roman Empire) Roman Republic or early Empire and originated in voluntary emigration and the lure of trade and commerce.&quot; Many Jews migrated to Rome from Alexandria due to flourishing trade relations between the cities. Dating the numerous settlements is difficult. Some settlements may have resulted from Jewish emigration following the defeat of Jewish revolts. Others, such as the Jewish community in Rome, were far older, dating back to at least the mid second century BCE, although it expanded greatly following Pompey’s campaign in 62 BCE. In 6 CE the Romans annexed Judaea. Only the Jews in Babylonia remained outside of Roman rule. Unlike the Greek speaking Hellenized Jews in the west the Jewish communities in Babylonian and Judea continued the use of Aramaic as a primary language.

As early as the middle of the 2nd century BCE the Jewish author of the third book of the Oracula Sibyllina addressed the &quot;chosen people,&quot; saying: &quot;Every land is full of thee and every sea.&quot; The most diverse witnesses, such as Strabo, Philo, Seneca, Luke (the author of the &quot;Acts of the Apostles&quot;), Cicero, and Josephus, all mention Jewish populations in the cities of the Mediterranean basin. See also History of the Jews in India and History of the Jews in China for pre-Roman (and post-) diasporic populations.

King Agrippa I, in a letter to Caligula, enumerated among the provinces of the Jewish diaspora almost all the Hellenized and non-Hellenized countries of the Orient. This enumeration was far from complete as Italy and Cyrene were not included. The epigraphic discoveries from year to year augment the number of known Jewish communities but must be viewed with caution due to the lack of precise evidence of their numbers. According to the ancient Jewish historian Josephus, the next most dense Jewish population after the Land of Israel and Babylonia was in Syria, particularly in Antioch, and Damascus, where 10,000 to 18,000 Jews were massacred during the great insurrection. The ancient Jewish philosopher Philo gives the number of Jewish inhabitants in Egypt as one million, one-eighth of the population. Alexandria was by far the most important of the Egyptian Jewish communities. The Jews in the Egyptian diaspora were on a par with their Ptolemaic counterparts and close ties existed for them with Jerusalem. As in other Hellenistic diasporas, the Egyptian diaspora was one of choice not of imposition.

To judge by the later accounts of wholesale massacres in 115 CE, the number of Jewish residents in Cyrenaica, Cyprus, and Mesopotamia must also have been large. At the commencement of the reign of Caesar Augustus, there were over 7,000 Jews in Rome (though this is only the number that is said to have escorted the envoys who came to demand the deposition of Archelaus; compare: Bringmann: Klaus: Geschichte der Juden im Altertum, Stuttgart 2005, S. 202. Bringmann talks about 8,000 Jews who lived in the city of Rome.). Many sources say that the Jews constituted a full one-tenth (10%) of the population of the ancient city of Rome itself. Finally, if the sums confiscated by the governor Lucius Valerius Flaccus in the year 62/61 BCE represented the tax of a didrachma per head for a single year, it would imply that the Jewish population of Asia Minor numbered 45,000 adult males, for a total of at least 180,000 persons.

==Under the Roman Empire==
The 13th-century author Bar Hebraeus gave a figure of 6,944,000 Jews in the Roman world. Salo Wittmayer Baron considered the figure convincing. The figure of seven million within and one million outside the Roman world in the mid-first century became widely accepted, including by Louis Feldman. However, contemporary scholars now accept that Bar Hebraeus based his figure on a census of total Roman citizens and thus, included non-Jews. The figure of 6,944,000 being recorded in Eusebius&#x27; Chronicon. Louis Feldman, previously an active supporter of the figure, now states that he and Baron were mistaken. Philo gives a figure of one million Jews living in Egypt. John R. Bartlett rejects Baron&#x27;s figures entirely, arguing that we have no clue as to the size of the Jewish demographic in the ancient world. The Romans did not distinguish between Jews inside and outside of the Land of Israel/Judaea. They collected an annual temple tax from Jews both in and outside of Israel.

The suppression of the diaspora uprisings of 116–117 CE resulted in the near-total destruction of Jewish communities in Cyrenaica and Egypt. By the third century, Jewish communities began to re-establish themselves in Egypt and Cyrenaica, primarily through immigration from the Land of Israel.

==Destruction of Judea==
Roman rule in Judea began in 63 BCE with the capture of Jerusalem by Pompey. After the city fell to Pompey&#x27;s forces, thousands of Jewish prisoners of war were brought from Judea to Rome and sold into slavery. After these Jewish slaves were manumitted, they settled permanently in Rome on the right bank of the Tiber as traders. In 37 BCE, the forces of the Jewish client king Herod the Great captured Jerusalem with Roman assistance, and there was likely an influx of Jewish slaves taken into the diaspora by Roman forces. In 53 BCE, a minor Jewish revolt was suppressed and the Romans subsequently sold Jewish war captives into slavery. Roman rule continued until the First Jewish-Roman War, or the Great Revolt, a Jewish uprising to fight for independence, which began in 66 CE and was eventually crushed in 73 CE, culminating in the Siege of Jerusalem and the burning and destruction of the Temple, the centre of the national and religious life of the Jews throughout the world. The Jewish diaspora at the time of the Temple&#x27;s destruction, according to Josephus, was in Parthia (Persia), Babylonia (Iraq), Arabia, as well as some Jews beyond the Euphrates and in Adiabene (Kurdistan). In Josephus&#x27; own words, he had informed &quot;the remotest Arabians&quot; about the destruction. Jewish communities also existed in southern Europe, Anatolia, Syria, and North Africa. Jewish pilgrims from the diaspora, undeterred by the rebellion, had actually come to Jerusalem for Passover prior to the arrival of the Roman army, and many became trapped in the city and died during the siege. According to Josephus, about 97,000 Jewish captives from Judea were sold into slavery by the Romans during the revolt. Many other Jews fled from Judea to other areas around the Mediterranean. Josephus wrote that 30,000 Jews were deported from Judea to Carthage by the Romans.

Exactly when Roman Anti-Judaism began is a question of scholarly debate, however historian Hayim Hillel Ben-Sasson has proposed that the &quot;Crisis under Caligula&quot; (37–41) was the &quot;first open break between Rome and the Jews&quot;. Meanwhile, the Kitos War, a rebellion by Jewish diaspora communities in Roman territories in the Eastern Mediterranean and Mesopotamia, led to the destruction of Jewish communities in Crete, Cyprus, and North Africa in 117 CE, and consequently the dispersal of Jews already living outside of Judea to further reaches of the Empire.

Jerusalem had been left in ruins from the time of Vespasian. Sixty years later, Hadrian, who had been instrumental in the expulsion from Palestine of Marcius Turbo after his bloody repression of Jews in the diaspora in 117 CE, on visiting the area of &quot;Iudaea&quot;, decided to rebuild the city in 130 CE, and settle it, circumstantial evidence suggesting it was he who renamed it &quot;Ælia Capitolina&quot;, with a Roman &quot;colonia&quot; and foreign cults. It is commonly held that this was done as an insult to the Jews and as a means of erasing the land&#x27;s Jewish identity, Others argued that this project was expressive of an intention of establishing administratively and culturally a firm Roman imperial presence, and thus incorporating the province, now called Syro-Palaestina, into the Roman world system. These political measures were, according to Menachem Mor, devoid of any intention to eliminate Judaism, indeed, the pagan reframing of Jerusalem may have been a strategic move designed to challenge, rather, the growing threat, pretensions and influence of converts to Christianity, for whom Jerusalem was likewise a crucial symbol of their faith. Implementation of these plans led to violent opposition, and triggered a full-scale insurrection with the Bar Kokhba revolt (132–136 CE), assisted, according to Dio Cassius, by some other peoples, perhaps Arabs who had recently been subjected by Trajan. The revolt was crushed, with the Jewish population of Judea devastated. Jewish war captives were again captured and sold into slavery by the Romans. According to Jewish tradition, the Romans deported twelve boatloads of Jews to Cyrenaica. Voluntary Jewish emigration from Judea in the aftermath of the Bar-Kokhba revolt also expanded Jewish communities in the diaspora. Jews were forbidden entrance to Jerusalem on pain of death, except for the day of Tisha B&#x27;Av. There was a further shift of the center of religious authority from Yavne, as rabbis regrouped in Usha in the western Galilee, where the Mishnah was composed. This ban struck a blow at Jewish national identity within Palestine, while the Romans however continued to allow Jews in the diaspora their distinct national and religious identity throughout the Empire.

The military defeats of the Jews in Judaea in 70 CE and again in 135 CE, with large numbers of Jewish captives from Judea sold into slavery and an increase in voluntary Jewish emigration from Judea as a result of the wars, meant a drop in Palestine&#x27;s Jewish population was balanced by a rise in diaspora numbers. Jewish prisoners sold as slaves in the diaspora and their children were eventually manumitted and joined local free communities. It has been argued that the archaeological evidence is suggestive of a Roman genocide taking place during the Second revolt. A significant movement of gentiles and Samaritans into villages formerly with a Jewish majority appears to have taken place thereafter. During the Crisis of the Third Century, civil wars in the Roman Empire caused great economic disruption, and taxes imposed to finance these wars impacted the Jewish population of Palestine heavily. As a result, many Jews emigrated to Babylon under the more tolerant Sassanid Empire, where autonomous Jewish communities continued to flourish, lured by the promise of economic prosperity and the ability to lead a full Jewish life there. Between the 3rd and 7th centuries, estimates indicate that the Babylonian Jewish community numbered approximately one million, which may have been the largest Jewish diaspora population of the time, possibly outnumbering those in the Land of Israel.

Palestine and Babylon were both great centers of Jewish scholarship during this time, but tensions between scholars in these two communities grew as many Jewish scholars in Palestine feared that the centrality of the land to the Jewish religion would be lost with continuing Jewish emigration. Many Palestinian sages refused to consider Babylonian scholars their equals and would not ordain Babylonian students in their academies, fearing they would return to Babylon as rabbis. Significant Jewish emigration to Babylon adversely affected the Jewish academies of Palestine, and by the end of the third century they were reliant on donations from Babylon.

The effect that the destruction of Jerusalem had on the Jewish diaspora has been a topic of considerable scholarly discussion. David Aberbach has argued that much of the European Jewish diaspora, by which he means exile or voluntary migration, originated with the Jewish wars which occurred between 66 and 135 CE. Martin Goodman states that it is only after the destruction of Jerusalem that Jews are found in northern Europe and along the western Mediterranean coast.
Howard Adelman and Elazar Barkan challenge the &quot;widespread notion&quot; the Jews in Judea were only expelled after the destruction of the Second Temple in 70 CE and the Jewish defeat during Bar Kokhba revolt in 135 CE. They also contend it is &quot;misleading&quot; that the expulsion from Judea created the diaspora.

Israel Bartal contends that Shlomo Sand is incorrect in his claim that the original Jews living in Israel were not exiled by the Romans, instead arguing that this view is negligible among serious Jewish study scholars. These scholars argue that the growth of diaspora Jewish communities was a gradual process that occurred over the centuries, starting with the Assyrian destruction of Israel, the Babylonian destruction of Judah, the Roman destruction of Judea, and the subsequent rule of Christians and Muslims. After the revolt, the Jewish religious and cultural center shifted to the Babylonian Jewish community and its scholars. For the generations that followed, the destruction of the Second Temple event came to represent a fundamental insight about the Jews who had become a dispossessed and persecuted people for much of their history.

Erich S. Gruen contends that focusing on the destruction of the Temple misses the point that already before this, the diaspora was well-established. Gruen argues compulsory dislocation of Jews during the Second Temple period (516 BCE – 70 CE) cannot explain more than a fraction of the eventual diaspora. Rather, the Jewish diaspora during this time period was created from various factors, including through the creation of political and war refugees, enslavement, deportation, overpopulation, indebtedness, military employment, and opportunities in business, commerce, and agriculture. Avrum Ehrlich also states that already well before the destruction of the Temple in 70 CE, more Jews lived in the Diaspora than in Israel. Jonathan Adelman estimated that around 60% of Jews lived in the diaspora during the Second Temple period. According to Gruen:

Perhaps three to five million Jews dwelled outside Palestine in the roughly four centuries that stretched from Alexander to Titus. The era of the Second Temple brought the issue into sharp focus, inescapably so. The Temple still stood, a reminder of the hallowed past, and, through most of the era, a Jewish regime existed in Palestine. Yet the Jews of the diaspora, from Italy to Iran, far outnumbered those in the homeland. Although Jerusalem loomed large in their self-perception as a nation, few of them had seen it, and few were likely to.

Israel Yuval contends the Babylonian captivity created a promise of return in the Jewish consciousness which had the effect of enhancing the Jewish self-perception of Exile after the destruction of the Second Temple, albeit their dispersion was due to an array of non-exilic factors. According to Hasia R. Diner, the destruction of the Second Temple in 70 CE, followed by the dissolution, in 132 CE, of Jewish sovereignty over the territory renamed Syria Palaestina, had launched the second dispersion of the diaspora, the first being the Babylonian exile of 586 BCE. She writes that, &quot;Although many Jews had lived outside Judea even before that [the destruction of Judea], the ending of home rule set in motion the world’s longest diaspora.&quot;

==Byzantine, Islamic, and Crusader periods==
In the 4th century, the Roman Empire split and Palestine came under the control of the Byzantine Empire. There was still a significant Jewish population there, and Jews probably constituted a majority of the population until some time after Constantine converted to Christianity in the 4th century. The ban on Jewish settlement in Jerusalem was maintained. There was a minor Jewish rebellion against a corrupt governor from 351 to 352 which was put down. In the 5th century, the collapse of the Western Roman Empire resulted in Christian migration into Palestine and the development of a firm Christian majority. Judaism was the only non-Christian religion tolerated, but the Jews were discriminated against in various ways. They were prohibited from building new houses of worship, holding public office, or owning slaves. The 7th century saw the Jewish revolt against Heraclius, which broke out in 614 during the Byzantine–Sasanian War. It was the last serious attempt by Jews to gain autonomy in the Land of Israel prior to modern times. Jewish rebels aided the Persians in capturing Jerusalem, where the Jews were permitted autonomous rule until 617, when the Persians reneged on their alliance. After Byzantine Emperor Heraclius promised to restore Jewish rights, the Jews aided him in ousting the Persians. Heraclius subsequently went back on his word and ordered a general massacre of the Jewish population, devastating the Jewish communities of Jerusalem and the Galilee. As a result, many Jews fled to Egypt.

In 638, Palestine came under Muslim rule with the Muslim conquest of the Levant. One estimate placed the Jewish population of Palestine at between 300,000 and 400,000 at the time. However, this is contrary to other estimates which place it at 150,000 to 200,000 at the time of the revolt against Heraclius. According to historian Moshe Gil, the majority of the population was Jewish or Samaritan. The land gradually came to have an Arab majority as Arab tribes migrated there. Jewish communities initially grew and flourished. Umar allowed and encouraged Jews to settle in Jerusalem. It was the first time in about 500 years that Jews were allowed to freely enter and worship in their holiest city. In 717, new restrictions were imposed against non-Muslims that negatively affected the Jews. Heavy taxes on agricultural land forced many Jews to migrate from rural areas to towns. Social and economic discrimination caused significant Jewish emigration from Palestine, and Muslim civil wars in the 8th and 9th centuries pushed many Jews out of the country. By the end of the 11th century the Jewish population of Palestine had declined substantially.

During the First Crusade, Jews in Palestine, along with Muslims, were indiscriminately massacred and sold into slavery by the Crusaders. The majority of Jerusalem&#x27;s Jewish population was killed during the Crusader Siege of Jerusalem and the few thousand survivors were sold into slavery. Some of the Jews sold into slavery later had their freedom bought by Jewish communities in Italy and Egypt, and the redeemed slaves were taken to Egypt. Some Jewish prisoners of war were also deported to Apulia in southern Italy.

Relief for the Jewish population of Palestine came when the Ayyubid dynasty defeated the Crusaders and conquered Palestine (see 1187 Battle of Hattin). Some Jewish immigration from the diaspora subsequently took place, but this came to an end when Mamluks took over Palestine (see 1291 Fall of Acre). The Mamluks severely oppressed the Jews and greatly mismanaged the economy, resulting in a period of great social and economic decline. The result was large-scale migration from Palestine, and the population declined. The Jewish population shrunk especially heavily, as did the Christian population. Though some Jewish immigration from Europe, North Africa, and Syria also occurred in this period, which potentially saved the collapsing Jewish community of Palestine from disappearing altogether, Jews were reduced to an even smaller minority of the population.

The result of these waves of emigration and expulsion was that the Jewish population of Palestine was reduced to a few thousand by the time the Ottoman Empire conquered Palestine, after which the region entered a period of relative stability. At the start of Ottoman rule in 1517, the estimated Jewish population was 5,000, composed of both descendants of Jews who had never left the land and migrants from the diaspora.

==Post-Roman period Jewish diaspora populations==

During the Middle Ages, due to increasing geographical dispersion and re-settlement, Jews divided into distinct regional groups which today are generally addressed according to two primary geographical groupings: the Ashkenazi of Northern and Eastern Europe, and the Sephardic Jews of Iberia (Spain and Portugal), North Africa and the Middle East. These groups have parallel histories sharing many cultural similarities as well as a series of massacres, persecutions and expulsions, such as the expulsion from England in 1290, the expulsion from Spain in 1492, and the expulsion from Arab countries in 1948–1973. Although the two branches comprise many unique ethno-cultural practices and have links to their local host populations (such as Central Europeans for the Ashkenazim and Hispanics and Arabs for the Sephardim), their shared religion and ancestry, as well as their continuous communication and population transfers, has been responsible for a unified sense of cultural and religious Jewish identity between Sephardim and Ashkenazim from the late Roman period to the present.

By 1764 there were about 750,000 Jews in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. The worldwide Jewish population (comprising the Middle East and the rest of Europe) was estimated at 1.2 million.

===Classical period===
After the Persian conquest of Babylon in 539 BCE, Judah ( ) became a province of the Persian empire. This status continued into the following Hellenistic period, when Yehud became a disputed province of Ptolemaic Egypt and Seleucid Syria. In the early part of the 2nd century BCE, a revolt against the Seleucids led to the establishment of an independent Jewish kingdom under the Hasmonean dynasty. The Hasmoneans adopted a deliberate policy of imitating and reconstituting the Davidic kingdom, and as part of this forcibly converted to Judaism their neighbours in the Land of Israel. The conversions included Nabateans (Zabadeans) and Itureans, the peoples of the former Philistine cities, the Moabites, Ammonites and Edomites. Attempts were also made to incorporate the Samaritans, following takeover of Samaria. The success of mass-conversions is however questionable, as most groups retained their tribal separations and mostly turned Hellenistic or Christian, with Edomites perhaps being the only exception to merge into the Jewish society under Herodian dynasty and in the following period of Jewish–Roman Wars.

===Middle Ages===

====Ashkenazi Jews====
Ashkenazi Jews is a general category of Jewish populations who immigrated to what is now Germany and northeastern France during the Middle Ages and until modern times used to adhere to the Yiddish culture and the Ashkenazi prayer style. There is evidence that groups of Jews had immigrated to Germania during the Roman Era; they were probably merchants who followed the Roman Legions during their conquests. However, for the most part, modern Ashkenazi Jews originated with Jews who migrated or were forcibly taken from the Middle East to southern Europe in antiquity, where they established Jewish communities before moving into northern France and lower Germany during the High and Late Middle Ages. They also descend to a lesser degree from Jewish immigrants from Babylon, Persia, and North Africa who migrated to Europe in the Middle Ages. The Ashkenazi Jews later migrated from Germany (and elsewhere in Central Europe) into Eastern Europe as a result of persecution. Some Ashkenazi Jews also have minor ancestry from Sephardi Jews exiled from Spain, first during Islamic persecutions (11th–12th centuries) and later during Christian reconquests (13th–15th centuries) and the Spanish Inquisition (15th–16th centuries). Ashkenazi Jews are of mixed Middle Eastern and European ancestry, as they derive part of their ancestry from non-Jewish Europeans who intermixed with Jews of migrant Middle Eastern origin.

In 2006, a study by Doron Behar and Karl Skorecki of the Technion and Ramban Medical Center in Haifa, Israel demonstrated that the vast majority of Ashkenazi Jews, both men and women, have Middle Eastern ancestry. According to Nicholas Wades&#x27; 2010 Autosomal study Ashkenazi Jews share a common ancestry with other Jewish groups and Ashkenazi and Sephardi Jews have roughly 30% European ancestry with the rest being Middle Eastern. According to Hammer, the Ashkenazi population expanded through a series of bottlenecks—events that squeeze a population down to small numbers—perhaps as it migrated from the Middle East after the destruction of the Second Temple in 70 CE, to Italy, reaching the Rhine Valley in the 10th century.

David Goldstein, a Duke University geneticist and director of the Duke Center for Human Genome Variation, has said that the work of the Technion and Ramban team served only to confirm that genetic drift played a major role in shaping Ashkenazi mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), which is inherited in a matrilineal manner. Goldstein argues that the Technion and Ramban mtDNA studies fail to actually establish a statistically significant maternal link between modern Jews and historic Middle Eastern populations. This differs from the patrilineal case, where Goldstein said there is no doubt of a Middle Eastern origin.

In June 2010, Behar et al. &quot;shows that most Jewish samples form a remarkably tight subcluster with common genetic origin, that overlies Druze and Cypriot samples but not samples from other Levantine populations or paired diaspora host populations. In contrast, Ethiopian Jews (Beta Israel) and Indian Jews (Bene Israel and Cochini) cluster with neighboring autochthonous populations in Ethiopia and western India, respectively, despite a clear paternal link between the Bene Israel and the Levant.&quot; &quot;The most parsimonious explanation for these observations is a common genetic origin, which is consistent with an historical formulation of the Jewish people as descending from ancient Hebrew and Israelite residents of the Levant.&quot; In conclusion the authors are stating that the genetic results are concordant &quot;with the dispersion of the people of ancient Israel throughout the Old World&quot;. Regarding the samples he used Behar points out that &quot;Our conclusion favoring common ancestry (of Jewish people) over recent admixture is further supported by the fact that our sample contains individuals that are known not to be admixed in the most recent one or two generations.&quot;

A 2013 study of Ashkenazi mitochondrial DNA by Costa et al., reached the conclusion that the four major female founders and most of the minor female founders had ancestry in prehistoric Europe, rather than the Near East or Caucasus. According to the study these findings &#x27;point to a significant role for the conversion of women in the formation of Ashkenazi communities&quot; and their intermarriage with Jewish men of Middle Eastern origin.

A study by Haber, et al., (2013) noted that while previous studies of the Levant, which had focused mainly on diaspora Jewish populations, showed that the &quot;Jews form a distinctive cluster in the Middle East&quot;, these studies did not make clear &quot;whether the factors driving this structure would also involve other groups in the Levant&quot;. The authors found strong evidence that modern Levant populations descend from two major apparent ancestral populations. One set of genetic characteristics which is shared with modern-day Europeans and Central Asians is most prominent in the Levant amongst &quot;Lebanese, Armenians, Cypriots, Druze and Jews, as well as Turks, Iranians and Caucasian populations&quot;. The second set of inherited genetic characteristics is shared with populations in other parts of the Middle East as well as some African populations. Levant populations in this category today include &quot;Palestinians, Jordanians, Syrians, as well as North Africans, Ethiopians, Saudis, and Bedouins&quot;. Concerning this second component of ancestry, the authors remark that while it correlates with &quot;the pattern of the Islamic expansion&quot;, and that &quot;a pre-Islamic expansion Levant was more genetically similar to Europeans than to Middle Easterners,&quot; they also say that &quot;its presence in Lebanese Christians, Sephardi and Ashkenazi Jews, Cypriots and Armenians might suggest that its spread to the Levant could also represent an earlier event&quot;. The authors also found a strong correlation between religion and apparent ancestry in the Levant:

all Jews (Sephardi and Ashkenazi) cluster in one branch; Druze from Mount Lebanon and Druze from Mount Carmel are depicted on a private branch; and Lebanese Christians form a private branch with the Christian populations of Armenia and Cyprus placing the Lebanese Muslims as an outer group. The predominantly Muslim populations of Syrians, Palestinians and Jordanians cluster on branches with other Muslim populations as distant as Morocco and Yemen.

Another 2013 study, made by Doron M. Behar of the Rambam Health Care Campus in Israel and others, suggests that: &quot;Cumulatively, our analyses point strongly to ancestry of Ashkenazi Jews primarily from European and Middle Eastern populations and not from populations in or near the Caucasus region. The combined set of approaches suggests that the observations of Ashkenazi proximity to European and Middle Eastern populations in population structure analyses reflect actual genetic proximity of Ashkenazi Jews to populations with predominantly European and Middle Eastern ancestry components, and lack of visible introgression from the region of the Khazar Khaganate—particularly among the northern Volga and North Caucasus populations—into the Ashkenazi community.&quot;

A 2014 study by Fernández et al. found that Ashkenazi Jews display a frequency of haplogroup K in their maternal (mitochondrial) DNA, suggesting an ancient Near Eastern matrilineal origin, similar to the results of the Behar study in 2006. Fernández noted that this observation clearly contradicts the results of the 2013 study led by Costa, Richards et al. that suggested a European source for 3 exclusively Ashkenazi K lineages.

====Sephardic Jews====
Sephardi Jews are Jews whose ancestors lived in Spain or Portugal. Some 300,000 Jews resided in Spain before the Spanish Inquisition in the 15th century, when the Reyes Católicos reconquered Spain from the Arabs and ordered the Jews to convert to Catholicism, leave the country or face execution without trial. Those who chose not to convert, between 40,000 and 100,000, were expelled from Spain in 1492 in the wake of the Alhambra decree. Sephardic Jews subsequently migrated to North Africa (Maghreb), Christian Europe (Netherlands, Britain, France and Poland), throughout the Ottoman Empire and even the newly discovered Latin America. In the Ottoman Empire, the Sephardim mostly settled in the European portion of the Empire, and mainly in the major cities such as: Istanbul, Selânik and Bursa. Selânik, which is today known as Thessaloniki and found in modern-day Greece, had a large and flourishing Sephardic community as was the community of Maltese Jews in Malta.

A small number of Sephardic refugees who fled via the Netherlands as Marranos settled in Hamburg and Altona Germany in the early 16th century, eventually appropriating Ashkenazic Jewish rituals into their religious practice. One famous figure from the Sephardic Ashkenazic population is Glückel of Hameln. Some relocated to the United States, establishing the country&#x27;s first organized community of Jews and erecting the United States&#x27; first synagogue. Nevertheless, the majority of Sephardim remained in Spain and Portugal as Conversos, which would also be the fate for those who had migrated to Spanish and Portuguese ruled Latin America. Sephardic Jews evolved to form most of North Africa&#x27;s Jewish communities of the modern era, as well as the bulk of the Turkish, Syrian, Galilean and Jerusalemite Jews of the Ottoman period.

====Mizrahi Jews====
Mizrahi Jews are Jews descended from the Jewish communities of the Middle East, Central Asia and the Caucasus, largely originating from the Babylonian Jewry of the classic period. The term Mizrahi is used in Israel in the language of politics, media and some social scientists for Jews from the Arab world and adjacent, primarily Muslim-majority countries. The definition of Mizrahi includes the modern Iraqi Jews, Syrian Jews, Lebanese Jews, Persian Jews, Afghan Jews, Bukharian Jews, Kurdish Jews, Mountain Jews, Georgian Jews. Some also include the North-African Sephardic communities and Yemenite Jews under the definition of Mizrahi, but do that from rather political generalization than ancestral reasons.

====Yemenite Jews====
Temanim are Jews who were living in Yemen prior to immigrating to Ottoman Palestine and Israel. Their geographic and social isolation from the rest of the Jewish community over the course of many centuries allowed them to develop a liturgy and set of practices that are significantly distinct from those of other Oriental Jewish groups; they themselves comprise three distinctly different groups, though the distinction is one of religious law and liturgy rather than of ethnicity. Traditionally the genesis of the Yemenite Jewish community came after the Babylonian exile, though the community most probably emerged during Roman times, and it was significantly reinforced during the reign of Dhu Nuwas in the 6th century CE and during later Muslim conquests in the 7th century CE, which drove the Arab Jewish tribes out of central Arabia.

====Karaite Jews====
Karaim are Jews who used to live mostly in Egypt, Iraq, and Crimea during the Middle Ages. They are distinguished by the form of Judaism which they observe. Rabbinic Jews of varying communities have affiliated with the Karaite community throughout the millennia. As such, Karaite Jews are less an ethnic division, than they are members of a particular branch of Judaism. Karaite Judaism recognizes the Tanakh as the single religious authority for the Jewish people. Linguistic principles and contextual exegesis are used in arriving at the correct meaning of the Torah. Karaite Jews strive to adhere to the plain or most obvious understanding of the text when interpreting the Tanakh. By contrast, Rabbinical Judaism regards an Oral Law (codified and recorded in the Mishnah and the Talmud) as being equally binding on Jews, and mandated by God. In Rabbinical Judaism, the Oral Law forms the basis of religion, morality, and Jewish life. Karaite Jews rely on the use of sound reasoning and the application of linguistic tools to determine the correct meaning of the Tanakh; while Rabbinical Judaism looks towards the Oral law codified in the Talmud, to provide the Jewish community with an accurate understanding of the Hebrew Scriptures.

The differences between Karaite and Rabbinic Judaism go back more than a thousand years. Rabbinical Judaism originates from the Pharisees of the Second Temple period. Karaite Judaism may have its origins among the Sadducees of the same era. Karaite Jews hold the entire Hebrew Bible to be a religious authority. As such, the vast majority of Karaites believe in the resurrection of the dead. Karaite Jews are widely regarded as being halachically Jewish by the Orthodox Rabbinate. Similarly, members of the rabbinic community are considered Jews by the Moetzet Hakhamim, if they are patrilineally Jewish.

===Modern era===

====Israeli Jews====
Jews of Israel comprise an increasingly mixed wide range of Jewish communities making aliyah from Europe, North Africa, and elsewhere in the Middle East. While a significant portion of Israeli Jews still retain memories of their Sephardic, Ashkenazi and Mizrahi origins, mixed Jewish marriages among the communities are very common. There are also smaller groups of Yemenite Jews, Indian Jews and others, who still retain a semi-separate communal life. There are also approximately 50,000 adherents of Karaite Judaism, most of whom live in Israel, but their exact numbers are not known, because most Karaites have not participated in any religious censuses. The Beta Israel, though somewhat disputed as the descendants of the ancient Israelites, are widely recognized in Israel as Ethiopian Jews.

====American Jews====
The ancestry of most American Jews goes back to Ashkenazi Jewish communities that immigrated to the US in the course of the 19th and 20th centuries, as well as more recent influxes of Persian and other Mizrahi Jewish immigrants. The American Jewish community is considered to contain the highest percentage of mixed marriages between Jews and non-Jews, resulting in both increased assimilation and a significant influx of non-Jews becoming identified as Jews. The most widespread practice in the U.S. is Reform Judaism, which does not require members to prove, or consider the Jews to possess direct descent from the ethnic Jews or Biblical Israelites. These attitudes had been present in Reform Judaism for many years but were codified in a 1983 decree by the Central Conference of American Rabbis, &quot;On Patrilineal Descent&quot;. Among other assertions, the 1983 decree holds that matrilineal descent is not necessary for a person to be considered Jewish. This is in marked contrast to Orthodox Judaism, whose adherents represent around 30% of the Jews in Israel. Orthodox Judaism considers the Jewish people to be a closed ethnoreligious community and consequently possesses very strict procedures for conversion, a practice that it does not generally encourage.

====French Jews====

The Jews of modern France number around 400,000 persons, largely descendants of North African communities, some of which were Sephardic communities that had come from Spain and Portugal—others were Arab and Berber Jews from Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia, who were already living in North Africa before the Jewish exodus from the Iberian Peninsula—and to a smaller degree members of the Ashkenazi Jewish communities, who survived WWII and the Holocaust.

====Mountain Jews====

Mountain Jews are Jews from the eastern and northern slopes of the Caucasus, mainly Azerbaijan, Chechnya and Dagestan. They are the descendants of Persian Jews from Iran.

====Bukharan Jews====

Bukharan Jews are an ethnic group from Central Asia who historically practised Judaism and spoke Bukhori, a dialect of the Tajik-Persian language.

====Kaifeng Jews====

The Kaifeng Jews are members of a small Jewish community in Kaifeng, in the Henan province of China who have assimilated into Chinese society while preserving some Jewish traditions and customs.

====Cochin Jews====

Cochin Jews, also called Malabar Jews, are the oldest group of Jews in India, with possible roots that are claimed to date back to the time of King Solomon. The Cochin Jews settled in the Kingdom of Cochin in South India, now part of the state of Kerala. As early as the 12th century, mention is made of the Black Jews in southern India. The Jewish traveler, Benjamin of Tudela, speaking of Kollam (Quilon) on the Malabar Coast, writes in his &quot;Itinerary&quot;: &quot;...throughout the island, including all the towns thereof, live several thousand Israelites. The inhabitants are all black, and the Jews also. The latter are good and benevolent. They know the law of Moses and the prophets, and to a small extent the Talmud and Halacha.&quot; These people later became known as the Malabari Jews. They built synagogues in Kerala beginning in the 12th and 13th centuries. They are known to have developed Judeo-Malayalam, a dialect of the Malayalam language.

====Paradesi Jews====

Paradesi Jews are mainly the descendants of Sephardic Jews who originally immigrated to India from Sepharad (Spain and Portugal) during the 15th and 16th centuries in order to flee forced conversion or persecution in the wake of the Alhambra Decree which expelled the Jews from Spain. They are sometimes referred to as White Jews, although that usage is generally considered pejorative or discriminatory and it is instead used to refer to relatively recent Jewish immigrants (end of the 15th century onwards), who are predominantly Sephardim.

The Paradesi Jews of Cochin are a community of Sephardic Jews whose ancestors settled among the larger Cochin Jewish community located in Kerala, a coastal southern state of India.

The Paradesi Jews of Madras traded in diamonds, precious stones and corals, they had very good relations with the rulers of Golkonda, they maintained trade connections with Europe, and their language skills were useful. Although the Sephardim spoke Ladino (i.e. Spanish or Judeo-Spanish), in India they learned to speak Tamil and Judeo-Malayalam from the Malabar Jews.

====Georgian Jews====

The Georgian Jews are considered ethnically and culturally distinct from neighboring Mountain Jews. They were also traditionally a highly separate group from the Ashkenazi Jews in Georgia.

====Krymchaks====

The Krymchaks are Jewish ethno-religious communities of Crimea derived from Turkic-speaking adherents of Orthodox Judaism.

====Anusim====

During the history of the Jewish diaspora, Jews who lived in Christian Europe were often attacked by the local Christian population, and they were often forced to convert to Christianity. Many, known as &quot;Anusim&quot; (&#x27;forced-ones&#x27;), continued practicing Judaism in secret while living outwardly as ordinary Christians. The best known Anusim communities were the Jews of Spain and the Jews of Portugal, although they existed throughout Europe. In the centuries since the rise of Islam, many Jews living in the Muslim world were forced to convert to Islam, such as the Mashhadi Jews of Persia, who continued to practice Judaism in secret and eventually moved to Israel. Many of the Anusim&#x27;s descendants left Judaism over the years. The results of a genetic study of the population of the Iberian Peninsula released in December 2008 &quot;attest to a high level of religious conversion (whether voluntary or enforced) driven by historical episodes of religious intolerance, which ultimately led to the integration of the Anusim&#x27;s descendants.

====Modern Samaritans====

The Samaritans, who comprised a comparatively large group in classical times, now number 745 people, and today they live in two communities in Israel and the West Bank, and they still regard themselves as descendants of the tribes of Ephraim (named by them as &quot;Aphrime&quot;) and Manasseh (named by them as &quot;Manatch&quot;). Samaritans adhere to a version of the Torah known as the Samaritan Pentateuch, which differs in some respects from the Masoretic text, sometimes in important ways, and less so from the Septuagint.

The Samaritans consider themselves &quot;Bnei Yisrael&quot; (&quot;Children of Israel&quot; or &quot;Israelites&quot;), but they do not regard themselves as &quot;Yehudim&quot; (Jews). They view the term &quot;Jews&quot; as a designation for followers of Judaism, which they assert is a related but an altered and amended religion which was brought back by the exiled Israelite returnees, and is therefore not the true religion of the ancient Israelites, which according to them is Samaritanism.

== Genetic studies ==

Y DNA studies tend to imply a small number of founders in an old population whose members parted and followed different migration paths. In most Jewish populations, these male line ancestors appear to have been mainly Middle Eastern. For example, Ashkenazi Jews share more common paternal lineages with other Jewish and Middle Eastern groups than with non-Jewish populations in areas where Jews lived in Eastern Europe, Germany and the French Rhine Valley. This is consistent with Jewish traditions which place most Jewish paternal origins in the region of the Middle East.
Conversely, the maternal lineages of Jewish populations, studied by looking at mitochondrial DNA, are generally more heterogeneous. Scholars such as Harry Ostrer and Raphael Falk believe this indicates that many Jewish males found new mates from European and other communities in the places where they migrated in the diaspora after fleeing ancient Israel. In contrast, Behar has found evidence that about 40% of Ashkenazi Jews originate maternally from just four female founders, who were of Middle Eastern origin. The populations of Sephardi and Mizrahi Jewish communities &quot;showed no evidence for a narrow founder effect.&quot; Subsequent studies carried out by Feder et al. confirmed the large portion of the non-local maternal origin among Ashkenazi Jews. Reflecting on their findings related to the maternal origin of Ashkenazi Jews, the authors conclude &quot;Clearly, the differences between Jews and non-Jews are far larger than those observed among the Jewish communities. Hence, differences between the Jewish communities can be overlooked when non-Jews are included in the comparisons.&quot;

Studies of autosomal DNA, which look at the entire DNA mixture, have become increasingly important as the technology develops. They show that Jewish populations have tended to form relatively closely related groups in independent communities, with most people in a community sharing significant ancestry in common. For Jewish populations of the diaspora, the genetic composition of Ashkenazi, Sephardi, and Mizrahi Jewish populations show a predominant amount of shared Middle Eastern ancestry. According to Behar, the most parsimonious explanation for this shared Middle Eastern ancestry is that it is &quot;consistent with the historical formulation of the Jewish people as descending from ancient Hebrew and Israelite residents of the Levant&quot; and &quot;the dispersion of the people of ancient Israel throughout the Old World&quot;. North African, Italian and others of Iberian origin show variable frequencies of admixture with non-Jewish historical host populations among the maternal lines. In the case of Ashkenazi and Sephardi Jews (in particular Moroccan Jews), who are closely related, the source of non-Jewish admixture is mainly southern European, while Mizrahi Jews show evidence of admixture with other Middle Eastern populations and Sub-Saharan Africans. Behar &quot;et al.&quot; have remarked on an especially close relationship of Ashkenazi Jews and modern Italians. Jews were found to be more closely related to groups in the north of the Fertile Crescent (Kurds, Turks, and Armenians) than to Arabs.

The studies also show that persons of Sephardic Bnei Anusim origin (those who are descendants of the &quot;anusim&quot; who were forced to convert to Catholicism) throughout today&#x27;s Iberia (Spain and Portugal) and Ibero-America (Hispanic America and Brazil), estimated that up to 19.8% of the modern population of Iberia and at least 10% of the modern population of Ibero-America, has Sephardic Jewish ancestry within the last few centuries. The Bene Israel and the Cochin Jews of India, Beta Israel of Ethiopia, and a portion of the Lemba people of Southern Africa, meanwhile, despite more closely resembling the local populations of their native countries, also have some more remote ancient Jewish descent.

==Zionist &quot;negation of the Diaspora&quot;==
According to Eliezer Schweid, the rejection of life in the diaspora is a central assumption in all currents of Zionism. Underlying this attitude was the feeling that the diaspora restricted the full growth of Jewish national life. For instance the poet Hayim Nahman Bialik wrote:

&lt;poem&gt;
And my heart weeps for my unhappy people ...
How burned, how blasted must our portion be,
If seed like this is withered in its soil. ...
&lt;/poem&gt;

According to Schweid, Bialik meant that the &quot;seed&quot; was the potential of the Jewish people. Preserved in the diaspora, this seed could only give rise to deformed results; however, once conditions changed the seed could still provide a plentiful harvest.

In this matter Sternhell distinguishes two schools of thought in Zionism. One was the liberal or utilitarian school of Theodor Herzl and Max Nordau. Especially after the Dreyfus Affair, they held that antisemitism would never disappear and they saw Zionism as a rational solution for Jews.

The other was the organic nationalist school. It was prevalent among the Zionist olim and they saw the movement as a project to rescue the Jewish nation rather than as a project to only rescue Jews. For them, Zionism was the &quot;Rebirth of the Nation&quot;.

In the 2008 book &quot;The Invention of the Jewish People&quot;, Shlomo Sand argued that the formation of the &quot;Jewish-Israeli collective memory&quot; had inculcated a &quot;period of silencing&quot; in Jewish history, particularly with regard to the formation of the Khazar Kingdom out of converted gentile tribes. Israel Bartal, then dean of the humanities faculty of the Hebrew University, countered &quot;that no historian of the Jewish national movement has ever really believed that the origins of the Jews are ethnically and biologically &#x27;pure.&#x27; [...] No &#x27;nationalist&#x27; Jewish historian has ever tried to conceal the well-known fact that conversions to Judaism had a major impact on Jewish history in the ancient period and in the early Middle Ages. Although the myth of an exile from the Jewish homeland (Palestine) does exist in popular Israeli culture, it is negligible in serious Jewish historical discussions.&quot;

==Mystical explanation==
Rabbi Tzvi Elimelech of Dinov (Bnei Yissaschar, Chodesh Kislev, 2:25) explains that each exile was characterized by a different negative aspect:

# The Babylonian exile was characterized by physical suffering and oppression. The Babylonians were lopsided towards the Sefirah of Gevurah, strength and bodily might.
# The Persian exile was one of emotional temptation. The Persians were hedonists who declared that the purpose of life is to pursue indulgence and lusts—&quot;Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we may die.&quot; They were lopsided towards the quality of Chesed, attraction and kindness (albeit to the self).
# Hellenistic civilization was highly cultured and sophisticated. Although the Greeks had a strong sense of aesthetics, they were highly pompous, and they viewed aesthetics as an end in itself. They were excessively attached to the quality of Tiferet, beauty. This was also related to an appreciation of the intellect&#x27;s transcendence over the body, which reveals the beauty of the spirit.
# The exile of Edom began with Rome, whose culture lacked any clearly defined philosophy. Rather, it adopted the philosophies of all the preceding cultures, causing Roman culture to be in a constant flux. Although the Roman Empire has fallen, the Jews are still in the exile of Edom, and indeed, one can find this phenomenon of ever-changing trends dominating modern western society. The Romans and the various nations who inherited their rule (e.g., the Holy Roman Empire, the Europeans, the Americans) are lopsided towards Malchut, sovereignty, the lowest Sefirah, which can be received from any of the others, and can act as a medium for them.

The Jewish fast day of Tisha B&#x27;Av commemorates the destruction of the First and Second Temples in Jerusalem and the subsequent exile of the Jews from the Land of Israel. The Jewish tradition maintains that the Roman exile would be the last, and that after the people of Israel returned to their land, they would never be exiled again. This statement is based on the verse: &quot;(You paying for) Your sin is over daughter of Zion, he will not exile you (any)more&quot; [&quot;&quot;].

==In Christian theology==

According to Aharon Oppenheimer, the concept of the exile beginning after the destruction of the Second Jewish Temple was developed by early Christians, who saw the destruction of the Temple as a punishment for Jewish deicide, and by extension as an affirmation of the Christians as God&#x27;s new chosen people, or the &quot;New Israel&quot;. In actually, in the period that followed the destruction of the Temple, Jews had many freedoms. The people of Israel had religious, economic and cultural autonomy, and the Bar Kochba revolt demonstrated the unity of Israel and their political-military power at that time. Therefore, according to Aharon Oppenheimer, the Jewish exile only started after the Bar Kochba revolt, which devastated the Jewish community of Judea. Despite popular conception, Jews have had a continuous presence in the Land of Israel, despite the exile of the majority of Judeans. The Jerusalem Talmud was signed in the fourth century, hundreds of years after the revolt. Moreover, many Jews remained in Israel even centuries later, including during the Byzantine period (many remnants of synagogues are found from this period). Jews have been a majority or a significant plurality in Jerusalem in the millennia since their exile with few exceptions (including the period following the Siege of Jerusalem (1099) by the Crusaders and the 18 years of Jordanian rule of eastern Jerusalem, in which Jerusalem&#x27;s historic Jewish quarter was expelled).

==Historical comparison of Jewish population==

a. Austria, Czech republic, Slovenia
b. Albania, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Macedonia, Syria, Turkey
c. Croatia, Hungary, Slovakia
d. Baltic states (Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania), Belarus, Moldova, Russia (including Siberia), Ukraine.
e. Caucasus (Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia), Central Asia (Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan).

==Today==

As of 2023, about 8.5 million Jews live outside Israel, which hosts the largest Jewish population in the world with 7.2 million. Israel is followed by the United States with approximately 6.3 million. Other countries with significant Jewish populations include France (440,000), Canada (398,000), the United Kingdom (312,000), Argentina (171,000), Russia (132,000), Germany (125,000), Australia (117,200), Brazil (90,000), and South Africa (50,000). These numbers reflect the &quot;core&quot; Jewish population, defined as being &quot;not inclusive of non-Jewish members of Jewish households, persons of Jewish ancestry who profess another monotheistic religion, other non-Jews of Jewish ancestry, and other non-Jews who may be interested in Jewish matters.&quot; Jewish populations also remain in Middle Eastern and North African countries outside of Israel, particularly Turkey, Iran, Morocco, Tunisia, and the Emirates. In general, these populations are shrinking due to low growth rates and high rates of emigration (particularly since the 1960s).

The Jewish Autonomous Oblast continues to be an Autonomous Oblast of Russia. The Chief Rabbi of Birobidzhan, Mordechai Scheiner, says there are 4,000 Jews in the capital city. Governor Nikolay Mikhaylovich Volkov has stated that he intends to, &quot;support every valuable initiative maintained by our local Jewish organizations.&quot; The Birobidzhan Synagogue opened in 2004 on the 70th anniversary of the region&#x27;s founding in 1934. An estimated 75,000 Jews live in Siberia.

Metropolitan areas with the largest Jewish populations are listed below though one source at jewishtemples.org, states that &quot;It is difficult to come up with exact population figures on a country by country basis, let alone city by city around the world. Figures for Russia and other CIS countries are but educated guesses.&quot; The source cited here, the 2010 World Jewish Population Survey, also notes that &quot;Unlike our estimates of Jewish populations in individual countries, the data reported here on urban Jewish populations do not fully adjust for possible double counting due to multiple residences. The differences in the United States may be quite significant, in the range of tens of thousands, involving both major and minor metropolitan areas.&quot;

# Gush Dan (Tel Aviv) – 2,980,000
# New York City – 2,008,000
# Jerusalem – 705,000
# Los Angeles – 685,000
# Haifa – 671,000
# Miami – 486,000
# Beersheba – 368,000
# San Francisco – 346,000
# Chicago – 319,600
# Paris – 284,000
# Philadelphia – 264,000
# Boston – 229,000
# Washington, D.C. – 216,000
# London – 195,000
# Toronto – 180,000
# Atlanta – 120,000
# Moscow – 95,000
# San Diego – 89,000
# Cleveland – 87,000
# Phoenix – 83,000
# Montreal – 80,000
# São Paulo – 75,000

==See also==
* Expulsions and exoduses of Jews
* Historical Jewish population comparisons
* Homeland for the Jewish people
* Jewish Agency for Israel
* Jewish ethnic divisions
* Jewish history
* Jewish population by country
* Litvaks
* World Jewish Congress
* Yerida
== Notes ==
==References==
=== Citations ===
=== Bibliography ===
* 
* 
==External links==

* Jewish Diaspora at the JewishEncyclopedia.com
* World Jewish Congress – Jewish Communities
* Research and articles about the diaspora experience and Israel-Diaspora relations on the Berman Jewish Policy Archive @ NYU Wagner
* The Diaspora and Israel – Rich Cohen</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="4" end="19" title="Jewish diaspora" label="Jewish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="24" end="34" title="Jewish diaspora" label="dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="41" end="46" title="Jewish diaspora" label="exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="48" end="54" title="Jewish diaspora" label="Galuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="81" end="91" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="95" end="99" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="145" end="159" title="Land of Israel" label="Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="239" end="251" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625264" start="345" end="361" title="Israelite diaspora" label="taken into exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q230407" start="371" end="388" title="Kingdom of Israel (Samaria)" label="Kingdom of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48685" start="444" end="460" title="Kingdom of Judah" label="Kingdom of Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="470" end="486" title="Babylonian captivity" label="taken into exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625264" start="612" end="626" title="Assyrian exile" label="Assyrian exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q210074" start="678" end="697" title="Tiglath-Pileser III" label="Tiglath-Pileser III"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="701" end="708" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q208336" start="751" end="760" title="Sargon II" label="Sargon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757438" start="842" end="849" title="Samaria (ancient city)" label="Samaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q310640" start="859" end="872" title="Shalmaneser V" label="Shalmaneser V"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="911" end="931" title="Babylonian captivity" label="Babylonian captivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q624887" start="1046" end="1067" title="Neo-Babylonian Empire" label="Neo-Babylonian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12591" start="1086" end="1103" title="Nebuchadnezzar II" label="Nebuchadnezzar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="1177" end="1190" title="Second Temple" label="Second Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911414" start="1228" end="1248" title="second Temple period" label="second Temple period"/>
<link wikidata="Q692775" start="1650" end="1669" title="Crete and Cyrenaica" label="Crete and Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="1731" end="1755" title="Judaea (Roman province)" label="Roman province of Judaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q202578" start="1829" end="1851" title="First Jewish–Roman War" label="First Jewish–Roman War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1877" end="1901" title="Siege of Jerusalem (70 CE)#Destruction" label="destruction of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="1981" end="1990" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q334502" start="2236" end="2262" title="Bar Kokhba revolt" label="Bar Kokhba led a rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="2271" end="2278" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250874" start="2333" end="2349" title="Aelia Capitolina" label="Aelia Capitolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2478" end="2489" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509271" start="2555" end="2579" title="Jewish ethnic divisions" label="distinct regional groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="2668" end="2677" title="Ashkenazi" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="2718" end="2727" title="Sephardic" label="Sephardic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="2736" end="2742" title="Iberia" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="2765" end="2777" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="2786" end="2797" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q29662" start="2946" end="2976" title="Edict of Expulsion" label="expulsion from England in 1290"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061030" start="2982" end="3010" title="Alhambra Decree" label="expulsion from Spain in 1492"/>
<link wikidata="Q276172" start="3020" end="3064" title="Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries" label="Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="3216" end="3230" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="3257" end="3266" title="Hispanics" label="Hispanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="3271" end="3276" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006758" start="3468" end="3483" title="Jewish peoplehood" label="Jewish identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614462" start="4156" end="4169" title="Steven Bowman" label="Steven Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903457" start="4614" end="4644" title="light unto the nations" label="guiding light unto the nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q192121" start="5287" end="5299" title="Teleology" label="teleological"/>
<link wikidata="Q729145" start="5339" end="5353" title="Daniel Boyarin" label="Daniel Boyarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299988" start="5444" end="5464" title="double consciousness" label="double consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="5748" end="5757" title="neologism" label="neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="5784" end="5797" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="5811" end="5821" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="6106" end="6112" title="Tanakh" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q266273" start="6128" end="6139" title="Semitic root" label="Hebrew root"/>
<link wikidata="Q4224666" start="6348" end="6361" title="Books of Kings" label="2 Kings 17:23"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="7324" end="7330" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919891" start="7506" end="7511" title="geula" label="geula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407083" start="7532" end="7547" title="Eugene Borowitz" label="Eugene Borowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="7726" end="7741" title="American Jews" label="Jewish-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="7742" end="7749" title="Zionist" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q96509" start="7759" end="7775" title="Simon Rawidowicz" label="Simon Rawidowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="7857" end="7871" title="Land of Israel" label="Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="7933" end="7941" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="7985" end="7998" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421977" start="8800" end="8817" title="Jewish messianism" label="Jewish messianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="9239" end="9251" title="Eretz Israel" label="Eretz Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44003" start="9261" end="9274" title="Theodor Herzl" label="Theodor Herzl"/>
<link wikidata="Q380425" start="9381" end="9391" title="Ahad Ha-am" label="Ahad Ha-am"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="9558" end="9567" title="ancient Assyrians" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q208336" start="9575" end="9584" title="Sargon II" label="Sargon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q310640" start="9599" end="9612" title="Shalmaneser V" label="Shalmaneser V"/>
<link wikidata="Q230407" start="9628" end="9645" title="Kingdom of Israel (Samaria)" label="Kingdom of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="9656" end="9666" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625264" start="9672" end="9680" title="Israelite diaspora" label="deported"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="9684" end="9695" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48685" start="9808" end="9824" title="Kingdom of Judah" label="Kingdom of Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q12591" start="9839" end="9856" title="Nebuchadnezzar II" label="Nebuchadnezzar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="9873" end="9893" title="Babylonian captivity" label="Babylonian captivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="9963" end="9974" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517398" start="10021" end="10030" title="History of the Jews in Iraq" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="10039" end="10053" title="land of Israel" label="land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48685" start="10082" end="10089" title="Kingdom of Judah" label="Samaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="10147" end="10162" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q191787" start="10185" end="10189" title="Ezra" label="Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q405008" start="10482" end="10496" title="Cyrus Cylinder" label="Cyrus Cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429292" start="10888" end="10904" title="Lester L. Grabbe" label="Lester L. Grabbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q592272" start="11392" end="11397" title="Yehud Medinata" label="Yehud"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527812" start="11590" end="11601" title="Achaemenid dynasty" label="Achaemenids"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="11607" end="11616" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="11622" end="11629" title="Parthia" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15955102" start="11641" end="11651" title="Sassanid dynasty" label="Sassanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527812" start="11806" end="11817" title="Achaemenid dynasty" label="Achaemenids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906600" start="11866" end="11885" title="Temple in Jerusalem" label="Temple in Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="12022" end="12027" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600128" start="12303" end="12327" title="History of the Jews in Egypt" label="Jewish diaspora in Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q662410" start="12341" end="12371" title="Twenty-sixth Dynasty of Egypt" label="last century of pharaonic rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q171191" start="12424" end="12436" title="Ashurbanipal" label="Ashurbanipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q328763" start="12460" end="12471" title="Psamtik I" label="Psammeticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="12553" end="12560" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="12566" end="12575" title="Ptolemaic Kingdom" label="Ptolemaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="12834" end="12842" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q168261" start="12849" end="12858" title="Ptolemy I Soter" label="Ptolemy I"/>
<link wikidata="Q39576" start="13141" end="13153" title="Ptolemy II Philadelphus" label="Philadelphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774212" start="13235" end="13243" title="cleruchy" label="cleruchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="13319" end="13328" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="13524" end="13530" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q44112" start="13602" end="13608" title="Cyrene, Libya" label="Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930888" start="13677" end="13693" title="Maccabean Revolt" label="Maccabean Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566991" start="13752" end="13774" title="Siege of Jerusalem (63 BC)" label="Pompey&amp;#x27;s campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q496922" start="13796" end="13805" title="Hasmonean" label="Hasmonean"/>
<link wikidata="Q51677" start="13833" end="13845" title="High Priest of Israel" label="high priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="14279" end="14285" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q315456" start="14378" end="14386" title="Aulus Gabinius" label="Gabinius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="15390" end="15409" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566991" start="16622" end="16639" title="Siege of Jerusalem (63 BC)" label="Pompey’s campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q740092" start="16988" end="17005" title="Sibylline oracles" label="Oracula Sibyllina"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="17145" end="17151" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189597" start="17153" end="17158" title="Philo" label="Philo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="17160" end="17166" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q128538" start="17168" end="17172" title="Luke the Evangelist" label="Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q40309" start="17198" end="17218" title="Acts of the Apostles" label="Acts of the Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="17227" end="17233" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="17239" end="17247" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="17301" end="17320" title="Mediterranean basin" label="Mediterranean basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q573598" start="17331" end="17359" title="History of the Jews in India" label="History of the Jews in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137454" start="17364" end="17392" title="History of the Jews in China" label="History of the Jews in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q298636" start="17448" end="17457" title="Agrippa I" label="Agrippa I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="17474" end="17482" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="17650" end="17655" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44112" start="17660" end="17666" title="Cyrene, Libya" label="Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="17690" end="17700" title="Epigraphy" label="epigraphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="17983" end="17992" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="18000" end="18005" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="18023" end="18030" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="18036" end="18044" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="18199" end="18204" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="18251" end="18261" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q18192091" start="18610" end="18616" title="Kitos War" label="115 CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="18652" end="18661" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="18663" end="18669" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="18675" end="18686" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="18750" end="18765" title="Caesar Augustus" label="Caesar Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q244345" start="18912" end="18921" title="Herod Archelaus" label="Archelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q731997" start="19234" end="19242" title="Promagistrate" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="19397" end="19407" title="Anatolia" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q380295" start="19530" end="19542" title="Bar Hebraeus" label="Bar Hebraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q953507" start="19595" end="19615" title="Salo Wittmayer Baron" label="Salo Wittmayer Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687149" start="19787" end="19800" title="Louis Feldman" label="Louis Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675944" start="19986" end="20010" title="Chronicon (Eusebius)" label="Eusebius&amp;#x27; Chronicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q189597" start="20117" end="20122" title="Philo" label="Philo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498599" start="20441" end="20451" title="temple tax" label="temple tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q18192091" start="20517" end="20535" title="Kitos War" label="diaspora uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566991" start="20859" end="20879" title="Siege of Jerusalem (63 BC)" label="capture of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="20883" end="20889" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="21129" end="21134" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q51672" start="21195" end="21210" title="Herod the Great" label="Herod the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q11160826" start="21211" end="21229" title="Siege of Jerusalem (37 BC)" label="captured Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q202578" start="21488" end="21510" title="First Jewish-Roman War" label="First Jewish-Roman War"/>
<link wikidata="Q844886" start="21655" end="21673" title="Siege of Jerusalem (70 CE)" label="Siege of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="21880" end="21888" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="22300" end="22308" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="22664" end="22672" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22702" end="22720" title="Anti-Judaism#Pre-Christian Roman Empire" label="Roman Anti-Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335111" start="22780" end="22803" title="Hayim Hillel Ben-Sasson" label="Hayim Hillel Ben-Sasson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22826" end="22859" title="Caligula#Financial crisis and famine" label="&amp;quot;Crisis under Caligula&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q18192091" start="22947" end="22956" title="Kitos War" label="Kitos War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="23265" end="23274" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="23315" end="23324" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284490" start="23415" end="23428" title="Marcius Turbo" label="Marcius Turbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250874" start="23656" end="23671" title="Ælia Capitolina" label="Ælia Capitolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q334502" start="24544" end="24561" title="Bar Kokhba revolt" label="Bar Kokhba revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="24599" end="24610" title="Dio Cassius" label="Dio Cassius"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="24920" end="24929" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q211349" start="25144" end="25159" title="Tisha B&amp;#x27;Av" label="Tisha B&amp;#x27;Av"/>
<link wikidata="Q167677" start="25229" end="25234" title="Yavne" label="Yavne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901206" start="25259" end="25263" title="Usha (city)" label="Usha"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="25298" end="25305" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="26136" end="26146" title="Samaritans" label="Samaritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q329838" start="26244" end="26271" title="Crisis of the Third Century" label="Crisis of the Third Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="26499" end="26514" title="Sassanid Empire" label="Sassanid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241814" start="27890" end="27904" title="Martin Goodman (historian)" label="Martin Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q334502" start="28240" end="28257" title="Bar Kokhba revolt" label="Bar Kokhba revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6086798" start="28369" end="28382" title="Israel Bartal" label="Israel Bartal"/>
<link wikidata="Q718329" start="28397" end="28408" title="Shlomo Sand" label="Shlomo Sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q86814" start="29215" end="29229" title="Erich S. Gruen" label="Erich S. Gruen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911414" start="29419" end="29439" title="Second Temple period" label="Second Temple period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421" start="30193" end="30198" title="Titus" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642208" start="30615" end="30627" title="Israel Yuval" label="Israel Yuval"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679108" start="30912" end="30926" title="Hasia R. Diner" label="Hasia R. Diner"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="31501" end="31517" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="31655" end="31666" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="31680" end="31692" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q882925" start="31783" end="31805" title="Jewish revolt against Constantius Gallus" label="minor Jewish rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="31909" end="31929" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725954" start="32262" end="32293" title="Jewish revolt against Heraclius" label="Jewish revolt against Heraclius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326099" start="32329" end="32351" title="Byzantine–Sasanian War of 602–628" label="Byzantine–Sasanian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="32417" end="32431" title="Land of Israel" label="Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="32501" end="32510" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q41852" start="32638" end="32647" title="Heraclius" label="Heraclius"/>
<link wikidata="Q248984" start="32983" end="33012" title="Muslim conquest of the Levant" label="Muslim conquest of the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904684" start="33263" end="33272" title="Moshe Gil" label="Moshe Gil"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="33319" end="33328" title="Samaritans" label="Samaritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8467" start="33460" end="33464" title="Umar" label="Umar"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="34095" end="34108" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q456993" start="34303" end="34321" title="Siege of Jerusalem (1099)" label="Siege of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="34581" end="34587" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="34668" end="34683" title="Ayyubid dynasty" label="Ayyubid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q233568" start="34741" end="34757" title="Battle of Hattin" label="Battle of Hattin"/>
<link wikidata="Q282428" start="34856" end="34863" title="Mamluk Sultanate (Cairo)" label="Mamluks"/>
<link wikidata="Q325985" start="34894" end="34906" title="Fall of Acre" label="Fall of Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="35616" end="35630" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="35956" end="35967" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509271" start="36048" end="36072" title="Jewish ethnic divisions" label="distinct regional groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="36162" end="36171" title="Ashkenazi" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="36212" end="36221" title="Sephardic" label="Sephardic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="36230" end="36236" title="Iberia" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="36259" end="36271" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="36280" end="36291" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q29662" start="36440" end="36470" title="Edict of Expulsion" label="expulsion from England in 1290"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061030" start="36476" end="36504" title="Alhambra Decree" label="expulsion from Spain in 1492"/>
<link wikidata="Q276172" start="36514" end="36556" title="Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries" label="expulsion from Arab countries in 1948–1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="36686" end="36700" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="36727" end="36736" title="Hispanics" label="Hispanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="36741" end="36746" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006758" start="36938" end="36953" title="Jewish peoplehood" label="Jewish identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="37076" end="37106" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q592272" start="37315" end="37345" title="Yehud Medinata" label="province of the Persian empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="37388" end="37406" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q496922" start="37626" end="37635" title="Hasmonean" label="Hasmonean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37761" end="37790" title="Forced conversion#Judaism" label="forcibly converted to Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q220594" start="37856" end="37864" title="Nabatean" label="Nabatean"/>
<link wikidata="Q60745985" start="37867" end="37876" title="Zabadeans" label="Zabadeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514777" start="37882" end="37890" title="Itureans" label="Itureans"/>
<link wikidata="Q193776" start="37918" end="37928" title="Philistine" label="Philistine"/>
<link wikidata="Q326304" start="37941" end="37949" title="Moabites" label="Moabites"/>
<link wikidata="Q473353" start="37951" end="37956" title="Ammon" label="Ammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208475" start="37965" end="37973" title="Edomites" label="Edomites"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="38018" end="38028" title="Samaritans" label="Samaritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q208475" start="38216" end="38224" title="Edomites" label="Edomites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205368" start="38345" end="38362" title="Jewish–Roman Wars" label="Jewish–Roman Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="38407" end="38421" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="38539" end="38550" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915732" start="38596" end="38611" title="Yiddishkeit" label="Yiddish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070334" start="38620" end="38642" title="Nusach Ashkenaz" label="Ashkenazi prayer style"/>
<link wikidata="Q62646" start="38700" end="38708" title="Germania" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="38720" end="38729" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="39082" end="39086" title="High Middle Ages" label="High"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="39091" end="39107" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="39430" end="39443" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q301585" start="39476" end="39496" title="Persecution by Muslims" label="Islamic persecutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="39588" end="39607" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Spanish Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="40172" end="40185" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="40519" end="40531" title="Rhine" label="Rhine Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q202812" start="41449" end="41460" title="Beta Israel" label="Beta Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q573598" start="41466" end="41477" title="Indian Jews" label="Indian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105126" start="41495" end="41502" title="Cochin Jews" label="Cochini"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="46110" end="46123" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="46273" end="46288" title="Catholic Monarchs" label="Reyes Católicos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061030" start="46533" end="46548" title="Alhambra decree" label="Alhambra decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="46689" end="46703" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="46734" end="46747" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="46880" end="46888" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="46890" end="46897" title="Thessaloniki" label="Selânik"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="46902" end="46907" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="47075" end="47080" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q312214" start="47152" end="47159" title="Marrano" label="Marrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q76993" start="47370" end="47387" title="Glückel of Hameln" label="Glückel of Hameln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="47620" end="47628" title="Converso" label="Converso"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="47951" end="47963" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517398" start="48091" end="48107" title="Babylonian Jewry" label="Babylonian Jewry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517398" start="48354" end="48364" title="Iraqi Jews" label="Iraqi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840268" start="48366" end="48377" title="Syrian Jews" label="Syrian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q723348" start="48379" end="48392" title="Lebanese Jews" label="Lebanese Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309935" start="48394" end="48406" title="Persian Jews" label="Persian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710901" start="48408" end="48419" title="History of the Jews in Afghanistan" label="Afghan Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q44949" start="48421" end="48435" title="Bukharian Jews" label="Bukharian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750102" start="48437" end="48449" title="Kurdish Jews" label="Kurdish Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q628490" start="48451" end="48464" title="Mountain Jews" label="Mountain Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075566" start="48466" end="48479" title="Georgian Jews" label="Georgian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q657993" start="48686" end="48693" title="Temanim" label="Temanim"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="48722" end="48727" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q878766" start="49379" end="49388" title="Dhu Nuwas" label="Dhu Nuwas"/>
<link wikidata="Q208398" start="49548" end="49554" title="Karaite Judaism" label="Karaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q720982" start="49608" end="49614" title="Crimean Karaites" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="49626" end="49637" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="49705" end="49718" title="Rabbinic Jews" label="Rabbinic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q208398" start="49919" end="49934" title="Karaite Judaism" label="Karaite Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="49950" end="49956" title="Tanakh" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="50246" end="50264" title="Rabbinical Judaism" label="Rabbinical Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144567" start="50276" end="50284" title="Oral Law" label="Oral Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="50315" end="50322" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="50331" end="50337" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q26403" start="50916" end="50925" title="Pharisees" label="Pharisees"/>
<link wikidata="Q182682" start="51002" end="51011" title="Sadducees" label="Sadducees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894158" start="51154" end="51178" title="resurrection of the dead" label="resurrection of the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="51519" end="51525" title="aliyah" label="aliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752440" start="51618" end="51630" title="Israeli Jews" label="Israeli Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q208398" start="51935" end="51950" title="Karaite Judaism" label="Karaite Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202812" start="52095" end="52106" title="Beta Israel" label="Beta Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="52274" end="52287" title="American Jews" label="American Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="52301" end="52317" title="Ashkenazi Jewish" label="Ashkenazi Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="52757" end="52771" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060634" start="53014" end="53051" title="Central Conference of American Rabbis" label="Central Conference of American Rabbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787810" start="53140" end="53159" title="Matrilineality in Judaism" label="matrilineal descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="53245" end="53261" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152757" start="53752" end="53763" title="Berber Jews" label="Berber Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="53986" end="53995" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="54039" end="54042" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="54088" end="54096" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="54105" end="54115" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="54117" end="54125" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="54130" end="54138" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309935" start="54168" end="54180" title="Persian Jews" label="Persian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="54186" end="54190" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137454" start="54426" end="54432" title="History of the Jews in China" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q208471" start="54446" end="54453" title="Kaifeng" label="Kaifeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="54462" end="54467" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="54480" end="54485" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q573598" start="54666" end="54679" title="Indian Jews" label="Jews in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q37085" start="54746" end="54758" title="King Solomon" label="King Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q150056" start="54791" end="54808" title="Kingdom of Cochin" label="Kingdom of Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="54812" end="54823" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="54850" end="54856" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q318820" start="54962" end="54980" title="Benjamin of Tudela" label="Benjamin of Tudela"/>
<link wikidata="Q321475" start="54994" end="55000" title="Kollam" label="Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q837443" start="55268" end="55280" title="law of Moses" label="law of Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="55325" end="55331" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="55336" end="55343" title="Halacha" label="Halacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="55430" end="55436" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q56600" start="55512" end="55527" title="Judeo-Malayalam" label="Judeo-Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="55546" end="55555" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="55634" end="55643" title="Sephardic" label="Sephardic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061030" start="55823" end="55838" title="Alhambra Decree" label="Alhambra Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105126" start="56237" end="56250" title="Cochin Jews" label="Cochin Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="56272" end="56278" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="56337" end="56343" title="Madras" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q36196" start="56565" end="56571" title="Judaeo-Spanish" label="Ladino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="56636" end="56641" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q56600" start="56646" end="56661" title="Judeo-Malayalam" label="Judeo-Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378806" start="57211" end="57244" title="forced to convert to Christianity" label="forced to convert to Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q178111" start="57436" end="57449" title="Jews of Spain" label="Jews of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502485" start="57458" end="57474" title="Jews of Portugal" label="Jews of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="57552" end="57557" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="57583" end="57595" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378806" start="57601" end="57627" title="forced to convert to Islam" label="forced to convert to Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q121157" start="57641" end="57648" title="Mashhad" label="Mashhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="57658" end="57664" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="57725" end="57740" title="aliyah" label="moved to Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="57865" end="57882" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="58295" end="58301" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="58310" end="58319" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="58524" end="58529" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q149441" start="58543" end="58563" title="Samaritan Pentateuch" label="Samaritan Pentateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q380669" start="58605" end="58619" title="Masoretic text" label="Masoretic text"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="58671" end="58681" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981696" start="59166" end="59178" title="Samaritanism" label="Samaritanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202771" start="59204" end="59209" title="Y chromosome" label="Y DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="59422" end="59433" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="59608" end="59622" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="59624" end="59631" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="59647" end="59659" title="Rhine" label="Rhine Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="59857" end="59874" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15463142" start="59927" end="59939" title="Harry Ostrer" label="Harry Ostrer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59944" end="59956" title="Raphael Falk (academic)" label="Raphael Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q186380" start="60898" end="60911" title="Autosome" label="autosomal DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="61269" end="61278" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="61280" end="61288" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="61294" end="61301" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q570868" start="61587" end="61593" title="Hebrews" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="61598" end="61607" title="Israelites" label="Israelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="61625" end="61631" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="61710" end="61719" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="61727" end="61739" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="61742" end="61749" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="61764" end="61771" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152214" start="61946" end="61959" title="Moroccan Jews" label="Moroccan Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="62032" end="62047" title="southern Europe" label="southern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="62139" end="62157" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="62265" end="62273" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q20988743" start="62449" end="62470" title="Sephardic Bnei Anusim" label="Sephardic Bnei Anusim"/>
<link wikidata="Q612845" start="62518" end="62524" title="anusim" label="anusim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378806" start="62540" end="62557" title="Forced conversion" label="forced to convert"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="62561" end="62572" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="62598" end="62604" title="Iberia" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="62606" end="62611" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="62616" end="62624" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q377916" start="62630" end="62643" title="Ibero-America" label="Ibero-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q653884" start="62645" end="62661" title="Hispanic America" label="Hispanic America"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="62666" end="62672" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="62801" end="62814" title="Sephardic Jew" label="Sephardic Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q817287" start="62862" end="62873" title="Bene Israel" label="Bene Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105126" start="62882" end="62893" title="Cochin Jews" label="Cochin Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="62897" end="62902" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q202812" start="62904" end="62915" title="Beta Israel" label="Beta Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="62919" end="62927" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167577" start="62950" end="62962" title="Lemba people" label="Lemba people"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="62966" end="62981" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360773" start="63189" end="63204" title="Eliezer Schweid" label="Eliezer Schweid"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="63287" end="63294" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q359705" start="63429" end="63448" title="Hayim Nahman Bialik" label="Hayim Nahman Bialik"/>
<link wikidata="Q44003" start="64005" end="64018" title="Theodor Herzl" label="Theodor Herzl"/>
<link wikidata="Q472270" start="64023" end="64033" title="Max Nordau" label="Max Nordau"/>
<link wikidata="Q173457" start="64056" end="64070" title="Dreyfus Affair" label="Dreyfus Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="64087" end="64099" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="64250" end="64262" title="Aliyah" label="Zionist olim"/>
<link wikidata="Q963956" start="64461" end="64495" title="The Invention of the Jewish People" label="The Invention of the Jewish People"/>
<link wikidata="Q718329" start="64503" end="64514" title="Shlomo Sand" label="Shlomo Sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q254217" start="64569" end="64586" title="collective memory" label="collective memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q961603" start="64645" end="64659" title="Jewish history" label="Jewish history"/>
<link wikidata="Q6086798" start="64758" end="64771" title="Israel Bartal" label="Israel Bartal"/>
<link wikidata="Q174158" start="64816" end="64833" title="Hebrew University" label="Hebrew University"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="65567" end="65583" title="Babylonian exile" label="Babylonian exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q660267" start="65682" end="65689" title="Sefirah" label="Sefirah"/>
<link wikidata="Q513168" start="65693" end="65700" title="Gevurah" label="Gevurah"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="65735" end="65741" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305411" start="65983" end="65989" title="Chesed" label="Chesed"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="66039" end="66063" title="Hellenistic civilization" label="Hellenistic civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305433" start="66280" end="66287" title="Tiferet" label="Tiferet"/>
<link wikidata="Q208475" start="66446" end="66450" title="Edom" label="Edom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="66462" end="66466" title="Ancient Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="66798" end="66813" title="Western culture" label="western society"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="66886" end="66903" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="66909" end="66915" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="66924" end="66933" title="United States" label="Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231686" start="66956" end="66963" title="Malchut" label="Malchut"/>
<link wikidata="Q211349" start="67102" end="67117" title="Tisha B&amp;#x27;Av" label="Tisha B&amp;#x27;Av"/>
<link wikidata="Q223644" start="67154" end="67159" title="First Temple" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="67164" end="67170" title="Second Temple" label="Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="67182" end="67191" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q188863" start="67211" end="67216" title="exile" label="exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="67238" end="67252" title="Land of Israel" label="Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q205318" start="67509" end="67513" title="Zion" label="Zion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67610" end="67628" title="Aharon Oppenheimer" label="Aharon Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855439" start="67815" end="67822" title="deicide" label="deicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q792023" start="67895" end="67908" title="Supersessionism" label="chosen people"/>
<link wikidata="Q334502" start="68113" end="68130" title="Bar Kochba revolt" label="Bar Kochba revolt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68237" end="68255" title="Aharon Oppenheimer" label="Aharon Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q334502" start="68297" end="68314" title="Bar Kochba revolt" label="Bar Kochba revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="68801" end="68810" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q456993" start="68902" end="68927" title="Siege of Jerusalem (1099)" label="Siege of Jerusalem (1099)"/>
<link wikidata="Q527934" start="69119" end="69126" title="History of the Jews in Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q118960" start="69128" end="69142" title="History of the Jews in the Czech Republic" label="Czech republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134900" start="69144" end="69152" title="History of the Jews in Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915020" start="69156" end="69163" title="Judaism in Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517398" start="69165" end="69169" title="History of the Jews in Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869682" start="69171" end="69177" title="History of the Jews in Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q723348" start="69179" end="69186" title="History of the Jews in Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409789" start="69188" end="69197" title="History of the Jews in the Republic of Macedonia" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120206" start="69199" end="69204" title="History of the Jews in Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q560816" start="69206" end="69212" title="History of the Jews in Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509326" start="69216" end="69223" title="History of the Jews in Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q469544" start="69225" end="69232" title="History of the Jews in Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q480496" start="69234" end="69242" title="History of the Jews in Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="69246" end="69259" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516798" start="69261" end="69268" title="History of the Jews in Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516807" start="69270" end="69276" title="History of the Jews in Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869693" start="69278" end="69287" title="History of the Jews in Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1843161" start="69290" end="69297" title="History of the Jews in Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q549381" start="69299" end="69306" title="History of the Jews in Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031644" start="69308" end="69314" title="History of the Jews in Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="69326" end="69333" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778017" start="69336" end="69343" title="History of the Jews in Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="69348" end="69356" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667103" start="69358" end="69365" title="Jews in Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505951" start="69367" end="69377" title="Azerbaijani Jews" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075566" start="69379" end="69386" title="History of the Jews in Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44949" start="69389" end="69401" title="Bukharan Jews" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067366" start="69403" end="69413" title="Jews in Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="69415" end="69425" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908458" start="69427" end="69437" title="History of the Jews in Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="69439" end="69451" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163394" start="69453" end="69463" title="Uzbek Jews" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="69526" end="69532" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="69633" end="69646" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="69739" end="69745" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="69757" end="69763" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="69779" end="69793" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="69805" end="69814" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="69826" end="69832" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="69844" end="69851" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="69863" end="69872" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="69884" end="69890" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="69905" end="69917" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="70351" end="70357" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="70359" end="70363" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="70365" end="70372" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="70374" end="70381" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="70391" end="70399" title="United Arab Emirates" label="Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730" start="70535" end="70559" title="Jewish Autonomous Oblast" label="Jewish Autonomous Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q43263" start="70579" end="70606" title="Autonomous oblasts of Russia" label="Autonomous Oblast of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501412" start="70612" end="70623" title="Chief Rabbi" label="Chief Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769" start="70627" end="70638" title="Birobidzhan" label="Birobidzhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909673" start="70640" end="70658" title="Mordechai Scheiner" label="Mordechai Scheiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="70707" end="70715" title="Governor" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4123338" start="70716" end="70743" title="Nikolay Mikhaylovich Volkov" label="Nikolay Mikhaylovich Volkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916918" start="70871" end="70892" title="Birobidzhan Synagogue" label="Birobidzhan Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="71004" end="71011" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="71014" end="71032" title="Metropolitan areas" label="Metropolitan areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q319233" start="71788" end="71807" title="Gush Dan" label="Gush Dan (Tel Aviv)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="71822" end="71835" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="71850" end="71859" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="71872" end="71883" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="71896" end="71901" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="71914" end="71919" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q41843" start="71932" end="71941" title="Beersheba" label="Beersheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="71954" end="71967" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="71980" end="71987" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="72000" end="72005" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="72018" end="72030" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="72043" end="72049" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="72062" end="72078" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="72091" end="72097" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="72110" end="72117" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="72130" end="72137" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="72150" end="72156" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="72168" end="72177" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="72189" end="72198" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="72210" end="72217" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="72229" end="72237" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="72249" end="72258" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q878794" start="72284" end="72315" title="Expulsions and exoduses of Jews" label="Expulsions and exoduses of Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892273" start="72318" end="72358" title="Historical Jewish population comparisons" label="Historical Jewish population comparisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220693" start="72361" end="72391" title="Homeland for the Jewish people" label="Homeland for the Jewish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q41189" start="72394" end="72418" title="Jewish Agency for Israel" label="Jewish Agency for Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509271" start="72421" end="72444" title="Jewish ethnic divisions" label="Jewish ethnic divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q961603" start="72447" end="72461" title="Jewish history" label="Jewish history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916388" start="72464" end="72492" title="Jewish population by country" label="Jewish population by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421205" start="72495" end="72502" title="Litvaks" label="Litvaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q541010" start="72505" end="72526" title="World Jewish Congress" label="World Jewish Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042232" start="72529" end="72535" title="Yerida" label="Yerida"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405455" wikidata="Q404215" url="?curid=405455" title="Chronicles">
<text>Chronicles may refer to:

* Books of Chronicles in the Bible
* Chronicle, chronological histories
* &quot;The Chronicles of Narnia&quot;, a novel series by C. S. Lewis
* &quot;The Chronicles of Prydain&quot;, a novel series by Lloyd Alexander.
* &quot;Holinshed&#x27;s Chronicles&quot;, the collected works of Raphael Holinshed
* &quot;The Idhun Chronicles&quot;, a Netflix anime-style series based on the &quot;Idhún&#x27;s Memories&quot; book trilogy by Laura Gallego
* &quot;Book of Chronicles&quot;, an alternate name for the &quot;Nuremberg Chronicle&quot; of 1493
* &quot;&quot;, Bob Dylan&#x27;s autobiography
* &quot;Chronicles&quot; (magazine), a conservative magazine from the Charlemagne Institute
* &quot;Chronicles&quot; (Magic: The Gathering), an expansion set of the &quot;Magic: The Gathering&quot; trading card game
* Froissart&#x27;s &quot;Chronicles&quot;, a prose history of the Hundred Years&#x27; War written in the 14th century by Jean Froissart
* &quot;Samurai Rabbit: The Usagi Chronicles&quot;, an upcoming Netflix CGI-animated series loosely based on the &quot;Usagi Yojimbo&quot; comics by Stan Sakai

== Albums ==
*&quot;Chronicles&quot; (Audiomachine album), 2012
*&quot;Chronicles&quot; (David Arkenstone album), 1993
*&quot;Chronicles&quot; (Free album), 2006
*&quot;Chronicles&quot; (Jon and Vangelis album), 1994
*&quot;Chronicles&quot; (Rush album), 1990
** &quot;Chronicles&quot; (video), a compilation of music videos by Rush
*&quot;Chronicles&quot; (Steve Winwood album), 1987
*&quot;Chronicles&quot; (The Velvet Underground album), 1991
* &quot;The Chronicles&quot; (E.S.G. album), 2008

==Films==

* The English name of the 2004 Ecuadorian thriller film, &quot;Crónicas&quot;

==See also==
* Chronicle (disambiguation)
* Crônica, a Portuguese-language genre of short-form writing</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q404215" start="0" end="10" title="Chronicles" label="Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q161953" start="28" end="47" title="Books of Chronicles" label="Books of Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q185363" start="63" end="72" title="Chronicle" label="Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q483412" start="106" end="130" title="The Chronicles of Narnia" label="The Chronicles of Narnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="156" end="167" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211900" start="176" end="201" title="The Chronicles of Prydain" label="The Chronicles of Prydain"/>
<link wikidata="Q366643" start="227" end="242" title="Lloyd Alexander" label="Lloyd Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q690389" start="252" end="279" title="Holinshed&amp;#x27;s Chronicles" label="Holinshed&amp;#x27;s Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q98381294" start="336" end="356" title="The Idhun Chronicles" label="The Idhun Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q907934" start="536" end="555" title="Nuremberg Chronicle" label="Nuremberg Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q122699328" start="619" end="652" title="Chronicles (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Chronicles&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="711" end="756" title="Chronicles (Magic: The Gathering)" label="&amp;quot;Chronicles&amp;quot; (Magic: The Gathering)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12826" start="835" end="874" title="Froissart&amp;#x27;s Chronicles" label="Froissart&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;Chronicles&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="" start="977" end="1013" title="Samurai Rabbit: The Usagi Chronicles" label="Samurai Rabbit: The Usagi Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q25411892" start="1144" end="1187" title="Chronicles (Audiomachine album)" label="&amp;quot;Chronicles&amp;quot; (Audiomachine album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114045" start="1195" end="1242" title="Chronicles (David Arkenstone album)" label="&amp;quot;Chronicles&amp;quot; (David Arkenstone album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114044" start="1250" end="1285" title="Chronicles (Free album)" label="&amp;quot;Chronicles&amp;quot; (Free album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718447" start="1293" end="1340" title="Chronicles (Jon and Vangelis album)" label="&amp;quot;Chronicles&amp;quot; (Jon and Vangelis album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768667" start="1348" end="1383" title="Chronicles (Rush album)" label="&amp;quot;Chronicles&amp;quot; (Rush album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768667" start="1393" end="1423" title="Chronicles (video)" label="&amp;quot;Chronicles&amp;quot; (video)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782574" start="1464" end="1508" title="Chronicles (Steve Winwood album)" label="&amp;quot;Chronicles&amp;quot; (Steve Winwood album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496820" start="1516" end="1569" title="Chronicles (The Velvet Underground album)" label="&amp;quot;Chronicles&amp;quot; (The Velvet Underground album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722805" start="1578" end="1619" title="The Chronicles (E.S.G. album)" label="&amp;quot;The Chronicles&amp;quot; (E.S.G. album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886375" start="1701" end="1709" title="Crónicas" label="Crónicas"/>
<link wikidata="Q355061" start="1732" end="1758" title="Chronicle (disambiguation)" label="Chronicle (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17628188" start="1761" end="1768" title="Crônica" label="Crônica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405467" wikidata="Q2128336" url="?curid=405467" title="Emblem book">
<text>An emblem book is a book collecting emblems (allegorical illustrations) with accompanying explanatory text, typically morals or poems. This category of books was popular in Europe during the 16th and 17th centuries.

Emblem books are collections of sets of three elements: an icon or image, a motto, and text explaining the connection between the image and motto. The text ranged in length from a few lines of verse to pages of prose. Emblem books descended from medieval bestiaries that explained the importance of animals, proverbs, and fables. In fact, writers often drew inspiration from Greek and Roman sources such as Aesop&#x27;s Fables and Plutarch&#x27;s Lives.

== Definition ==
Scholars differ on the key question of whether the actual emblems in question are the visual images, the accompanying texts, or the combination of the two. This is understandable, given that first emblem book, the &quot;Emblemata&quot; of Andrea Alciato, was first issued in an unauthorized edition in which the woodcuts were chosen by the printer without any input from the author, who had circulated the texts in unillustrated manuscript form. It contained around a hundred short verses in Latin. One image it depicted was the lute, which symbolized the need for harmony instead of warfare in the city-states of Italy.

Some early emblem books were unillustrated, particularly those issued by the French printer Denis de Harsy. With time, however, the reading public came to expect emblem books to contain picture-text combinations. Each combination consisted of a woodcut or engraving accompanied by one or more short texts, intended to inspire their readers to reflect on a general moral lesson derived from the reading of both picture and text together. The picture was subject to numerous interpretations: only by reading the text could a reader be certain which meaning was intended by the author. Thus the books are closely related to the personal symbolic picture-text combinations called personal devices, known in Italy as &#x27; and in France as &#x27;. Many of the symbolic images present in emblem books were used in other contexts, on clothes, furniture, street signs, and the façades of buildings. For instance, a sword and scales symbolized death.

== Miscellany == 
Emblem books, both secular and religious, attained enormous popularity throughout continental Europe, though in Britain they did not capture the imagination of readers to quite the same extent. The books were especially numerous in the Netherlands, Belgium, Germany, and France. Emblem books first became popular in the sixteenth century with Andrea Alciato&#x27;s &quot;Emblemata&quot; and remained popular until the eighteenth century.

Many emblematic works borrowed plates or texts (or both) from earlier exemplars, as was the case with Geoffrey Whitney&#x27;s &quot;Choice of Emblemes&quot;, a compilation which chiefly used the resources of the Plantin Press in Leyden.

Early European studies of Egyptian hieroglyphs, like that of Athanasius Kircher, assumed that the hieroglyphs were emblems, and imaginatively interpreted them accordingly.

A similar collection of emblems, but not in book form, is Lady Drury&#x27;s Closet.

== Timeline ==


== Authors and artists famous for emblem books ==
* Andrea Alciato (1492–1550)
* Guillaume de La Perrière (1499/1503 – 1565)
* Georgette de Montenay (1540–1581)
* Otto van Veen ( – 1629)
* Jacob Cats (1577–1660)
* Albert Flamen ( – after 1669)

== Further reading ==
* Dunn, R.(2015). Breaking a tradition: Hester Pulter and the English emblem book. &quot;The Seventeenth Century,&quot; 30:1, 55–73.
* Saunders, A. (2008). French emblematic studies. &quot;French Studies: A Quarterly Review. 62&quot;(4), 455–463. Oxford University Press.
* Stronks, E.(2009). Dutch religious love emblems: Reflections of faith and toleration in the later 17th century. &quot;Literature &amp; Theology,&quot; 23(2), 142–164.
* Peter Maurice Daly, Leslie T. Duer, Alan R.(1995) Young, Anthony RaspaThe English Emblem Tradition: Emblematic flag devices of the English civil wars, 1642–1660.University of Toronto Press
* Peter Maurice Daly(1998). Literature in the Light of the Emblem: Structural Parallels Between the Emblem and Literature in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries .University of Toronto Press
* The English Emblem Tradition. Volumes 1-5 .University of Toronto Press
* Peter Maurice Daly, G. Richard Dimler(1997–2006). Corpus Librorum Emblematum(CLE):Primary literature - The Jesuit Series. Parts 1 - 5.University of Toronto Press

==References==

*Arthur Henkel &amp; Albrecht Schöne, &quot;Emblemata, Handbuch zur Sinnbildkunst des XVI. und XVII. Jahrhunderts&quot;, Verlag J.B. Metzler, Stuttgart - Weimar 1996, . Massive catalog reproducing emblems with texts from all known 16th and 17th century emblem books.
*Daniel Russell, &quot;The Emblem and Device in France&quot;, French Forum, Lexington, KY, 1985.

==External links==

*the OpenEmblem Project - housed at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
*Mnemosyne Emblem Project - a dozen digitized emblem books
*Cumulative catalogue by IDC
*Society for Emblem Studies
*The Symbolic Literature of the Renaissance

=== Regional ===
*The English Emblem Book Project 
*Emblem Project Utrecht - &quot;27 Dutch love emblem books, religious as well as profane&quot; 
*Glasgow University Emblem Website including French and Italian emblem books
*Literatura Emblemática Hispánica</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2128336" start="3" end="14" title="Emblem book" label="emblem book"/>
<link wikidata="Q571" start="20" end="24" title="book" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q112110" start="36" end="42" title="emblem" label="emblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808194" start="191" end="195" title="16th century in literature" label="16th"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072076" start="200" end="214" title="17th century in literature" label="17th centuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q865902" start="624" end="643" title="Aesop&amp;#x27;s Fables" label="Aesop&amp;#x27;s Fables"/>
<link wikidata="Q842337" start="648" end="669" title="Plutarch&amp;#x27;s Lives" label="Plutarch&amp;#x27;s Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q112110" start="747" end="753" title="emblem" label="emblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342127" start="909" end="918" title="Emblemata" label="Emblemata"/>
<link wikidata="Q464471" start="928" end="942" title="Andrea Alciato" label="Andrea Alciato"/>
<link wikidata="Q173242" start="1001" end="1008" title="woodcut" label="woodcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q173242" start="1556" end="1563" title="woodcut" label="woodcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q139106" start="1567" end="1576" title="engraving" label="engraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="1675" end="1680" title="morality" label="moral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429148" start="1987" end="2002" title="personal device" label="personal device"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303501" start="2292" end="2299" title="secular" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="2304" end="2313" title="religious" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534971" start="2814" end="2830" title="Geoffrey Whitney" label="Geoffrey Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254948" start="2924" end="2937" title="Plantin Press" label="Plantin Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q132659" start="2976" end="2996" title="Egyptian hieroglyphs" label="Egyptian hieroglyphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q76738" start="3011" end="3029" title="Athanasius Kircher" label="Athanasius Kircher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470092" start="3181" end="3205" title="Lady Drury&amp;#x27;s Closet" label="Lady Drury&amp;#x27;s Closet"/>
<link wikidata="Q464471" start="3277" end="3291" title="Andrea Alciato" label="Andrea Alciato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100339" start="3306" end="3330" title="Guillaume de La Perrière" label="Guillaume de La Perrière"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103751" start="3352" end="3373" title="Georgette de Montenay" label="Georgette de Montenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q785355" start="3388" end="3401" title="Otto van Veen" label="Otto van Veen"/>
<link wikidata="Q46151" start="3414" end="3424" title="Jacob Cats" label="Jacob Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831183" start="3439" end="3452" title="Albert Flamen" label="Albert Flamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639967" start="4593" end="4608" title="Albrecht Schöne" label="Albrecht Schöne"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405478" wikidata="Q6286581" url="?curid=405478" title="Joseph Ritson">
<text>Joseph Ritson (2 October 1752 – 23 September 1803) was an English antiquary known for editing the first scholarly collection of Robin Hood ballads (1795). After a visit to France in 1791, he became a staunch supporter of the ideals of the French Revolution. He was also an influential vegetarianism activist. Ritson is also known for his collections of English nursery rhymes, such as &quot;Roses Are Red&quot; and &quot;Little Bo-Peep&quot;, in &quot;Gammer Gurton&#x27;s Garland or The Nursery Parnassus&quot;, published in London by Joseph Johnson.

== Life and work ==

=== Early life ===
Ritson was born in Stockton-on-Tees, County Durham, of a Westmorland yeoman family. He was educated for the law, mainly by Ralph Bradley the leading conveyancer. He then settled in London as a conveyancer at 22.

=== Writing career ===
Ritson devoted his spare time to literature, and in 1782, he published an attack on Thomas Warton&#x27;s &quot;History of English Poetry&quot;. The tone of his &quot;Observations&quot;, in which Warton was treated as a pretender, charged with cheating and lying to cover his ignorance, caused a sensation in literary circles.

In nearly all the small points with which he dealt, Ritson was in the right, and his corrections have since been adopted, but the unjustly bitter language of his criticisms roused great anger at the time, much, it would appear, to Ritson&#x27;s delight. In 1783 Samuel Johnson and George Steevens were attacked in the same bitter fashion as Warton for their text of Shakespeare. Bishop Percy was next subjected to a furious onslaught in the preface to a collection of &quot;Ancient Songs&quot; (printed 1787, dated 1790, published 1792). In a letter (14 March 1803) to Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Robert Southey wrote that &quot;Ritson is the oddest, but most honest of all our antiquarians, and he abuses Percy and Pinkerton with less mercy than justice&quot;.

Ritson usually spared no pains himself to ensure accuracy in the texts of old songs, ballads and metrical romances which he edited. His collection of the Robin Hood ballads is perhaps his greatest single achievement. However, unlike the other works he edited, he gave in to his own political prejudices as a Jacobin when he included the idea, uncommon until then, that Robin Hood robbed the rich and gave to the poor rather than simply robbing the bishops and the Sheriff of Nottingham. When Ritson was asked who gave Robin Hood a commission to rob from the rich and give to the poor, his response was:

&quot;That same power which authorises kings to take it where it can be worst spared, and give it where it is least wanted.&quot;

Sir Walter Scott, who admired his industry and accuracy in spite of his temper, was almost the only man who could get on with him. According to Scott, Ritson was &quot;a man of acute observation, profound research, and great labour&quot;. He features as &#x27;the potato philosopher&#x27; in &quot;John Paterson&#x27;s Mare&quot;, James Hogg&#x27;s allegorical satire on the Edinburgh publishing scene first published in the &quot;Newcastle Magazine&quot; in 1825. 

Spelling became one of his eccentricities; in his later books, he increasingly adopted a reformed spelling of his own devising. As early as 1796, Ritson showed signs of mental collapse, and on 10 September 1803, he became completely insane, barricaded himself in his chambers at Gray&#x27;s Inn, made a bonfire of manuscripts, and was finally forcibly removed to Hoxton, where he died.

Ritson was an atheist.

=== Vegetarianism ===
Ritson was an early vegetarianism activist. He became a vegetarian in 1772 after reading Bernard Mandeville&#x27;s &quot;The Fable of the Bees&quot; and adopted a diet that was based on vegetables and milk. His ideas were criticised in his day, but were influential to many vegetarians who came after him. Ritson has been described as a pioneer of animal rights.

In 1802, his &quot;An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty&quot;, was published by Sir Richard Phillips. The book utilised health and moral arguments for abstaining from animal foods. Biographer Bertrand Harris Bronson has noted that based on excerpts from Ritson&#x27;s daily journal his vegetarian diet consisted of muffins, cake, cheese, bread, butter, milk, beer and ale.

==Bibliography==

*&quot;Verses addressed to the Ladies of Stockton. First printed in the Newcastle Miscellany, MDCCLXXII&quot;, 1780
*&quot;Observations on the three first volumes of the history of English poetry by T. W. in a letter to the author&quot;, by Thomas Warton and Joseph Ritson, 1782
*&quot;A Select Collection of English Songs&quot;, 1783
*&quot;Gammer Gurton&#x27;s Garland, or, The nursery Parnassus: a choice collection of pretty songs and verses for the amusement of all little good children who can neither read nor run&quot;, 1784
*&quot;The Spartan Manual, or Tablet of Morality, being a genuine collection of the apophthegms, maxims and precepts of the philosophers ... and other ... celebrated characters of antiquity, etc&quot;, 1785
*&quot;A Digest of the proceedings of the Court Leet of the Manor and Liberty of the Savoy&quot;, 1789
*&quot;Pieces of Ancient Popular Poetry: From Authentic Manuscripts and Old Printed Copies&quot;, 1791, (Kessinger Publishing, 2007) 
*&quot;The Office of Constable: being an entirely new compendium of the law concerning that ancient minister for the conservation of the peace, etc&quot;, 1791
*&quot;Cursory criticisms on the edition of Shakespeare published by Edmond Malone&quot;, 1792
*&quot;The Northumberland Garland; or, Newcastle Nightingale: a matchless collection of famous songs&quot;. Edited by Joseph Ritson, 1793
*&quot;Law-Tracts. L.P&quot;, 1794
*&quot;Poems on interesting events in the reign of Edward III. written in the year MCCCLII. ... With a preface, dissertations, notes, and a glossary by J. Ritson&quot;, by Laurence Minot and Joseph Ritson (editor), 1795
*&quot;Ancient Songs and Ballads from the Reign of King Henry the Second to the Revolution in Two Volumes&quot;, (BiblioBazaar, 2009) 
*&quot;Bibliographia poetica: a catalogue of Engleish sic poets, of the twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth, centurys, with a short account of their works&quot;, by Joseph Ritson, Philip Bliss, James Boswell, and John Payne Collier, 1802
*&quot;Ancient Engleish Metrical Romanceës&quot;, 1802, (Kessinger Publishing, 2009) 
*&quot;An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty&quot;, edited by Sir Richard Philips, London, 1802, (Kessinger Publishing, 2009) 
*&quot;A catalogue of the entire and curious library and manuscripts of the late Joseph Ritson&quot;, 1803
*&quot;The jurisdiction of the Court leet: Exemplified in the articles which the jury or inquest for the King, in that court, is charged and sworn, and by law enjoined, to inquire of and present, W. Clarke and Sons; 2d ed, with great additions&quot;, edition 1809
*&quot;Northern Garlands&quot;, R. Triphook, 1810
*&quot;The Office of Bailiff of a Liberty&quot;, 1811
*&quot;A Select Collection of English Songs, with Their Original Airs: and a Historical Essay on the Origin and Progress of National Song&quot;, London, 1813, (Adamant Media Corporation, 2005) 
*&quot;The Caledonian Muse: A Chronological Selection of Scottish Poetry from the Earliest Times&quot;, 1821, (Kessinger Publishing, 2007) 
*&quot;Some account of the life and publications of the late Joseph Ritson, esq,&quot; by Joseph Haslewood, 1824
*&quot;Life of King Arthur from Ancient Historians and Authentic Documents&quot;, London, 1825, (Kessinger Publishing, 2003) 
*&quot;Annals of the Caledonians, Picts, and Scots and of Strathclyde, Cumberland, Galloway and Murray&quot;, London, 1828, (BiblioBazaar, 2008) 
*&quot;Memoirs of The Celts or Gauls&quot;, Joseph Ritson and Joseph Frank, 1829, (BiblioBazaar, 2009) 
*&quot;Letters from Joseph Ritson to George Paton&quot;, 1829, (Kessinger Publishing, 2008) 
*&quot;Fairy Tales, Now First Collected: To which are prefixed two dissertations: 1. On Pygmies. 2. On Fairies&quot;, London, 1831, (Adamant Media Corporation, 2004) 
*&quot;Robin Hood: A Collection of All the Ancient Poems, Songs, and Ballads, Now Extant Relative to That Celebrated English Outlaw: To Which are Prefixed Historical Anecdotes of His Life&quot;, London, 1832, (Adamant Media Corporation, 2004) 
*&quot;The Letters of Joseph Ritson edited chiefly from originals in the possession of his nephew J. Frank. To which is prefixed a memoir of the author&quot;, by Joseph Ritson, Joseph Frank, and Nicholas Harris Nicolas, 1833, (Kessinger Publishing, 2007) 
*&quot;Gammer Gurton&#x27;s Garland or the Nursery Parnassus: A Choice Collection of Pretty Songs and Verses&quot;, 1866, (Kessinger Publishing, 2007) 
*&quot;Scotish Songs&quot; &quot;(sic)&quot;, 1869, (Kessinger Publishing, 2008) 
*&quot;Fairy Tales, Legends &amp; Romances Illustrating Shakespeare &amp; Other Early English Writers&quot;, 1875, (Kessinger Publishing, 2003) 
*&quot;The Boy Knight ; or, Kindness Rewarded&quot;, James B. Knapp, 1877
*&quot;Ancient Popular Poetry V1: From Authentic Manuscripts and Old Printed Copies&quot;, by Joseph Ritson and Edmund Goldsmid, 1884, (Kessinger Publishing, 2009) 
*&quot;Ancient English metrical romances&quot;, E. &amp; G. Goldsmid, 1884
*&quot;Northern Garlands: A Collection of Songs&quot;, 1887
*&quot;A dissertation on romance and minstrelsy: To which is appended the ancient metrical romance of Ywaine and Gawin&quot;, 1891, (Kessinger Publishing, 2007) 
*&quot;Joseph Ritson: A Critical Biography&quot;, by Henry A. Burd, Illinois, 1916, (BiblioBazaar, 2008) 
*&quot;Joseph Ritson, scholar-at-arms. With plates, including portraits, and a bibliography&quot;, by Bertrand Harris Bronson, 1938

== See also ==

*Ritson&#x27;s Northern Garlands 1810
*Ritson&#x27;s Bishopric Garland or Durham Minstrel 1792
*Ritson&#x27;s Yorkshire Garland 1809
*Ritson&#x27;s Northumberland Garland or Newcastle Nightingale 1809
*Ritson&#x27;s North-Country Chorister 1809

==References==
*
==Further reading==
*Burd, Henry A., &quot;Joseph Ritson: A Critical Biography&quot;, Illinois, 1916, (BiblioBazaar, 2008) 
*Basdeo, Stephen, &quot;Discovering Robin Hood: The Life of Joseph Ritson - Gentleman, Scholar and Revolutionary&quot; (Pen &amp; Sword Books, 2021) 
*H. S. V. Jones. (1914). &quot;Joseph Ritson: A Romantic Antiquarian&quot;. &quot;The Sewanee Review&quot; 22: 341-350.
*Morton, Timothy, Marilyn Butler, and James Chandler. &quot;Shelley and the Revolution in Taste: The Body and the Natural World&quot;. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1995.
* Stuart, Tristram, &quot;The Bloodless Revolution: A Cultural History of Vegetarianism From 1600 to Modern Times&quot;, W. W. Norton &amp; Co., 2007, 
* Williams, Howard, &quot;The Ethics of Diet: A Catena of Authorities Deprecatory of the Practice of Flesh-Eating&quot;, University of Illinois Press, 2003, pp. 185–189 (original edition), 

==External links==
* 
* Allan&#x27;s Illustrated Edition of Tyneside songs and readings
* Google e-book Northern Garland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6286581" start="0" end="13" title="Joseph Ritson" label="Joseph Ritson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697103" start="66" end="75" title="Antiquarian" label="antiquary"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="128" end="138" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="239" end="256" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="285" end="298" title="vegetarianism" label="vegetarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123037" start="361" end="374" title="nursery rhyme" label="nursery rhyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368661" start="391" end="404" title="Roses Are Red" label="Roses Are Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649200" start="421" end="435" title="Little Bo-Peep" label="Little Bo-Peep"/>
<link wikidata="Q63258116" start="452" end="480" title="Gammer Gurton&amp;#x27;s Garland" label="Gammer Gurton&amp;#x27;s Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047162" start="536" end="550" title="Joseph Johnson (publisher)" label="Joseph Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q989418" start="612" end="628" title="Stockton-on-Tees" label="Stockton-on-Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q23082" start="630" end="643" title="County Durham" label="County Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23326" start="650" end="661" title="Westmorland" label="Westmorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="662" end="668" title="yeoman" label="yeoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287266" start="716" end="729" title="Ralph Bradley (barrister)" label="Ralph Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971218" start="913" end="926" title="Thomas Warton" label="Thomas Warton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17332374" start="940" end="965" title="The History of English Poetry" label="History of English Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="1418" end="1432" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450536" start="1437" end="1452" title="George Steevens" label="George Steevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1522" end="1533" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q712930" start="1535" end="1547" title="Thomas Percy (Bishop of Dromore)" label="Bishop Percy"/>
<link wikidata="Q82409" start="1725" end="1748" title="Samuel Taylor Coleridge" label="Samuel Taylor Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q216838" start="1750" end="1764" title="Robert Southey" label="Robert Southey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446354" start="1869" end="1878" title="John Pinkerton" label="Pinkerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="2001" end="2007" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="2070" end="2080" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="2655" end="2667" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q941810" start="2982" end="2992" title="James Hogg" label="James Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="3026" end="3035" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088390" start="3118" end="3126" title="Spelling" label="Spelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172021" start="3207" end="3224" title="Spelling reform" label="reformed spelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q157412" start="3397" end="3412" title="Gray&amp;#x27;s Inn" label="Gray&amp;#x27;s Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998354" start="3481" end="3487" title="Hoxton" label="Hoxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="3519" end="3526" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="3571" end="3584" title="vegetarianism" label="vegetarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171104" start="3672" end="3693" title="The Fable of the Bees" label="The Fable of the Bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="3737" end="3746" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="3752" end="3756" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q426" start="3899" end="3912" title="animal rights" label="animal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372006" start="3934" end="3990" title="An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty" label="An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528648" start="4019" end="4035" title="Richard Phillips (publisher)" label="Richard Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q16011534" start="4127" end="4150" title="Bertrand Harris Bronson" label="Bertrand Harris Bronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512006" start="6354" end="6389" title="Ancient Engleish Metrical Romanceës" label="Ancient Engleish Metrical Romanceës"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336788" start="9808" end="9844" title="Ritson&amp;#x27;s Northern Garlands 1810" label="Ritson&amp;#x27;s Northern Garlands 1810"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336786" start="9846" end="9901" title="Ritson&amp;#x27;s Bishopric Garland or Durham Minstrel 1792" label="Ritson&amp;#x27;s Bishopric Garland or Durham Minstrel 1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336791" start="9903" end="9939" title="Ritson&amp;#x27;s Yorkshire Garland 1809" label="Ritson&amp;#x27;s Yorkshire Garland 1809"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336790" start="9941" end="10007" title="Ritson&amp;#x27;s Northumberland Garland or Newcastle Nightingale 1809" label="Ritson&amp;#x27;s Northumberland Garland or Newcastle Nightingale 1809"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336789" start="10009" end="10051" title="Ritson&amp;#x27;s North-Country Chorister 1809" label="Ritson&amp;#x27;s North-Country Chorister 1809"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451241" start="10640" end="10656" title="Stuart, Tristram" label="Stuart, Tristram"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10664" end="10751" title="The Bloodless Revolution: A Cultural History of Vegetarianism From 1600 to Modern Times" label="The Bloodless Revolution: A Cultural History of Vegetarianism From 1600 to Modern Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442840" start="10792" end="10808" title="Howard Williams (humanitarian)" label="Williams, Howard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405480" wikidata="Q1249005" url="?curid=405480" title="University of Dundee">
<text>The University of Dundee is a public research university based in Dundee, Scotland. It was founded as a university college in 1881 with a donation from the prominent Baxter family of textile manufacturers. The institution was, for most of its early existence, a constituent college of the University of St Andrews alongside United College and St Mary&#x27;s College located in the town of St Andrews itself. Following significant expansion, the University of Dundee gained independent university status by royal charter in 1967 while retaining elements of its ancient heritage and governance structure.

The main campus of the university is located in Dundee&#x27;s West End, which contains many of the university&#x27;s teaching and research facilities; the Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design, Dundee Law School and the Dundee Dental Hospital and School. The university has additional facilities at Ninewells Hospital, containing its School of Medicine; Perth Royal Infirmary, which houses a clinical research centre; and in Kirkcaldy, Fife, containing part of its School of Health Sciences. The annual income of the institution for 2022–23 was £325.7 million of which £78.9 million was from research grants and contracts, with an expenditure of £330.2 million.

==History==

===Foundation===
The University of Dundee has its roots in the earlier university college based in Dundee and the University of St Andrews. During the 19th century, the growing population of Dundee significantly increased demand for the establishment of an institution of higher education in the city and several organisations were established to promote this end, including a University Club in the city. There was a significant movement with the intention of moving the entire university to Dundee (which the royal commission observed was now a &quot;large and increasing town&quot;) or the establishment of a college along very similar lines to the present United College. Finally, agreement was reached that what was needed was expansion of the sciences and professions, rather than the arts at St Andrews.

A donation of £120,000 for the creation of an institution of higher education in Dundee was made by Miss Mary Ann Baxter of Balgavies, a notable lady of the city and heir to the fortune of William Baxter of Balgavies. In this endeavour, she was assisted by her relative, John Boyd Baxter, an alumnus of St Andrews and Procurator Fiscal of Forfarshire who also contributed nearly £20,000. In order to craft the institution and its principles, it was to be established first as an independent university college, with a view from its very inception towards incorporation into the University of St Andrews.

In 1881, the ideals of the proposed new college were laid down, suggesting the establishment of an institute for &quot;promoting the education of persons of both sexes and the study of Science, Literature and the Fine Arts&quot;. The university currently identifies 1881 as the year of its foundation, as University College&#x27;s endowment was dated 31 December 1881, but the year 1880, when the announcement of Mary Ann Baxter&#x27;s funding was made, as well as the years 1882 and 1883 have also been cited as their foundation year by the institution in the past.

No religious oaths were to be required of members. Later that year, &quot;University College, Dundee&quot; was established as an academic institution and the first principal, Sir William Peterson, was elected in late 1882. When opened in 1883, it comprised five faculties: Maths and Natural Philosophy, Chemistry, Engineering and Drawing, English Language and Literature and Modern History, and Philosophy. The University College had no power to award degrees and for some years some students were prepared for external examinations of the University of London. By 1894, the faculties offered at the college remained essentially scientific in outlook, with three academics - including the principal, William Peterson - giving instruction in classics, philosophy, English and history at both the Dundee and St Andrews sites.

The policy of no discrimination between the sexes, which was insisted upon by Mary Ann Baxter, meant that the new college recruited several able female students. Their number included the social reformer Mary Lily Walker and, later, Margaret Fairlie who in 1940 became Scotland&#x27;s first female professor. Another early female graduate, Ruth Wilson, later Young, became professor of surgery at Lady Hardinge Medical College in Delhi and later became its principal.

===Incorporation into the University of St Andrews===

Following discussions around various forms of incorporation and association, students were able to matriculate through the University of St Andrews from 1885. The full incorporation was completed in 1897 when University College became part of the University of St Andrews. This move was of notable benefit to both, enabling the University of St Andrews (which was in a small town) to support a medical school. Medical students could choose to undertake preclinical studies either in Dundee or St Andrews (at the Bute Medical School) after which all students would undertake their clinical studies at Dundee. Eventually, law, dentistry and other professional subjects were taught at University College. By 1904 University College had a roll of 208, making up 40 per cent of the roll of the university generally. By session 1909-10 234 students were studying at University College, 101 of whom were female. Among the notable students at this time were Robert Watson-Watt, the radar pioneer; William Alexander Young the epidemiologist who later died in Accra while studying yellow fever; and David Rutherford Dow who would go on to be a senior member of staff at the college.

In 1895, unlike the students at St Andrews, there were reportedly very few &quot;bona-fide&quot; matriculated students at Dundee who were &quot;aiming to graduate&quot;. During the academic years of 1892–4, those students at Dundee who had matriculated at St Andrews were considered St Andrews University students and were subsequently awarded degrees by St. Andrews. Although the union between the two institutions was then threatened by a lawsuit, by 1898 the union with St. Andrews was restored on the original basis.

University College&#x27;s development in the early twentieth century has been described as &quot;slow and fitful&quot; and the interwar period saw virtually no new building projects, leaving large parts of the college housed in buildings which were not fit for purpose. Kenneth Baxter has claimed that World War I had a major impact on University College and stated that the conflict presented it with &quot;a storm of challenges unlike anything it had faced&quot; up to that point. Baxter contends that the War impacted the college greatly, with key consequences being declining student numbers which in turn led to a loss of income, as well as staff departures and the decaying of fabric. In 2018 it was revealed that research shows that while the college&#x27;s war memorial records the names of 37 staff and former students who died at least a further 39 alumni of the college were not recorded on it. In 1920 the college received a war trophy in the form of a &quot;40 ton, 15 cm field gun&quot;, which was thought to have been captured from Bulgarian forces and was sited in front of the students Union.

Attempts were made to raise income. In 1923 Rudyard Kipling, then the rector of the University of St Andrews, visited University College and asked the merchant princes and leading citizens of Dundee to give the college their money and support. Kipling implored those who had lost their sons in the Great War to consider giving a donation so that their names would live on. Staff of a high calibre continued to be employed by the university including Alexander Peacock and Margaret Fairlie, who in 1940 was appointed as professor of obstetrics and gynaecology and thus became the first woman to hold a professorial chair at a university in Scotland.

In 1947, the principal of University College, Douglas Wimberley released the &quot;Wimberley Memo&quot; (resulting in the Cooper and Tedder reports of 1952), advocating independence for the college. In 1954, after a royal commission, University College was renamed &quot;Queen&#x27;s College&quot; and the Dundee-based elements of the university gained a greater degree of independence and flexibility. It was also at this time that Queen&#x27;s College absorbed the former Dundee School of Economics as well as the jointly administered medical school and dental school.

===Creation of the University of Dundee===

The publication of the Robbins Report on Higher Education in 1963, which considered the question of university education expansion throughout the country, provided impetus to the movement to attain independent university status for Dundee. At this time, a number of new institutions were being elevated to this status, such as the University of Stirling, and second universities were created in Edinburgh and Glasgow (Heriot-Watt University and the University of Strathclyde) despite their having fewer than 2,000 students.

Queen&#x27;s College&#x27;s size and location, alongside a willingness to expand, led to an eventual decision to separate from the wider University of which it remained an integral part. In 1966, St Andrews University Court and the Council of Queen&#x27;s College submitted a joint petition to the Privy Council seeking the grant of a royal charter to establish the University of Dundee. This petition was approved and the Charter was granted which saw Queen&#x27;s College become the University of Dundee, on 1 August 1967. The university continued a number of the traditions of its originator college and university and continues to be organised under the ancient university governance structure.

===Modern developments===
In 1974, the university began to validate some degrees from Dundee&#x27;s Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design, and by 1988 all degrees from that institution were being validated in this fashion. In 1994 the two institutions merged, with the college becoming a constituent faculty of the university. In 1996, the Tayside College of Nursing and the Fife College of Health studies became part of the university, as a school of Nursing and Midwifery. For several years, Dundee College of Education prepared students for degree examinations at the University of Dundee, and in December 2001 the university merged with the Dundee campus of Northern College to create a Faculty of Education and Social Work.

In October 2005, the university became home to the first UNESCO centre in the United Kingdom. The IHP-HELP Centre for Water Law, Policy and Science is involved in research regarding the management of the world&#x27;s water resources on behalf of the United Nations. A school of accounting and finance was introduced in 2007. These disciplines are now part of the School of Business.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the university suspended most face to face teaching from 16 March 2020. However, a &quot;blended learning&quot; approach was offered to many students with weekly tutorials available in person for small groups using COVID-19 protocols of social distancing and regular cleaning.

==Campus==

===City Campus===

The main campus is within the West End of the City of Dundee. It has expanded greatly since the university gained independence, from just four converted buildings when the University College was founded in 1881 the university has grown to consist of over fifty at present. However, many buildings survive from Dundee&#x27;s period as a university college and as a constituent college of St Andrews University. The earliest purpose-built facility on campus was the Carnelley Building which opened in 1883 as part of the new University College. A £10,000 donation from Mary Ann Baxter provided for a chemistry laboratory situated in the building which was named for the university&#x27;s first professor of chemistry, Thomas Carnelley.

====Geddes Quadrangle====

The buildings at the heart of the university form the Geddes Quadrangle. These include the Carnegie, Harris and Peters Buildings which were constructed in 1909 as part of the new college of the University of St Andrews. The Geddes Quadrangle was named for Patrick Geddes, a pioneering thinker in the fields of sociology and urban planning and former professor of botany at Dundee, as a botanist Geddes had originally proposed a garden in the center of the quadrangle to be used for teaching purposes. The designer was Victorian architect Robert Rowand Anderson, the architect of buildings such as the Scottish National Portrait Gallery and Mount Stuart House.

====Post-war buildings====
Amid the expansion of education in post-war Britain, the University College, Dundee commissioned the construction of several new buildings to cope with the increasing numbers of students and academics arriving. The first of these was the Ewing Building which had started planning in 1950 and was officially opened in 1954. Named after Sir James Alfred Ewing, the university&#x27;s first professor of engineering. The Fulton Building gave the civil and mechanical engineering department a dedicated building, it was opened in 1964 and took its name from Angus Robertson Fulton, former principal of University College, Dundee (1939–1946).

The 1960s saw the further development of the Queen&#x27;s College campus with some of the earliest multi-story towers in Scotland being built for both teaching and student accommodation. The Tower Building, opened in 1961 by Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, exemplified early Scottish modernist architecture and was designed by Robert Matthew; it stands 140 ft tall with ten storeys home to both academic, executive and administrative departments of the university. The Tower was built on the site of two of the original four Georgian houses which had housed University College, Dundee (originally known as Whiteleys). Its construction was notable as it was the tallest structure built in Dundee since the Old Steeple in the medieval period. The building was extended in the later 1960s was resulted in the demolition of the remaining two original buildings.

Belmont Halls of Residence took inspiration from Danish design and aimed to provide modern, spacious quarters for students while keeping costs cheap; it was completed in 1963 on the site of Belmont Works, a former jute mill.

====Recent developments====
The 2000s brought extensive renovation to the university&#x27;s central campus, with a number of new and upgraded buildings introduced around 2007 to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the university&#x27;s independence. Large extensions have been placed on the Main Library and sports centre, and a number of new halls of residence (Heathfield, Belmont, West Park and Seabraes) have been gradually phased into operation. The Dalhousie building was erected during this period as dedicated teaching accommodation for the university, in part replacing space previously at the Gardyne Road campus of Northern College, which has now been taken up by Dundee College. Significant improvement works have taken place in old buildings such as the Old Technical Institute, Medical Sciences Institute and Old Medical School buildings.

===Kirkcaldy Campus===
The School of Nursing and Health Sciences has a campus on Forth Avenue, Kirkcaldy, Fife. This offers degrees in nursing, midwifery and other health-related subjects. Placements are available often in conjunction with NHS Fife.

==Governance and organisation==
===Governance===
The University of Dundee is organised under the provisions of its royal charter, which granted the university its independence in 1967. Dundee, uniquely outside of the four ancient universities of Scotland has a governance framework which shares a number of similarities with the ancient governance structure which was developed in the 19th and 20th centuries through the various Universities (Scotland) Acts.

====Chancellor====
The chancellor is the head of the university and president of the Graduates&#x27; Council, with a role of presiding over academic ceremonies such as graduations. The six chancellors of the university to have held office since its independence are:

* Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother (1967–1977)
* Simon Ramsay, 16th Earl of Dalhousie (1977–1992)
* Sir James W. Black (1992–2006)
* Narendra Patel, Baron Patel (2006–2017)
* Dame Jocelyn Bell Burnell (2018–2023)
* Baron George Robertson (2023-)

====Rector====
The rector of the university is an official elected by the matriculated students of the university for a three-year term. In common with other university rectors in Scotland, the position is largely ceremonial, although it does involve the representation of students on the University Court. The rector at Dundee, unlike that of the ancient universities, does not chair the University Court, that duty instead falling to a lay member. The rector may appoint an assessor who can carry out the rector&#x27;s functions on their behalf when they are absent. The university gained national attention in 2001 when it seemed that actor David Hasselhoff may stand as rector.

As part of the process of installation, the students traditionally take the new rector on the &#x27;rectorial drag&#x27; which involves them being &#x27;dragged&#x27; from Dundee City Chambers to the university in the university&#x27;s own carriage visiting on the way some of the many pubs in the city as part of the informal welcome to the university.

The present holder of the position is artist manager Keith Harris, who was installed in 2022. He replaced sports broadcaster Jim Spence, who was installed in 2019 but did not serve a full term partly due to changes in personal circumstances as a result of COVID-19. Prior to Spence, the rector was Mark Beaumont, the record-breaking endurance cyclist.

Previous Rectors since the university&#x27;s independence have included Sir Peter Ustinov, Sir Clement Freud, and Stephen Fry, who each served two terms, and Craig Murray, Tony Slattery, Lorraine Kelly and Fred MacAulay, who each served one.
====Principal and Vice-Chancellor====

The Principal and Vice-Chancellor is the chief academic and administrative officer of the university, presiding over the Senatus Academicus. As a result of their title as Vice-Chancellor, the Principal can fulfill the duties of the Chancellor in their absence. Prior to the university&#x27;s independence, when it was part of the University of St Andrews, a similar function was carried out by the Master of Queen&#x27;s College. This position replaced the earlier post of principal of University College, Dundee, which was first filled in 1882.

Following the announced resignation of Principal and Vice-Chancellor Sir Pete Downes in February 2018, the university appointed Professor Andrew Atherton to the post, to begin in January 2019. Atherton resigned following a dispute with the university in November 2019.

Holders of this position and its predecessors are:

=====Principals of University College, Dundee=====
* William Peterson (1882–1895)
* John Yule Mackay (1895–1930)
* Sir James Irvine (1930–1939) – &#x27;Interim&#x27; appointment
* Angus Robertson Fulton (1939–1946) – &#x27;Interim&#x27; appointment
* Douglas Wimberley (1946–1954)

=====Masters of Queen&#x27;s College, Dundee=====
* David Rutherford Dow (1954–1958)
* Arthur Alexander Matheson (1958–1966)
* James Drever (1966–1967)

=====Principals of the University of Dundee=====
* James Drever (1967–1978)
* Adam Neville (1978–1987)
* Michael Hamlin (1987–1994)
* Ian James Graham-Bryce (1994–2000)
* Sir Alan Langlands (2000–2009)
* Sir Pete Downes (2009–2018)
* Andrew Atherton (2019)
* David Maguire (2020) &quot;Interim Principal&quot;
* Iain Gillespie (2021-24) 
* Shane O&#x27;Neill (2024-) &quot;interim principal&quot;

===Structure===

As of 1 August 2022, the University of Dundee is organised into eight schools containing multiple disciplines. Each individual school is formally headed by a dean. The following is a full list of the academic divisions of the university:


School of Art and Design
* Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design

School of Business
* Accounting and Finance
* Economics
* Business, Management and Marketing

School of Dentistry
* Dentistry
School of Humanities, Social Sciences and Law
* Dundee Law School
* Education and Society
* Energy, Environment and Society
* Humanities
* Psychology

School of Life Sciences
* Life Sciences

School of Medicine
* Medicine

School of Health Sciences
* Adult Nursing
* Child Nursing
* Mental Health Nursing

School of Science and Engineering
* Anatomy and Human Identification
* Computing
* Engineering (Civil, Mechanical and Industrial, Biomedical)
* Mathematics
* Physics


==Reputation and rankings==

===University rankings===

, Dundee is ranked within the top 500 universities in the world according to the major global rankings (&quot;Times&quot;, &quot;QS&quot;, and &quot;ARWU&quot;); placing 301-350th in the Times World University rankings, joint 418th in the QS World University Rankings and 401-500th in the Academic Ranking of World Universities. The university was &quot;The Times Good University Guide&#x27;s&quot; &quot;Scottish University of the Year&quot; consecutively in 2015/16 and 2016/17.

===Subject rankings===

In both the 2021 and 2014 Research Excellence Framework which assesses research output between 2008-2020, the quality of research for Biological Sciences at Dundee is ranked 2nd in the United Kingdom by GPA, behind only the specialist Institute of Cancer Research. According to the 2024 Times Higher Education World University Rankings by Subject, Dundee&#x27;s strongest subjects are Life Sciences, ranked in the top 125 in the world and Law, ranked in the top 150 in the world. The 2023 &quot;QS World University Rankings by Subject&quot; ranks the university in the top 200 in the world for Pharmacy &amp; Pharmacology, Biological Sciences, Art &amp; Design, Nursing, and Medicine. 

In the 2024 Guardian university rankings in the UK, Dundee&#x27;s subject offerings in Dentistry (3rd in UK, 1st in Scotland), and Computer science and information systems (9th in UK, 3rd in Scotland) rank within the top ten nationally. In 2023/2024 Anatomy &amp; Physiology, Art and Design, Biological Sciences, Social Work and Medicine rank within the top ten nationally in at least one of the rankings.

==Student life==

Students at Dundee are represented by the university&#x27;s students&#x27; representative council and the Rector in common with other universities in Scotland sharing the ancient organisational structure.

===Students&#x27; Association===


The Dundee University Students&#x27; Association (DUSA), unlike many other students&#x27; unions in the United Kingdom, is not affiliated to the National Union of Students, mainly due to cost concerns and political objections. 

Membership of the Students&#x27; Association is automatic for all students of the university, although it is possible under statutes to renounce this membership at any time. The Association, as with the other ancient universities in Scotland, co-exists with the University&#x27;s students&#x27; representative council.

The DUSA building is located in Airlie Place, in the centre of the University&#x27;s Main Campus and caters as a private members&#x27; club offering bar, nightclub and refectory services for students. DUSA also provides a number of other typical students&#x27; union services such as advocacy on behalf of its membership and assistance to individual students. In addition the DUSA facilitates the creation of student societies, as of 2023 there are 240 student-led societies on campus.

===Sports facilities===

As of 2016, there are 43 clubs affiliated with the Sports&#x27; Union. There is an annual award ceremony for the sports clubs, and a Blues &amp; Colours Ball (see Blue (university sport)) to provide social interaction between the clubs.

The Institute of Sport and Exercise, unlike the Sports Union, is directly controlled by the university, but works closely with the students&#x27; organisations. Its chief building is located on Old Hawkhill in the main campus, which contains the main indoor sporting facilities and the university&#x27;s gym.

Outdoor facilities are mainly based in the Riverside Sporting Ground, within a reasonable walking distance and bordering the Tay, although there are others – such as tennis courts – spread throughout the main campus. The ISE&#x27;s 25m swimming pool is located within the Students&#x27; Association building on Airlie Place.

Notable sporting achievements of the university include winning the British University Gaelic football Championship in 1994 and being the first team in Scottish rugby history to win the league and SUS Cup double in the 2007/08 season.

===Chaplaincy===

The University Chaplaincy Centre was constructed in 1974 and extended in 1987 and houses both the University Chapel and a number of other related social facilities. 

The university has a full-time chaplain, Fiona Douglas (since 1997), who is a minister of the Church of Scotland. There are also several part-time associate and honorary chaplains representing other faiths and denominations.

===Traditions===

Dundee students participate in a number of traditional events during the academic calendar. Towards the start of the year, a standard British Freshers&#x27; Week is organised, with a secondary one held when the university reconvenes after the Christmas vacation.

Traditions remaining from Dundee&#x27;s days as a college of the University of St Andrews include the Gaudie Night (taking its name from the first line of the students&#x27; anthem, &quot;De Brevitate Vitae&quot;) – held early in the first semester and organised both as a Students&#x27; Union night and an event organised by the individual schools (for example by the Life Sciences, Medical, Law and Dentistry Societies) where students are assigned academic &quot;parents&quot; from the senior years. Some weeks later, a Raisin (alternatively spelled &quot;Raisen&quot;) weekend is held to all new students to repay their academic parents&#x27; hospitality. Generally the school society-run events are more traditional in nature than the Students&#x27; Union event.

For 21 years (2004-2024), the University organised Discovery Days, a series of public talks from newly-appointed or promoted professors. The last Discovery Days event took place in January 2024. Inaugural lectures for new professors will be organised by the University’s academic schools.

===Student residences===

The university has a number of student residences spaced around the city. Over the last decade there has been an attempt to move some of these halls of residence closer to the main campus. With the closure and re-building of West Park Hall in 2005, all of the halls are now self catered en-suite.

At present, there are the following university residences:

* Belmont Tower (including Belmont Upper/Lower) – Based on the main campus and consisting of two main sections: Belmont Tower, opened in 1966, located on Mount Pleasant next to Belmont Quadrangle; and Belmont Upper and Lower, a long and low building connected to the tower, raised up on stilts to accommodate for car parking underneath for residences staff.
*Belmont Flats – Opened in 2006, these halls are of identical style to those of Heathfield and the new Seabraes halls. It is located on Old Hawkhill, across from the ISE and centred around Belmont Quadrangle.
* Heathfield – Built at the same time as Belmont Flats. It is located on Old Hawkhill, immediately across from Belmont Tower.
* Seabraes – A number of buildings containing flats, with a new hall identical in style to the new Heathfield and Belmont Halls being built at the foot of the complex. Located near to the south side of the main campus on Roseangle.
* West Park – Located some distance to the west of the main campus, these halls were traditionally popular with medicine students due to their proximity to Ninewells Hospital. Consists of a relatively new complex known as West Park Villas, which are essentially student flats. The old hall (separate from the Villas) was largely torn-down in 2005 (leaving behind only the listed parts of the building) and the new complex (generally known as &#x27;West Park Flats&#x27; by the university) were made available from the start of the 2007/08 term.

Some older halls, despite remaining open in the interim until building works were finished, are now out of use – the last students moved out in early 2007. These are:

* Airlie Place &amp; Springfield – A number of flats located in old terrace housing on the main campus, consisting of two streets mainly owned by the university. Both are architecturally noteworthy and have mostly been converted to offices.
* Peterson Hall – An almost brutalist style building to be found further down Roseangle from Seabraes. This hall was traditionally a non-smoking hall of residence, and is now ear-marked for private development.
* Wimberley Houses – The furthest university residences from the main campus, Wimberley – also the closest to Ninewells Hospital in the far west of the city. The residences themselves were a complex of buildings, each comprising a &quot;house&quot; which served as an independent flat for a number of students. They were named for Principal Douglas Wimberley.

==Historic collections==

The university&#x27;s cultural and historic collections are looked after by Museum Services and Archive Services.

===Museum Services===
Dundee has significant museum collections acquired over the 140 years of its history. These include fine art, design furniture, textiles, scientific instruments, medical equipment and natural history specimens. 
The collections are accredited as a public museum and are cared for by Museum Services. In 2012 it was announced that Museum Services had been awarded a grant of £100,000 by the Art Fund to develop an art collection inspired by D&#x27;Arcy Thompson. This body promotes the various departments of the university involved in cultural activity and runs an annual culture day of short public lectures. In January 2014 it was announced that Museum Services had been awarded funding of £32,407 to acquire a new object database to aid the management of its various collections of nearly 30,000 items.

===Archive Services===
The university&#x27;s Archive Services was established in 1976 and maintains the University of Dundee&#x27;s manuscripts and records collections. The archives hold a wide range of material relating to the university and its predecessor institutions and to individuals associated with the university. Archive Services also holds a number of records relating to individuals, businesses and organizations based in the Tayside area. The records held include a substantial number of business archives relating to the jute and linen industry in Dundee and West Bengal, records of other businesses including the archives of the Alliance Trust and the department store G. L. Wilson, the records of the Brechin Diocese of the Scottish Episcopal Church, the Michael Peto photographic collection and the NHS Tayside Archive. Archive Services&#x27; other collections include the archives of Dundee Repertory Theatre and the papers of the Great War poet Joseph Johnston Lee. In addition to material relating to the local area, the archives have a number of documents relating to other countries, especially India. The Archives also hold the records of the Glasite Church.

The archives also house some special book collections. These include rare books relating to local history and the Joan Auld Memorial Collection, an important collection of labour history books donated to the university in 1996 in memory of Joan Auld, the first university archivist, who had died in a climbing accident the previous year.

Archive Services also runs an ongoing oral history project to record the memories of individuals who have lived and worked in Dundee and hold public events to promote the project.

==Notable alumni and staff==

This list includes certain persons who are graduates of the University of St Andrews, having studied at the University College or Queen&#x27;s College in Dundee, as well as graduates of the University of Dundee. This is a result of the incorporation of this institution in the other from 1897 to 1967. Indeed, in a great many respects, the medical school at the University of Dundee is the direct inheritor of the medical traditions of the University of St Andrews. It also includes notable former members of staff of these institutions.

Former chancellor Sir James Black, who had studied medicine at the then University College Dundee, won the Nobel Prize for Medicine for his work on the discovery of propranolol – a beta-blocker for the treatment of hypertension. Ronald Coase served as a founding lecturer from 1932 to 1934 of the Dundee School of Economics and Commerce. Coase received the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences in 1991 for his work on the significance of transaction costs and property rights for the institutional structure and functioning of the economy.

===Business and economics===

* Ahmed Adamu, Nigerian economist and first global chairperson of the Commonwealth Youth Council
* Sir Robert Horton, former chairman of BP and Railtrack
* Sir George Mathewson, Chairman of the Royal Bank of Scotland Group (2001–2006); Convenor of the Scottish Council of Economic Advisers (2007–2011)
* Sanusi Ohiare, Nigerian economist and former executive director of Nigeria&#x27;s Rural Electrification Fund (2017-2023)

===Law===
===Media and the arts===
* Johanna Basford, illustrator
* Naetochukwu Chikwe (Naeto-C), musician
* B. C. Forbes, founder of &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine
* Holly Hamilton, BBC journalist and presenter
* David Jackson, musician, best known for his involvement in Van der Graaf Generator
* Alan Johnston, BBC correspondent based in Gaza, famously kidnapped in 2007
* Gary Lightbody, lead singer of Snow Patrol
* Fred MacAulay, comedian and former rector of the university
* James McIntosh, food writer
* Graham Phillips, pro-Kremlin journalist covering the Russian invasion of Ukraine
* Karine Polwart, folk musician
* Carla Romano, GMTV reporter
* John Suchet, Channel Five news anchor, formerly of ITN

====Artists====

* Calum Colvin 
* Luke Fowler, 2012 Turner Prize Nominee
* David Mach, 1988 Turner Prize Nominee
* Lucy McKenzie
* Lewis Deeney
* Susan Philipsz, 2010 Turner Prize
* Thomson &amp; Craighead
* Louise Wilson (of Jane and Louise Wilson) 1999 Turner Prize Nominees

===Politics===
* John Peter Amewu, Member of Parliament, Parliament of Ghana; and Minister for Railways Development, Ghana 
* Malcolm Bruce, former Liberal Democrat Member of Parliament, Rector of the university (1986–89)
* Christopher Chope, Member of Parliament, former Minister of State and barrister
* Lynda Clark, Baroness Clark of Calton, former member of parliament and Advocate General for Scotland, now Senator of the College of Justice
* Chris Clarkson, Conservative member of parliament
* William Cullen, Baron Cullen of Whitekirk, advocate, judge, Lord Justice General and Lord President of the Court of Session as well as life peer
* Kurt Deketelaere, secretary-general of the League of European Research Universities
* Frank Doran, former Labour member of parliament 
* Kevin Dunion, Scottish Information Commissioner between 2003 and 2012, as well as former Lord Rector of the University of St Andrews
* Maurice Golden, Conservative member of the Scottish Parliament
* Boaz Kipchumba Kaino, former MP and assistant minister of lands and settlement. Republic of Kenya
*Geoffrey Aori Mabea, first executive secretary of the Energy Regulators Association of East Africa 
* Finlay Macdonald, retired minister and principal clerk to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland
* Jenny Marra, member of Scottish Parliament, attended Dundee to read the Diploma in Professional Legal Practice
* Paul Masterton, former Conservative MP and solicitor
* Bruce Millan, Labour MP, Secretary of State for Scotland and European Commissioner for Regional Policy
* Lewis Moonie, Baron Moonie – Labour politician, former minister of state
* Claude Moraes, former Commissioner for Racial Equality, former member of the European Parliament
* Craig Murray, former British ambassador to Uzbekistan, former president of DUSA, former rector of the university
* Elijah Ngurare, Namibian politician serving as the secretary general of the SWAPO Party Youth League
* Nhial Deng Nhial, Minister of Foreign Affairs for the Republic of South Sudan
* Alex Neil, Scottish National Party MSP, Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing
* George Robertson, Baron Robertson of Port Ellen, former Secretary-General of NATO, Labour MP and UK Secretary of State for Defence
* John Stevenson, Conservative MP and solicitor
* Brian Wilson, former Labour MP and Minister of State

=== Science, medicine and engineering ===

* Sir James W. Black, pharmacologist and Nobel laureate
* Sue Black, anatomist and forensic anthropologist
* William Thomas Calman, zoologist
* Richard A. Collins, scientist and author
* Jane Eddleston, medical doctor, professor and critical care expert
* Sir James Alfred Ewing, engineer and physicist
* Margaret Fairlie, gynaecologist and first female professor in Scotland
* Thomas Claxton Fidler, civil engineer
* Angus A. Fulton, civil engineer
* Sir Patrick Geddes, biologist, botanist and urban planning theorist
* Johannes Kuenen, physicist
* Peter LeComber, physicist
* Doris Mackinnon, zoologist
* Narendra Patel, obstetrician, former chancellor of the university
* Alexander David Peacock, zoologist
* William Peddie, mathematician and physicist
* Harold Plenderleith, art conservator and archaeologist
* George Dawson Preston, physicist
* Dorothy MacBride Radwanski, occupational health nurse
* Edward Waymouth Reid, physiologist
* William G. Smith, botanist and ecologist
* Walter Eric Spear, physicist
* John Steggall, mathematician
* Sir William Stewart, government chief scientific advisor
* D&#x27;Arcy Wentworth Thompson, biologist, mathematician, and classical scholar
* A. D. Walsh, chemist
* Sir Robert Alexander Watson-Watt, pioneer of radar
* William Alexander Young, doctor, surgeon and epidemiologist
* Isham Jaafar, Minister of Health in Brunei Darussalam

===Miscellaneous===
* Colin Norris, serial killer nurse who is believed to have been inspired by lectures at the university in 2001 to kill his patients
* David Shayler, Security Service officer who revealed state secrets to the public, editor of &quot;Annasach&quot; magazine while at the university
* Cardinal Cornelius Sim, Roman Catholic Bishop of the Apostolic Vicariate of Brunei Darussalam

==See also==

* Armorial of UK universities
* University of Dundee Botanic Garden – University gardens in the West End of the city.
* List of universities in the United Kingdom

==Notes==
==References==

;Bibliography
*Baxter, K., Rolfe, M. &amp; Swinfen, D. &quot;A Dundee Celebration&quot; (Dundee: University of Dundee), 2007. The most recent history of the University of Dundee which was produced to mark the fortieth anniversary of the university&#x27;s founding.
*Shafe, M. &quot;University Education in Dundee 1881–1981: A Pictorial History&quot; (Dundee: University of Dundee), 1982.
*Southgate, D., &quot;University Education in Dundee: A Centenary History&quot; (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press), 1982.
*White, R. M. &quot;Dundee Law 1865-1967: The Development of a Law School in a Time of Change&quot; (Dundee: Abertay Historical Society), 2019.
*Kenneth Baxter, &quot;University College, Dundee and the Great War&quot;. In Kenefick, William; Patrick, Derek. &quot;Tayside at War&quot;.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1249005" start="4" end="24" title="University of Dundee" label="University of Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="30" end="36" title="public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="37" end="56" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="66" end="72" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="104" end="122" title="University college#United Kingdom" label="university college"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="183" end="204" title="History of Dundee#Industrial revolution" label="textile manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354859" start="262" end="281" title="Collegiate university" label="constituent college"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="289" end="313" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887619" start="324" end="338" title="United College, St Andrews" label="United College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594480" start="343" end="365" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s College, St Andrews" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q207736" start="389" end="399" title="St Andrews" label="St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="506" end="519" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667285" start="560" end="567" title="ancient university" label="ancient"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752983" start="581" end="601" title="ancient university governance in Scotland" label="governance structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985027" start="666" end="674" title="West End, Dundee" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314669" start="759" end="806" title="Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design" label="Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895349" start="808" end="825" title="Dundee Law School" label="Dundee Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038594" start="913" end="931" title="Ninewells Hospital" label="Ninewells Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q27957875" start="948" end="966" title="University of Dundee Medical School" label="School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170888" start="968" end="989" title="Perth Royal Infirmary" label="Perth Royal Infirmary"/>
<link wikidata="Q691685" start="1039" end="1048" title="Kirkcaldy" label="Kirkcaldy"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="1050" end="1054" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407956" start="1361" end="1379" title="university college" label="university college"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="1404" end="1428" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887619" start="1950" end="1964" title="United College, St Andrews" label="United College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062984" start="2207" end="2222" title="Mary Ann Baxter" label="Mary Ann Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420805" start="2420" end="2437" title="Procurator Fiscal" label="Procurator Fiscal"/>
<link wikidata="Q202177" start="2441" end="2452" title="Forfarshire" label="Forfarshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016825" start="3450" end="3470" title="William Peterson (academic)" label="Sir William Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895637" start="3786" end="3807" title="University of London External Programme" label="external examinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="3815" end="3835" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016825" start="3975" end="3991" title="William Peterson (academic)" label="William Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="4026" end="4036" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058765" start="4304" end="4320" title="Mary Lily Walker" label="Mary Lily Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759389" start="4333" end="4349" title="Margaret Fairlie" label="Margaret Fairlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470215" start="4497" end="4526" title="Lady Hardinge Medical College" label="Lady Hardinge Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896355" start="5136" end="5155" title="Bute Medical School" label="Bute Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q342591" start="5574" end="5592" title="Robert Watson-Watt" label="Robert Watson-Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="5598" end="5603" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030477" start="5613" end="5636" title="William Alexander Young" label="William Alexander Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761" start="5674" end="5679" title="Accra" label="Accra"/>
<link wikidata="Q155736" start="5879" end="5888" title="Good faith" label="bona-fide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193162" start="5895" end="5906" title="matriculate" label="matriculate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193162" start="6038" end="6050" title="matriculation" label="matriculated"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="6239" end="6246" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6622" end="6633" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q575759" start="7085" end="7097" title="war memorial" label="war memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="7475" end="7490" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303225" start="7501" end="7539" title="rector of the University of St Andrews" label="rector of the University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7729" end="7738" title="Great War" label="Great War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759389" start="7903" end="7919" title="Margaret Fairlie" label="Margaret Fairlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q80015" start="7963" end="7989" title="obstetrics and gynaecology" label="obstetrics and gynaecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302115" start="8127" end="8144" title="Douglas Wimberley" label="Douglas Wimberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118956" start="8720" end="8734" title="Robbins Report" label="Robbins Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q963530" start="9028" end="9050" title="University of Stirling" label="University of Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610024" start="9115" end="9137" title="Heriot-Watt University" label="Heriot-Watt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859178" start="9146" end="9171" title="University of Strathclyde" label="University of Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894671" start="9429" end="9445" title="University Court" label="University Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="9520" end="9533" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="9557" end="9570" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752983" start="9880" end="9919" title="Ancient university governance in Scotland" label="ancient university governance structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314669" start="10022" end="10069" title="Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design" label="Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="10719" end="10725" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="10912" end="10926" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="11056" end="11073" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985027" start="11414" end="11422" title="West End, Dundee" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="11430" end="11444" title="Dundee" label="City of Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q381848" start="12402" end="12416" title="Patrick Geddes" label="Patrick Geddes"/>
<link wikidata="Q330856" start="12684" end="12706" title="Robert Rowand Anderson" label="Robert Rowand Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441562" start="12747" end="12781" title="Scottish National Portrait Gallery" label="Scottish National Portrait Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545344" start="12786" end="12804" title="Mount Stuart House" label="Mount Stuart House"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530378" start="12869" end="12885" title="post-war Britain" label="post-war Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q936470" start="13173" end="13191" title="James Alfred Ewing" label="James Alfred Ewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764236" start="13387" end="13409" title="Angus Robertson Fulton" label="Angus Robertson Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="13697" end="13729" title="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother" label="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787100" start="13749" end="13767" title="Architecture in modern Scotland" label="Scottish modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658496" start="13801" end="13815" title="Robert Matthew" label="Robert Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605920" start="14179" end="14190" title="Old Steeple" label="Old Steeple"/>
<link wikidata="Q20877049" start="15232" end="15246" title="Dundee College" label="Dundee College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998530" start="15884" end="15916" title="ancient universities of Scotland" label="ancient universities of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752983" start="15991" end="16019" title="ancient university governance in Scotland" label="ancient governance structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752983" start="16091" end="16119" title="Universities (Scotland) Acts" label="Universities (Scotland) Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054021" start="16290" end="16300" title="graduation" label="graduation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="16392" end="16424" title="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother" label="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287766" start="16439" end="16475" title="Simon Ramsay, 16th Earl of Dalhousie" label="Simon Ramsay, 16th Earl of Dalhousie"/>
<link wikidata="Q110974" start="16490" end="16508" title="James W. Black" label="Sir James W. Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965255" start="16523" end="16550" title="Narendra Patel, Baron Patel" label="Narendra Patel, Baron Patel"/>
<link wikidata="Q233974" start="16565" end="16590" title="Jocelyn Bell Burnell" label="Dame Jocelyn Bell Burnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q333056" start="16605" end="16627" title="George Robertson, Baron Robertson of Port Ellen" label="Baron George Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303223" start="16656" end="16680" title="Rector of the University of Dundee" label="rector of the university"/>
<link wikidata="Q212071" start="16795" end="16825" title="Rector (academia)" label="university rectors in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q201927" start="17281" end="17297" title="David Hasselhoff" label="David Hasselhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q17807407" start="17492" end="17512" title="Dundee City Chambers" label="Dundee City Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q235356" start="17560" end="17568" title="carriage" label="carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="17606" end="17609" title="pub" label="pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q104243728" start="17728" end="17740" title="Keith Harris (artist manager)" label="Keith Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198244" start="17800" end="17810" title="Jim Spence (broadcaster)" label="Jim Spence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165388" start="17973" end="17986" title="Mark Beaumont (cyclist)" label="Mark Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q55796" start="18100" end="18117" title="Peter Ustinov" label="Sir Peter Ustinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477007" start="18119" end="18136" title="Clement Freud" label="Sir Clement Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="18142" end="18153" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q726260" start="18186" end="18198" title="Craig Murray" label="Craig Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559165" start="18200" end="18213" title="Tony Slattery" label="Tony Slattery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259652" start="18215" end="18229" title="Lorraine Kelly" label="Lorraine Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495836" start="18234" end="18247" title="Fred MacAulay" label="Fred MacAulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="18639" end="18663" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q28777167" start="18925" end="18940" title="Peter Downes" label="Sir Pete Downes"/>
<link wikidata="Q68265068" start="18984" end="19009" title="Andrew Atherton" label="Professor Andrew Atherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016825" start="19231" end="19247" title="William Peterson (academic)" label="William Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q27919776" start="19262" end="19278" title="John Yule Mackay" label="John Yule Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806508" start="19293" end="19309" title="Sir James Irvine" label="Sir James Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764236" start="19358" end="19380" title="Angus Robertson Fulton" label="Angus Robertson Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302115" start="19429" end="19446" title="Douglas Wimberley" label="Douglas Wimberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132834" start="19587" end="19599" title="James Drever" label="James Drever"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132834" start="19664" end="19676" title="James Drever" label="James Drever"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949080" start="19784" end="19802" title="Alan Langlands" label="Sir Alan Langlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q28777167" start="19817" end="19832" title="Peter Downes" label="Sir Pete Downes"/>
<link wikidata="Q68265068" start="19847" end="19862" title="Andrew Atherton" label="Andrew Atherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q60227802" start="19872" end="19885" title="David Maguire" label="David Maguire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314669" start="20295" end="20342" title="Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design" label="Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q60756006" start="20647" end="20660" title="School of Life Sciences (University of Dundee)" label="Life Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q27957875" start="20683" end="20691" title="University of Dundee Medical School" label="Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="21239" end="21267" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q478743" start="21289" end="21327" title="Academic Ranking of World Universities" label="Academic Ranking of World Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315085" start="21532" end="21561" title="Research Excellence Framework" label="Research Excellence Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039999" start="21741" end="21769" title="Institute of Cancer Research" label="Institute of Cancer Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318318" start="21793" end="21852" title="Times Higher Education World University Rankings" label="Times Higher Education World University Rankings by Subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310138" start="22678" end="22715" title="students&amp;#x27; representative council" label="students&amp;#x27; representative council"/>
<link wikidata="Q877998" start="22934" end="22954" title="students&amp;#x27; union" label="students&amp;#x27; union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979170" start="23004" end="23030" title="National Union of Students (United Kingdom)" label="National Union of Students"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310138" start="23368" end="23405" title="students&amp;#x27; representative council" label="students&amp;#x27; representative council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928811" start="24083" end="24106" title="Blue (university sport)" label="Blue (university sport)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19719" start="24593" end="24596" title="River Tay" label="Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971185" start="24862" end="24909" title="British University Gaelic football Championship" label="British University Gaelic football Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="25309" end="25327" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505736" start="25601" end="25620" title="Freshers&amp;#x27; Week" label="Freshers&amp;#x27; Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="25788" end="25812" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q203937" start="25911" end="25929" title="De Brevitate Vitae" label="De Brevitate Vitae"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="27904" end="27909" title="apartments" label="flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q994776" start="29073" end="29082" title="brutalist" label="brutalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302115" start="29597" end="29614" title="Douglas Wimberley" label="Douglas Wimberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519818" start="30166" end="30178" title="the Art Fund" label="the Art Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q739438" start="30220" end="30240" title="D&amp;#x27;Arcy Thompson" label="D&amp;#x27;Arcy Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q633294" start="31025" end="31032" title="Tayside" label="Tayside"/>
<link wikidata="Q107211" start="31122" end="31126" title="jute" label="jute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426327" start="31131" end="31136" title="linen" label="linen"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="31149" end="31155" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732335" start="31231" end="31245" title="Alliance Trust" label="Alliance Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q778172" start="31304" end="31319" title="Diocese of Brechin (Episcopal)" label="Brechin Diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205829" start="31327" end="31352" title="Scottish Episcopal Church" label="Scottish Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q15455941" start="31358" end="31370" title="Michael Peto" label="Michael Peto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954176" start="31403" end="31414" title="NHS Tayside" label="NHS Tayside"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041283" start="31489" end="31513" title="Dundee Repertory Theatre" label="Dundee Repertory Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6284877" start="31551" end="31570" title="Joseph Lee (poet)" label="Joseph Johnston Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220573" start="31753" end="31760" title="Glasite" label="Glasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="32380" end="32404" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="32760" end="32784" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q110974" start="32881" end="32892" title="James Black (pharmacologist)" label="James Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="32966" end="32977" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q423364" start="33024" end="33035" title="propranolol" label="propranolol"/>
<link wikidata="Q816759" start="33040" end="33052" title="beta-blocker" label="beta-blocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="33074" end="33086" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q188113" start="33088" end="33100" title="Ronald Coase" label="Ronald Coase"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="33216" end="33248" title="Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences" label="Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308774" start="33428" end="33439" title="Ahmed Adamu" label="Ahmed Adamu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345628" start="33529" end="33542" title="Robert Horton (businessman)" label="Robert Horton"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="33563" end="33565" title="BP" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q489224" start="33570" end="33579" title="Railtrack" label="Railtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542239" start="33586" end="33602" title="George Mathewson" label="George Mathewson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218598" start="33620" end="33648" title="Royal Bank of Scotland Group" label="Royal Bank of Scotland Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176390" start="33687" end="33715" title="Council of Economic Advisers (Scotland)" label="Council of Economic Advisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q107105255" start="33730" end="33743" title="Sanusi Ohiare" label="Sanusi Ohiare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="33797" end="33804" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619324" start="33889" end="33904" title="Johanna Basford" label="Johanna Basford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6958125" start="33920" end="33938" title="Naeto C" label="Naetochukwu Chikwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q718435" start="33961" end="33973" title="B. C. Forbes" label="B. C. Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="33992" end="33998" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q60676367" start="34016" end="34030" title="Holly Hamilton" label="Holly Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174850" start="34063" end="34076" title="David Jackson (rock musician)" label="David Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q752170" start="34122" end="34145" title="Van der Graaf Generator" label="Van der Graaf Generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q362240" start="34148" end="34161" title="Alan Johnston" label="Alan Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="34163" end="34166" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="34190" end="34194" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q705424" start="34225" end="34239" title="Gary Lightbody" label="Gary Lightbody"/>
<link wikidata="Q188407" start="34256" end="34267" title="Snow Patrol" label="Snow Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495836" start="34270" end="34283" title="Fred MacAulay" label="Fred MacAulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063503" start="34332" end="34346" title="James McIntosh (food writer)" label="James McIntosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999575" start="34362" end="34377" title="Graham Phillips (journalist)" label="Graham Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="34415" end="34442" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729615" start="34445" end="34459" title="Karine Polwart" label="Karine Polwart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658863" start="34477" end="34489" title="Carla Romano" label="Carla Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734852" start="34491" end="34495" title="GMTV" label="GMTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259588" start="34507" end="34518" title="John Suchet" label="John Suchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="34520" end="34532" title="Five (channel)" label="Channel Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210241" start="34558" end="34561" title="ITN" label="ITN"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194010" start="34582" end="34594" title="Calum Colvin" label="Calum Colvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4481506" start="34598" end="34609" title="Luke Fowler" label="Luke Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153097" start="34639" end="34649" title="David Mach" label="David Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275768" start="34679" end="34692" title="Lucy McKenzie" label="Lucy McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q118903239" start="34695" end="34707" title="Lewis Deeney" label="Lewis Deeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648284" start="34710" end="34724" title="Susan Philipsz" label="Susan Philipsz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795856" start="34746" end="34769" title="Thomson &amp;amp; Craighead" label="Thomson &amp;amp; Craighead"/>
<link wikidata="Q15493945" start="34790" end="34812" title="Jane and Louise Wilson" label="Jane and Louise Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q30160145" start="34859" end="34875" title="John Peter Amewu" label="John Peter Amewu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807513" start="34899" end="34918" title="Parliament of Ghana" label="Parliament of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="34959" end="34964" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q266113" start="34968" end="34981" title="Malcolm Bruce" label="Malcolm Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="34990" end="35006" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="35007" end="35027" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303223" start="35029" end="35053" title="Rector of the University of Dundee" label="Rector of the university"/>
<link wikidata="Q271715" start="35066" end="35083" title="Christopher Chope" label="Christopher Chope"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="35085" end="35105" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632935" start="35114" end="35131" title="Minister of State" label="Minister of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="35136" end="35145" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q336111" start="35148" end="35185" title="Lynda Clark, Baroness Clark of Calton" label="Lynda Clark, Baroness Clark of Calton"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="35194" end="35214" title="member of parliament" label="member of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928362" start="35219" end="35248" title="Advocate General for Scotland" label="Advocate General for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450071" start="35254" end="35287" title="Senator of the College of Justice" label="Senator of the College of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q76729340" start="35290" end="35304" title="Chris Clarkson (politician)" label="Chris Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="35306" end="35318" title="Conservative Party(UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q185189" start="35342" end="35383" title="William Cullen, Baron Cullen of Whitekirk" label="William Cullen, Baron Cullen of Whitekirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="35477" end="35486" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075900" start="35489" end="35505" title="Kurt Deketelaere" label="Kurt Deketelaere"/>
<link wikidata="Q300334" start="35575" end="35586" title="Frank Doran (British politician)" label="Frank Doran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396199" start="35626" end="35638" title="Kevin Dunion" label="Kevin Dunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437791" start="35640" end="35673" title="Scottish Information Commissioner" label="Scottish Information Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303225" start="35720" end="35758" title="Rector of the University of St Andrews" label="Rector of the University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039803" start="35761" end="35775" title="Maurice Golden" label="Maurice Golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243587" start="35777" end="35789" title="Scottish Conservatives" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="35790" end="35823" title="member of the Scottish Parliament" label="member of the Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931560" start="35826" end="35846" title="Boaz Kipchumba Kaino" label="Boaz Kipchumba Kaino"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="35906" end="35923" title="Kenya" label="Republic of Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q113604400" start="35925" end="35944" title="Geoffrey Aori Mabea" label="Geoffrey Aori Mabea"/>
<link wikidata="Q107564680" start="35979" end="36023" title="Energy Regulators Association of East Africa" label="Energy Regulators Association of East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450541" start="36027" end="36043" title="Finlay Macdonald (minister)" label="Finlay Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36066" end="36105" title="Moderators and clerks in the Church of Scotland#Clerks to the Assembly" label="principal clerk to the General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="36113" end="36131" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687049" start="36134" end="36145" title="Jenny Marra" label="Jenny Marra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279880" start="36206" end="36244" title="Diploma in Professional Legal Practice" label="Diploma in Professional Legal Practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q30164281" start="36247" end="36261" title="Paul Masterton" label="Paul Masterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q333293" start="36302" end="36314" title="Bruce Millan" label="Bruce Millan"/>
<link wikidata="Q111784" start="36327" end="36358" title="Secretary of State for Scotland" label="Secretary of State for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145918" start="36363" end="36404" title="European Commissioner for Regional Policy" label="European Commissioner for Regional Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q74329" start="36407" end="36419" title="Lewis Moonie, Baron Moonie" label="Lewis Moonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097007" start="36482" end="36495" title="Claude Moraes" label="Claude Moraes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152654" start="36504" end="36536" title="Commission for Racial Equality" label="Commissioner for Racial Equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q726260" start="36581" end="36593" title="Craig Murray" label="Craig Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303223" start="36669" end="36693" title="Rector of the University of Dundee" label="rector of the university"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360975" start="36696" end="36710" title="Elijah Ngurare" label="Elijah Ngurare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395142" start="36772" end="36796" title="SWAPO Party Youth League" label="SWAPO Party Youth League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893553" start="36799" end="36815" title="Nhial Deng Nhial" label="Nhial Deng Nhial"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="36853" end="36876" title="South Sudan" label="Republic of South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515752" start="36879" end="36888" title="Alex Neil (politician)" label="Alex Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="36890" end="36913" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q107694341" start="36919" end="36961" title="Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing" label="Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q333056" start="36964" end="37011" title="George Robertson, Baron Robertson of Port Ellen" label="George Robertson, Baron Robertson of Port Ellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="37041" end="37045" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747647" start="37064" end="37094" title="Secretary of State for Defence" label="Secretary of State for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q341538" start="37097" end="37111" title="John Stevenson (British politician)" label="John Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q338231" start="37145" end="37157" title="Brian Wilson (Labour politician)" label="Brian Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q110974" start="37248" end="37262" title="James W. Black" label="James W. Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="37283" end="37297" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634019" start="37300" end="37309" title="Sue Black (anthropologist)" label="Sue Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q640023" start="37351" end="37372" title="William Thomas Calman" label="William Thomas Calman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323549" start="37386" end="37404" title="Richard A. Collins" label="Richard A. Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q124287926" start="37429" end="37443" title="Jane Eddleston" label="Jane Eddleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q936470" start="37502" end="37520" title="James Alfred Ewing" label="James Alfred Ewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759389" start="37547" end="37563" title="Margaret Fairlie" label="Margaret Fairlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q43311688" start="37620" end="37641" title="Thomas Claxton Fidler" label="Thomas Claxton Fidler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764117" start="37660" end="37675" title="Angus Fulton" label="Angus A. Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q381848" start="37698" end="37712" title="Patrick Geddes" label="Patrick Geddes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359537" start="37764" end="37779" title="Johannes Kuenen" label="Johannes Kuenen"/>
<link wikidata="Q21165153" start="37793" end="37807" title="Peter LeComber" label="Peter LeComber"/>
<link wikidata="Q18576043" start="37821" end="37836" title="Doris Mackinnon" label="Doris Mackinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965255" start="37850" end="37864" title="Narendra Patel, Baron Patel" label="Narendra Patel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44829546" start="37918" end="37941" title="Alexander David Peacock" label="Alexander David Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q37736851" start="37955" end="37969" title="William Peddie" label="William Peddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12632131" start="38001" end="38020" title="Harold Plenderleith" label="Harold Plenderleith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101519" start="38058" end="38079" title="George Dawson Preston" label="George Dawson Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q116198575" start="38093" end="38119" title="Dorothy MacBride Radwanski" label="Dorothy MacBride Radwanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q21166178" start="38149" end="38169" title="Edward Waymouth Reid" label="Edward Waymouth Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568648" start="38186" end="38202" title="William Gardner Smith (botanist)" label="William G. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156363" start="38229" end="38246" title="Walter Eric Spear" label="Walter Eric Spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q37737959" start="38260" end="38273" title="John Steggall" label="John Steggall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018830" start="38295" end="38310" title="William Stewart (biologist)" label="William Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q739438" start="38350" end="38380" title="D&amp;#x27;Arcy Wentworth Thompson" label="D&amp;#x27;Arcy Wentworth Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q93400" start="38432" end="38443" title="A. D. Walsh" label="A. D. Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q342591" start="38459" end="38487" title="Robert Alexander Watson-Watt" label="Robert Alexander Watson-Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="38500" end="38505" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030477" start="38508" end="38531" title="William Alexander Young" label="William Alexander Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q110274040" start="38570" end="38582" title="Isham Jaafar" label="Isham Jaafar"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="38606" end="38623" title="Brunei Darussalam" label="Brunei Darussalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821730" start="38647" end="38659" title="Colin Norris" label="Colin Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q484188" start="38661" end="38674" title="serial killer" label="serial killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018780" start="38780" end="38793" title="David Shayler" label="David Shayler"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="38795" end="38811" title="MI5" label="Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="38928" end="38936" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133956" start="38937" end="38950" title="Cornelius Sim" label="Cornelius Sim"/>
<link wikidata="Q611644" start="38952" end="38973" title="Roman Catholic Bishop" label="Roman Catholic Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q620270" start="38981" end="39021" title="Apostolic Vicariate of Brunei Darussalam" label="Apostolic Vicariate of Brunei Darussalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359871" start="39039" end="39066" title="Armorial of UK universities" label="Armorial of UK universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895350" start="39069" end="39104" title="University of Dundee Botanic Garden" label="University of Dundee Botanic Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746976" start="39157" end="39199" title="List of universities in the United Kingdom" label="List of universities in the United Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405481" wikidata="Q6076993" url="?curid=405481" title="Isaac Reed">
<text>Isaac Reed (1 January 1742 – 5 January 1807) was an English Shakespearean editor.

==Biography==
The son of a baker, he was born in London. He was articled to a solicitor, and eventually set up as a conveyancer at Staple Inn, where he had a large practice.

His major work was the &quot;Biographia dramatica&quot; (2 vols., 1782), a set of biographies of dramatists and a descriptive dictionary of their plays. This book, which was an enlargement of David Erskine Baker&#x27;s &quot;Companion to the Playhouse&quot; (2 vols., 1764), was re-edited (3 vols.) by Stephen Jones in 1811. The original work by Baker had been based on Gerard Langbaine&#x27;s &quot;Account of the English Dramatick Poets&quot; (1691), Giles Jacob&#x27;s &quot;Poetical Register&quot; (1719), Thomas Whincop&#x27;s &quot;List of all the Dramatic Authors&quot; (printed with his tragedy of &quot;Scanderbeg&quot;, 1747) and the manuscripts of Thomas Coxeter. Reed&#x27;s &quot;Notitia dramatica&quot; (British Library, Add MSS 25390–25392), supplementary to the &quot;Biographia&quot;, was never published.

He also revised Robert Dodsley&#x27;s &quot;Collection of Old Plays&quot; (12 vols., 1780); and re-edited Samuel Johnson and George Steevens&#x27;s edition (1773) of Shakespeare. Reed&#x27;s edition was published in ten volumes (1785), and he gave great assistance to Steevens in his edition (1793). He was Steevens&#x27;s literary executor, and in 1803 published another edition (21 vols.) based on Steevens&#x27;s later collections. This, which is known as the first variorum, was re-issued ten years later.

Reed directed the &quot;European Magazine&quot; as a proprietor and editor, from 1782 for the duration of his life. After his death, his library of theatrical literature was catalogued for sale as &quot;Bibliotheca Reediana&quot; (1807).

In 2016, it was announced that a Shakespeare First Folio had been discovered in the library of Mount Stuart House. The book was identified as a working copy once owned by Reed, who had bought it in 1786.

==References==
===Bibliography===
*John Nichols &quot;Literary Anecdotes of the 18th Century&quot; (vol. ii., 1812); 
*Edward Dowden, &quot;Essays, Modern and Elizabethan&quot;.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6076993" start="0" end="10" title="Isaac Reed" label="Isaac Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="60" end="71" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="132" end="138" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q14284" start="161" end="170" title="solicitor" label="solicitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q759815" start="199" end="210" title="Conveyancing" label="conveyancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600449" start="214" end="224" title="Staple Inn" label="Staple Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233420" start="450" end="469" title="David Erskine Baker" label="David Erskine Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609621" start="560" end="573" title="Stephen Jones (editor)" label="Stephen Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550054" start="628" end="644" title="Gerard Langbaine" label="Gerard Langbaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15493903" start="711" end="722" title="Giles Jacob" label="Giles Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795041" start="768" end="782" title="Thomas Whincop" label="Thomas Whincop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788667" start="917" end="931" title="Thomas Coxeter" label="Thomas Coxeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="976" end="991" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434980" start="1098" end="1112" title="Robert Dodsley" label="Robert Dodsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="1188" end="1202" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450536" start="1207" end="1222" title="George Steevens" label="George Steevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426712" start="1405" end="1422" title="literary executor" label="literary executor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412795" start="1617" end="1634" title="European Magazine" label="European Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1865" end="1876" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q833645" start="1877" end="1888" title="First Folio" label="First Folio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545344" start="1927" end="1945" title="Mount Stuart House" label="Mount Stuart House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250441" start="2072" end="2084" title="John Nichols (printer)" label="John Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q970472" start="2156" end="2169" title="Edward Dowden" label="Edward Dowden"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405484" wikidata="Q92735" url="?curid=405484" title="Jürgen Schmidhuber">
<text>Jürgen Schmidhuber (born 17 January 1963) is a German computer scientist noted for his work in the field of artificial intelligence, specifically artificial neural networks. He is a scientific director of the Dalle Molle Institute for Artificial Intelligence Research in Switzerland. He is also director of the Artificial Intelligence Initiative and professor of the Computer Science program in the Computer, Electrical, and Mathematical Sciences and Engineering (CEMSE) division at the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST) in Saudi Arabia.

He is best known for his foundational and highly-cited work on long short-term memory (LSTM), a type of neural network architecture which was the dominant technique for various natural language processing tasks in research and commercial applications in the 2010s. He also introduced principles of dynamic neural networks, meta-learning, generative adversarial networks and linear transformers, all of which are widespread in modern AI.

==Career==
Schmidhuber completed his undergraduate (1987) and PhD (1991) studies at the Technical University of Munich in Munich, Germany. His PhD advisors were Wilfried Brauer and Klaus Schulten. He taught there from 2004 until 2009. From 2009, until 2021, he was a professor of artificial intelligence at the Università della Svizzera Italiana in Lugano, Switzerland.

He has served as the director of Dalle Molle Institute for Artificial Intelligence Research (IDSIA), a Swiss AI lab, since 1995.

In 2014, Schmidhuber formed a company, Nnaisense, to work on commercial applications of artificial intelligence in fields such as finance, heavy industry and self-driving cars. Sepp Hochreiter, Jaan Tallinn, and Marcus Hutter are advisers to the company. Sales were under US$11 million in 2016; however, Schmidhuber states that the current emphasis is on research and not revenue. Nnaisense raised its first round of capital funding in January 2017. Schmidhuber&#x27;s overall goal is to create an all-purpose AI by training a single AI in sequence on a variety of narrow tasks.

==Research==

In the 1980s, backpropagation did not work well for deep learning with long credit assignment paths in artificial neural networks. To overcome this problem, Schmidhuber (1991) proposed a hierarchy of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) pre-trained one level at a time by self-supervised learning. It uses predictive coding to learn internal representations at multiple self-organizing time scales. This can substantially facilitate downstream deep learning. The RNN hierarchy can be &quot;collapsed&quot; into a single RNN, by distilling a higher level &quot;chunker&quot; network into a lower level &quot;automatizer&quot; network. In 1993, a chunker solved a deep learning task whose depth exceeded 1000.

In 1991, Schmidhuber published adversarial neural networks that contest with each other in the form of a zero-sum game, where one network&#x27;s gain is the other network&#x27;s loss. The first network is a generative model that models a probability distribution over output patterns. The second network learns by gradient descent to predict the reactions of the environment to these patterns. This was called &quot;artificial curiosity.&quot; In 2014, this principle was used in a generative adversarial network where the environmental reaction is 1 or 0 depending on whether the first network&#x27;s output is in a given set. GANs were the state of the art in generative modeling during 2015-2020 period.

Schmidhuber supervised the 1991 diploma thesis of his student Sepp Hochreiter which he considered &quot;one of the most important documents in the history of machine learning&quot;. It studied the &quot;neural history compressor&quot;, and more importantly analyzed and overcame the vanishing gradient problem. This led to the long short-term memory (LSTM), a type of recurrent neural network. The name LSTM was introduced in a tech report (1995) 
leading to the most cited LSTM publication (1997), co-authored by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber. 
It was not yet the standard LSTM architecture which is used in almost all current applications. The standard LSTM architecture was introduced in 2000 by Felix Gers, Schmidhuber, and Fred Cummins. Today&#x27;s &quot;vanilla LSTM&quot; using backpropagation through time was published with his student Alex Graves in 2005, and its connectionist temporal classification (CTC) training algorithm in 2006. CTC was applied to end-to-end speech recognition with LSTM. By the 2010s, the LSTM became the dominant technique for a variety of natural language processing tasks including speech recognition and machine translation, and was widely implemented in commercial technologies such as Google Neural Machine Translation, have also been used in Google Voice for transcription and search, and Siri.

In 2014, the state of the art was training “very deep neural network” with 20 to 30 layers. Stacking too many layers led to a steep reduction in training accuracy, known as the &quot;degradation&quot; problem. In May 2015, Rupesh Kumar Srivastava, Klaus Greff, and Schmidhuber used LSTM principles to create the highway network, a feedforward neural network with hundreds of layers, much deeper than previous networks. In Dec 2015, the residual neural network (ResNet) was published, which is a variant of the highway network.

In 1992, Schmidhuber published &quot;fast weights programmer&quot;, an alternative to recurrent neural networks. It has a slow feedforward neural network that learns by gradient descent to control the fast weights of another neural network through outer products of self-generated activation patterns, and the fast weights network itself operates over inputs. This was later shown to be equivalent to the unnormalized linear Transformer. Schmidhuber used the terminology &quot;learning internal spotlights of attention&quot; in 1993.

In 2011, Schmidhuber&#x27;s team at IDSIA with his postdoc Dan Ciresan also achieved dramatic speedups of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) on fast parallel computers called GPUs. An earlier CNN on GPU by Chellapilla et al. (2006) was 4 times faster than an equivalent implementation on CPU. The deep CNN of Dan Ciresan et al. (2011) at IDSIA was already 60 times faster and achieved the first superhuman performance in a computer vision contest in August 2011. Between 15 May 2011 and 10 September 2012, these CNNs won four more image competitions and improved the state of the art on multiple image benchmarks. The approach has become central to the field of computer vision. It is based on CNN designs introduced much earlier by Kunihiko Fukushima.

==Credit disputes==
Schmidhuber has controversially argued that he and other researchers have been denied adequate recognition for their contribution to the field of deep learning, in favour of Geoffrey Hinton, Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun, who shared the 2018 Turing Award for their work in deep learning. He wrote a &quot;scathing&quot; 2015 article arguing that Hinton, Bengio and Lecun &quot;heavily cite each other&quot; but &quot;fail to credit the pioneers of the field&quot;. In a statement to the &quot;New York Times&quot;, Yann LeCun wrote that &quot;Jürgen is manically obsessed with recognition and keeps claiming credit he doesn&#x27;t deserve for many, many things... It causes him to systematically stand up at the end of every talk and claim credit for what was just presented, generally not in a justified manner.&quot; Schmidhuber replied that LeCun did this &quot;without any justification, without providing a single example,&quot; and published details of numerous priority disputes with Hinton, Bengio and LeCun.

The term &quot;schmidhubered&quot; has been jokingly used in the AI community to describe Schmidhuber&#x27;s habit of publicly challenging the originality of other researchers&#x27; work, a practice seen by some in the AI community as a &quot;rite of passage&quot; for young researchers. Some suggest that Schmidhuber&#x27;s significant accomplishments have been underappreciated due to his confrontational personality.

== Recognition ==

Schmidhuber received the Helmholtz Award of the International Neural Network Society in 2013, and the Neural Networks Pioneer Award of the IEEE Computational Intelligence Society in 2016 for &quot;pioneering contributions to deep learning and neural networks.&quot; He is a member of the European Academy of Sciences and Arts.

He has been referred to as the &quot;father of modern AI&quot; or similar, the &quot;father of Generative AI,&quot; and also the &quot;father of deep learning.&quot; Schmidhuber himself, however, has called Alexey Grigorevich Ivakhnenko the &quot;father of deep learning,&quot; and gives credit to many even earlier AI pioneers.

== Views ==
Schmidhuber is a proponent of open source AI, and believes that they will become competitive against commercial closed-source AI.

Since the 1970s, Schmidhuber wanted to create &quot;intelligent machines that could learn and improve on their own and become smarter than him within his lifetime.&quot; He differentiates between two types of AIs: tool AI, such as those for improving healthcare, and autonomous AIs that set their own goals, perform their own research, and explore the universe. He has worked on both types for decades, He expects the next stage of evolution to be self-improving AIs that will succeed human civilization as the next stage in the universal increase towards ever-increasing complexity, and he expects AI to colonize the visible universe.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q92735" start="0" end="18" title="Jürgen Schmidhuber" label="Jürgen Schmidhuber"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="54" end="72" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="108" end="131" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q192776" start="146" end="172" title="artificial neural networks" label="artificial neural networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211467" start="209" end="267" title="Dalle Molle Institute for Artificial Intelligence Research" label="Dalle Molle Institute for Artificial Intelligence Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="271" end="282" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463036" start="487" end="537" title="King Abdullah University of Science and Technology" label="King Abdullah University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="549" end="561" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673524" start="627" end="649" title="long short-term memory" label="long short-term memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642" start="741" end="768" title="natural language processing" label="natural language processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860946" start="862" end="884" title="dynamic neural network" label="dynamic neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822311" start="887" end="900" title="meta-learning (computer science)" label="meta-learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q25104379" start="902" end="932" title="generative adversarial network" label="generative adversarial network"/>
<link wikidata="Q85810444" start="945" end="956" title="transformer (machine learning)" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q157808" start="1090" end="1120" title="Technical University of Munich" label="Technical University of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="1124" end="1130" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q92889" start="1163" end="1178" title="Wilfried Brauer" label="Wilfried Brauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665429" start="1183" end="1197" title="Klaus Schulten" label="Klaus Schulten"/>
<link wikidata="Q689617" start="1313" end="1347" title="Università della Svizzera Italiana" label="Università della Svizzera Italiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024" start="1351" end="1357" title="Lugano" label="Lugano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211467" start="1406" end="1464" title="Dalle Molle Institute for Artificial Intelligence Research" label="Dalle Molle Institute for Artificial Intelligence Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q741490" start="1661" end="1677" title="self-driving car" label="self-driving car"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451965" start="1680" end="1695" title="Sepp Hochreiter" label="Sepp Hochreiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156998" start="1697" end="1709" title="Jaan Tallinn" label="Jaan Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758241" start="1715" end="1728" title="Marcus Hutter" label="Marcus Hutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264109" start="2001" end="2015" title="artificial general intelligence" label="all-purpose AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q798503" start="2111" end="2126" title="backpropagation" label="backpropagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q197536" start="2149" end="2162" title="deep learning" label="deep learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q192776" start="2200" end="2225" title="artificial neural network" label="artificial neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457734" start="2297" end="2321" title="recurrent neural network" label="recurrent neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q77562367" start="2365" end="2389" title="self-supervised learning" label="self-supervised learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315146" start="2399" end="2416" title="predictive coding" label="predictive coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478658" start="2426" end="2450" title="Knowledge representation" label="internal representations"/>
<link wikidata="Q74253442" start="2621" end="2631" title="Knowledge distillation" label="distilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q12811862" start="2845" end="2859" title="neural network" label="neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q156612" start="2907" end="2920" title="zero-sum game" label="zero-sum game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532625" start="3009" end="3025" title="generative model" label="generative model"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="3040" end="3064" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199743" start="3116" end="3132" title="gradient descent" label="gradient descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q25104379" start="3284" end="3314" title="generative adversarial network" label="generative adversarial network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451965" start="3572" end="3587" title="Sepp Hochreiter" label="Sepp Hochreiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358230" start="3793" end="3819" title="vanishing gradient problem" label="vanishing gradient problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673524" start="3837" end="3859" title="long short-term memory" label="long short-term memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457734" start="3878" end="3902" title="recurrent neural network" label="recurrent neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q29918552" start="4206" end="4216" title="Felix Gers" label="Felix Gers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839711" start="4293" end="4321" title="backpropagation through time" label="backpropagation through time"/>
<link wikidata="Q25189853" start="4353" end="4364" title="Alex Graves (computer scientist)" label="Alex Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q48996438" start="4382" end="4425" title="connectionist temporal classification (CTC)" label="connectionist temporal classification (CTC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q189436" start="4628" end="4646" title="speech recognition" label="speech recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q79798" start="4651" end="4670" title="machine translation" label="machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28325020" start="4734" end="4767" title="Google Neural Machine Translation" label="Google Neural Machine Translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q51712" start="4792" end="4804" title="Google Voice" label="Google Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q582159" start="4839" end="4843" title="Siri" label="Siri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985153" start="4991" end="4999" title="Training, validation, and test data sets" label="training"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673524" start="5128" end="5132" title="LSTM" label="LSTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417573" start="5158" end="5173" title="highway network" label="highway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441227" start="5177" end="5203" title="feedforward neural network" label="feedforward neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q43744058" start="5282" end="5305" title="residual neural network" label="residual neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457734" start="5460" end="5484" title="recurrent neural network" label="recurrent neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441227" start="5501" end="5527" title="feedforward neural network" label="feedforward neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199743" start="5543" end="5559" title="gradient descent" label="gradient descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268589" start="5622" end="5635" title="outer product" label="outer product"/>
<link wikidata="Q85810444" start="5799" end="5810" title="Transformer (deep learning architecture)" label="Transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084460" start="6015" end="6043" title="convolutional neural network" label="convolutional neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="6086" end="6089" title="GPU" label="GPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q844240" start="6573" end="6588" title="computer vision" label="computer vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q61904879" start="6644" end="6662" title="Kunihiko Fukushima" label="Kunihiko Fukushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q197536" start="6831" end="6844" title="deep learning" label="deep learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q92894" start="6859" end="6874" title="Geoffrey Hinton" label="Geoffrey Hinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572699" start="6876" end="6889" title="Yoshua Bengio" label="Yoshua Bengio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571662" start="6894" end="6904" title="Yann LeCun" label="Yann LeCun"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="6926" end="6938" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="8281" end="8320" title="IEEE Computational Intelligence Society" label="IEEE Computational Intelligence Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q46703" start="8430" end="8467" title="European Academy of Sciences and Arts" label="European Academy of Sciences and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196973" start="8677" end="8706" title="Alexey Grigorevich Ivakhnenko" label="Alexey Grigorevich Ivakhnenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q28324961" start="9184" end="9204" title="Artificial intelligence in healthcare" label="improving healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826847" start="9210" end="9223" title="autonomous AI" label="autonomous AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768494" start="9391" end="9409" title="Recursive self-improvement" label="self-improving AIs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405485" wikidata="Q857972" url="?curid=405485" title="Kobudō">
<text>is a collective term for Japanese traditional techniques for the use of armour, blades, firearms, and techniques related to combat and horse riding. The &quot;kanji&quot; 古流武術 (old-school martial arts) and 古武術 (old martial arts) are other ways of writing it. The general umbrella term is also used to describe these ancient arts.

== Definition and features ==
&quot;Kobudō&quot; (古武道) can be translated as (old) (martial) (way) &quot;old martial art&quot;; the term appeared in the first half of the seventeenth century. &quot;Kobudō&quot; marks the beginning of the Tokugawa period (1603–1868) also called the Edo period, when total power was consolidated by the ruling Tokugawa clan. The term often refers to martial arts established before the Meiji Restoration of the 19th century. Since the Muromachi period, swordsmanship, &quot;jūjutsu&quot;, martial arts, archery, artillery, etc. have been technicalized and systematized as various schools. The term &quot;Kobudō&quot; (古武道, ancient martial arts) contrasts with &quot;Gendai budō&quot; (&quot;modern martial arts&quot;) or &quot;shinbudō&quot; (&quot;new martial arts&quot;) which refer to schools developed since the Meiji era.

Whereas modern martial arts are designed to develop humanistic ideals through physical and mental training, focusing on sports-related competitions and constructing technical systems (e.g., &quot;jūdō&quot; and &quot;kendō&quot;) that encourage team work, socially healthy values, and prosperity. The old historical martial arts intention was not fundamentally concerned with an outcome of winning a match as a Sports match. Training was for the sake of it and was often about life or death. Dangerous techniques that are excluded from modern martial arts include various hidden weapons, medicinal and poisoning methods, and magic. Old martial arts are linked to Zen and Buddhism. It may also include irrational movements whose original meaning have been lost even to those who are masters of the school, or movements added for aesthetic reasons during the peaceful Edo period.

The system of &quot;kobudō&quot; is considered in following priorities order: 1) morals, 2) discipline 3) aesthetic form.

==Okinawan &quot;kobudō&quot;==
&quot;Kobudō&quot; can also be used to refer to Okinawan kobudō where it describes collectively all Okinawan combative systems. These are entirely different and basically unrelated systems. The use of the term &quot;kobudō&quot; should not be limited, as it popularly is, to the describing of the ancient weapons systems of Okinawa.

==Examples of taught skills ==

* &quot;Bōjutsu&quot;
* &quot;Jujutsu&quot;
* &quot;Jittejutsu&quot;
* &quot;Kenjutsu&quot;
* &quot;Kyūjutsu&quot;
* &quot;Naginatajutsu&quot;
* &quot;Ōzutsu&quot; (大筒) hand cannon
* &quot;Sōjutsu&quot;
* &quot;Tantojutsu&quot;
* &quot;Yabusame&quot;
==See also==
*List of koryū schools of martial arts

==Sources==
* Draeger, Donn F. &quot;Classical Bujitsu&quot; (Martial Arts and Ways of Japan). Weatherhill, 1973, 2007. 
* Hall, David A. &quot;Encyclopedia of Japanese Martial Arts&quot;. Kodansha USA, 2012. 
* Skoss, Diane, Editor. &quot;Koryu Bujutsu: Classical Warrior Traditions of Japan&quot;. Koryubooks, 1997. 
* Skoss, Diane, Editor. &quot;Sword and Spirit: Classical Warrior Traditions of Japan&quot;, Volume 2. Koryubooks, 1999. 
* Skoss, Diane, Editor. &quot;Keiko Shokon: Classical Warrior Traditions of Japan&quot;, Volume 3. Koryubooks, 2002. 

==References==
==External links==
* Nihon Kobudō Kyokai Official Kobudō website (in Japanese)
* What is Koryu?
* Koryu.com in English. Provides articles and links to books. 
* KoryuWeb in French and English.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q752021" start="25" end="56" title="Budō" label="Japanese traditional techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q11886611" start="72" end="78" title="armour" label="armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q330946" start="80" end="85" title="blade" label="blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="88" end="95" title="firearm" label="firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q650711" start="124" end="130" title="combat" label="combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="135" end="147" title="horse riding" label="horse riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="159" end="164" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q43201039" start="271" end="284" title="umbrella term" label="umbrella term"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="748" end="765" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q334845" start="797" end="813" title="Muromachi period" label="Muromachi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q68324344" start="815" end="828" title="swordsmanship" label="swordsmanship"/>
<link wikidata="Q163770" start="836" end="843" title="jūjutsu" label="jūjutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11417" start="851" end="863" title="martial arts" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="865" end="872" title="archery" label="archery"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="874" end="883" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q930504" start="1028" end="1039" title="Gendai budō" label="Gendai budō"/>
<link wikidata="Q930504" start="1089" end="1097" title="shinbudō" label="shinbudō"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="1178" end="1187" title="Meiji era" label="Meiji era"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="1386" end="1390" title="jūdō" label="jūdō"/>
<link wikidata="Q170931" start="1407" end="1412" title="kendō" label="kendō"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="1853" end="1856" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="1861" end="1869" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="2056" end="2066" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q15622124" start="2272" end="2287" title="Okinawan kobudō" label="Okinawan kobudō"/>
<link wikidata="Q961126" start="2598" end="2605" title="Bōjutsu" label="Bōjutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q163770" start="2620" end="2627" title="Jujutsu" label="Jujutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190581" start="2642" end="2652" title="Jittejutsu" label="Jittejutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q249608" start="2667" end="2675" title="Kenjutsu" label="Kenjutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11687476" start="2690" end="2698" title="Kyūjutsu" label="Kyūjutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757215" start="2713" end="2726" title="Naginatajutsu" label="Naginatajutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865786" start="2741" end="2747" title="Artillery of Japan" label="Ōzutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430251" start="2759" end="2770" title="hand cannon" label="hand cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45731" start="2779" end="2786" title="Sōjutsu" label="Sōjutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980935" start="2801" end="2811" title="Tantojutsu" label="Tantojutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886157" start="2826" end="2834" title="Yabusame" label="Yabusame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624690" start="2855" end="2892" title="List of koryū schools of martial arts" label="List of koryū schools of martial arts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405486" wikidata="Q970472" url="?curid=405486" title="Edward Dowden">
<text>Edward Dowden (3 May 18434 April 1913) was an Irish critic, professor, and poet.

==Biography==
He was the son of John Wheeler Dowden, a merchant and landowner, and was born at Cork, three years after his brother John, who became Bishop of Edinburgh in 1886. Edward&#x27;s literary tastes emerged early, in a series of essays written at the age of twelve. His home education continued at Queen&#x27;s College, Cork and at Trinity College, Dublin. He contributed to the literary magazine &quot;Kottabos.&quot;

He had a distinguished career, becoming president of the Philosophical Society, and won the vice-chancellor&#x27;s prize for English verse and prose, and the first senior moderatorship in ethics and logic. In 1867 he was elected professor of oratory and English literature in Dublin University.

Dowden&#x27;s first book, &quot;Shakspere: A Critical Study of His Mind and Art&quot; (1875), resulted from a revision of a course of lectures, and made him widely known as a critic: translations appeared in German and Russian; his &quot;Poems&quot; (1876) went into a second edition. His &quot;Shakespeare Primer&quot; (1877) was translated into Italian and German. In 1878 the Royal Irish Academy awarded him the Cunningham gold medal &quot;for his literary writings, especially in the field of Shakespearian criticism.&quot;

Later works by him in this field included an edition of &quot;Sonnets of William Shakespere&quot; (1881), &quot;Passionate Pilgrim&quot; (1883), &quot;Introduction to Shakespeare&quot; (1893), &quot;Hamlet&quot; (1899), &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot; (1900), &quot;Cymbeline&quot; (1903), and an article entitled &quot;Shakespeare as a Man of Science&quot; (in the &quot;National Review&quot;, July 1902), which criticized T. E. Webb&#x27;s &quot;Mystery of William Shakespeare&quot;. His critical essays &quot;Studies in Literature&quot; (1878), &quot;Transcripts and Studies&quot; (1888), &quot;New Studies in Literature&quot; (1895) showed a profound knowledge of the currents and tendencies of thought in various ages and countries; but his &quot;The Life of Percy Bysshe Shelley&quot; (1886) made him best known to the public at large. In 1900 he edited an edition of Shelley&#x27;s works.

Other books by him which indicate his interests in literature include: &quot;Southey&quot; (in the &quot;English Men of Letters&quot; series, 1879), his edition of &quot;Southey&#x27;s Correspondence with Caroline Bowles&quot; (1881), and &quot;Select Poems of Southey&quot; (1895), his Correspondence of Sir Henry Taylor (1888), his edition of Wordsworth&#x27;s &quot;Poetical Works&quot; (1892) and of his &quot;Lyrical Ballads&quot; (1890), his &quot;French Revolution and English Literature&quot; (1897; lectures given at Princeton University in 1896), &quot;History of French Literature&quot; (1897), &quot;Puritan and Anglican&quot; (1900), &quot;Robert Browning&quot; (1904) and &quot;Michel de Montaigne&quot; (1905). His devotion to Goethe led to his succeeding Max Müller in 1888 as president of the English Goethe Society.

In 1889 he gave the first annual Taylorian Lecture at the University of Oxford, and from 1892 to 1896 served as Clark lecturer at Trinity College, Cambridge. To his research are due, among other matters of literary interest, the first account of Thomas Carlyle&#x27;s &quot;Lectures on periods of European culture&quot;; the identification of Shelley as the author of a review (in &quot;The Critical Review&quot; of December 1814) of a romance by Thomas Jefferson Hogg; a description of Shelley&#x27;s &quot;Philosophical View of Reform&quot;; a manuscript diary of Fabre d&#x27;Églantine; and a record by Dr Wilhelm Weissenborn of Goethe&#x27;s last days and death. He also discovered a &quot;Narrative of a Prisoner of War under Napoleon&quot; (published in &quot;Blackwood&#x27;s Magazine&quot;), an unknown pamphlet by Bishop Berkeley, some unpublished writings of William Hayley relating to Cowper, and a unique copy of the &quot;Tales of Terror&quot;.

His wide interests and scholarly methods made his influence on criticism both sound and stimulating, and his own ideals are well described in his essay on &quot;The Interpretation of Literature&quot; in his &quot;Transcripts and Studies&quot;. As commissioner of education in Ireland (1896–1901), trustee of the National Library of Ireland, secretary of the Irish Liberal Union and vice-president of the Irish Unionist Alliance, he enforced his view that literature should not be divorced from practical life. His biographical/critical concepts, particularly in connection with Shakespeare, are played with by Stephen Dedalus in the library chapter of James Joyce&#x27;s &quot;Ulysses&quot;. Leslie Fiedler was to play with them again in &quot;The Stranger in Shakespeare&quot;.

Dowden married twice, first (1866) Mary Clerke, and secondly (1895) Elizabeth Dickinson West, daughter of the dean of St Patrick&#x27;s. His daughter by his first wife, Hester Dowden, was a well-known spiritualist medium.

Edward Dowden died in Dublin. His &quot;Letters&quot; were published in 1914 by Elizabeth and Hilda Dowden.

==References==
* Dowden, Edward. (1875). &quot;Shakespeare: A Critical Study of his Mind and Art&quot;. Henry S. King &amp; Co. (reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2009; )

==Further reading==
*William M. Murphy. &quot;Prodigal Father: the Life of John Butler Yeats (1839–1922)&quot; (Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 1978; paperback edition, 1979; revised paperback edition, Syracuse University Press, 2001.)
*William M. Murphy, &#x27;Yeats, Quinn, and Edward Dowden,&#x27; in &quot;John Quinn: Selected Irish Writers from His Library,&quot; ed. Janis and Richard Londraville (Locust Hill Press, 2001).

== External links ==
* 
** &quot;In Defense of Harriet Shelley&quot; – comments on Dowden&#x27;s &quot;Life of Shelley&quot; by Mark Twain
* 
* Article in Cassell&#x27;s &quot;Universal Portrait Gallery&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q970472" start="0" end="13" title="Edward Dowden" label="Edward Dowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="46" end="51" title="Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430706" start="52" end="58" title="critic" label="critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="60" end="69" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="75" end="79" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="177" end="181" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229970" start="213" end="217" title="John Dowden" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917835" start="230" end="249" title="Bishop of Edinburgh" label="Bishop of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574185" start="388" end="414" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Cork" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="422" end="445" title="Trinity College, Dublin" label="Trinity College, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q111293483" start="493" end="501" title="Kottabos (literary magazine)" label="Kottabos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894875" start="567" end="588" title="University Philosophical Society (Trinity College, Dublin)" label="Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="674" end="694" title="senior moderatorship" label="senior moderatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="698" end="704" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="709" end="714" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489271" start="752" end="759" title="Eloquence" label="oratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="764" end="782" title="English literature" label="English literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1014" end="1020" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="1025" end="1032" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="1153" end="1160" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83186" start="1561" end="1577" title="Romeo and Juliet" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q730212" start="1598" end="1607" title="Cymbeline" label="Cymbeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q93343" start="2206" end="2213" title="Percy Bysshe Shelley" label="Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q216838" start="2306" end="2313" title="Robert Southey" label="Southey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378327" start="2334" end="2356" title="English Men of Letters" label="English Men of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979755" start="2434" end="2449" title="Caroline Anne Southey" label="Caroline Bowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607302" start="2538" end="2550" title="Henry Taylor (dramatist)" label="Henry Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="2574" end="2584" title="William Wordsworth" label="Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="2755" end="2775" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q233265" start="2882" end="2897" title="Robert Browning" label="Robert Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q41568" start="2921" end="2940" title="Michel de Montaigne" label="Michel de Montaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="2971" end="2977" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q60074" start="3000" end="3010" title="Max Müller" label="Max Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690225" start="3097" end="3114" title="Taylorian Lecture" label="Taylorian Lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="3122" end="3142" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="3194" end="3220" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="3310" end="3324" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Thomas Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q527581" start="3511" end="3532" title="Thomas Jefferson Hogg" label="Thomas Jefferson Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q553446" start="3630" end="3652" title="Fabre d&amp;#x27;Églantine" label="Fabre d&amp;#x27;Églantine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3673" end="3692" title="Wilhelm Weissenborn" label="Wilhelm Weissenborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529971" start="3830" end="3855" title="Blackwood&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Blackwood&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q82049" start="3887" end="3902" title="George Berkeley" label="Bishop Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q74936" start="3933" end="3947" title="William Hayley" label="William Hayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q315537" start="3960" end="3966" title="William Cowper" label="Cowper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672830" start="4335" end="4362" title="National Library of Ireland" label="National Library of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4381" end="4400" title="Irish Liberal Union" label="Irish Liberal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071313" start="4427" end="4450" title="Irish Unionist Alliance" label="Irish Unionist Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5746291" start="4972" end="4985" title="Hester Dowden" label="Hester Dowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="5276" end="5302" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405489" wikidata="Q6692726" url="?curid=405489" title="Low-complexity art">
<text>Low-complexity art, first described by Jürgen Schmidhuber in 1997 and now established as a seminal topic within the larger field of computer science, is art that can be described by a short computer program (that is, a computer program of small Kolmogorov complexity).

==Overview==

Schmidhuber characterizes low-complexity art as the computer age equivalent of minimal art. He also describes an algorithmic theory of beauty and aesthetics based on the principles of algorithmic information theory and minimum description length. It explicitly addresses the subjectivity of the observer and postulates that among several input data classified as comparable by a given subjective observer, the most pleasing one has the shortest description, given the observer&#x27;s previous knowledge and his or her particular method for encoding the data. For example, mathematicians enjoy simple proofs with a short description in their formal language (sometimes called mathematical beauty). Another example draws inspiration from 15th century proportion studies by Leonardo da Vinci and Albrecht Dürer: the proportions of a beautiful human face can be described by very few bits of information.

Schmidhuber explicitly distinguishes between beauty and interestingness. He assumes that any observer continually tries to improve the predictability and compressibility of the observations by discovering regularities such as repetitions and symmetries and fractal self-similarity. When the observer&#x27;s learning process (which may be a predictive neural network) leads to improved data compression the number of bits required to describe the data decreases. The temporary interestingness of the data corresponds to the number of saved bits, and thus (in the continuum limit) to the first derivative of subjectively perceived beauty. A reinforcement learning algorithm can be used to maximize the future expected data compression progress. It will motivate the learning observer to execute action sequences that cause additional interesting input data with yet unknown but learnable predictability or regularity. The principles can be implemented on artificial agents which then exhibit a form of artificial curiosity.

While low-complexity art does not require a priori restrictions of the description size, the basic ideas are related to the size-restricted intro categories of the demoscene, where very short computer programs are used to generate pleasing graphical and musical output. Very small (usually C) programs that create music have been written: the style of this music has come to be called &quot;bytebeat&quot;.

==The larger context==
The larger context provided by the histories of both art and science suggests that low-complexity art will continue to be a topic of growing interest. In respect to art history, the potential relevance of low-complexity art extends far beyond the minimalistic Renaissance encoding of beauty already cited in its literature. The idea of an intimate relationship between mathematical structure and visual appeal is one of the recurring themes of Western art and is prominent during several of its periods of fluorescence including that of dynastic Egypt; Greece of the classic era; the Renaissance (as already noted); and on into the Geometric abstraction of the 20th century, especially as practiced by Georges Vantongerloo and Max Bill. 

In science and technology, low-complexity art may represent another case in which the relatively new discipline of computer science is able to shed fresh light on a disparate subject — an example being insights into the functioning of the genetic code garnered because of familiarity with issues already raised in the practice of software engineering. The topic of low-complexity art is expected to help foster a continued and fruitful interaction between the fields of computer science and aesthetics. Nor will the insights gained be purely qualitative; the formalizations on which low-complexity art is based are essentially quantitative.

==See also==
* Infinite compositions of analytic functions

==References==
==External links==
*Schmidhuber&#x27;s Papers on Low-Complexity Art &amp; Theory of Subjective Beauty
*Schmidhuber&#x27;s Papers on Interestingness as the First Derivative of Subjective Beauty
*Examples of Low-Complexity Art in a German TV show (May 2008)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6692726" start="0" end="18" title="Low-complexity art" label="Low-complexity art"/>
<link wikidata="Q92735" start="39" end="57" title="Jürgen Schmidhuber" label="Jürgen Schmidhuber"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="153" end="156" title="art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456811" start="245" end="266" title="Kolmogorov complexity" label="Kolmogorov complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="363" end="374" title="minimalism" label="minimal art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835759" start="397" end="408" title="algorithmic art" label="algorithmic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242" start="419" end="425" title="beauty" label="beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="430" end="440" title="aesthetics" label="aesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757543" start="468" end="498" title="algorithmic information theory" label="algorithmic information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417790" start="503" end="529" title="minimum description length" label="minimum description length"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="559" end="571" title="subjectivity" label="subjectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193181" start="579" end="587" title="observation" label="observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="856" end="869" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q192161" start="925" end="940" title="formal language" label="formal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248521" start="959" end="978" title="mathematical beauty" label="mathematical beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="1055" end="1072" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580" start="1077" end="1091" title="Albrecht Dürer" label="Albrecht Dürer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242" start="1231" end="1237" title="beauty" label="beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q616314" start="1242" end="1253" title="interesting" label="interesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534066" start="1321" end="1335" title="predictability" label="predictability"/>
<link wikidata="Q8067817" start="1340" end="1355" title="compressibility" label="compressibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485" start="1428" end="1438" title="symmetries" label="symmetries"/>
<link wikidata="Q81392" start="1443" end="1450" title="fractal" label="fractal"/>
<link wikidata="Q262372" start="1451" end="1466" title="self-similarity" label="self-similarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12811862" start="1537" end="1551" title="neural network" label="neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429781" start="1748" end="1763" title="continuum limit" label="continuum limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="1772" end="1788" title="first derivative" label="first derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242" start="1815" end="1821" title="beauty" label="beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q830687" start="1825" end="1847" title="reinforcement learning" label="reinforcement learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q616314" start="2018" end="2029" title="interesting" label="interesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142726" start="2139" end="2156" title="artificial agents" label="artificial agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q366791" start="2197" end="2206" title="curiosity" label="curiosity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2333" end="2365" title="Demo (computer programming)#Size restrictions" label="size-restricted intro categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q824340" start="2373" end="2382" title="demoscene" label="demoscene"/>
<link wikidata="Q655427" start="2431" end="2439" title="procedural generation" label="generate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="2499" end="2500" title="C programming language" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758902" start="2502" end="2528" title="Algorithmic composition" label="programs that create music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316866" start="3272" end="3293" title="Geometric abstraction" label="Geometric abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q771670" start="3342" end="3362" title="Georges Vantongerloo" label="Georges Vantongerloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q123454" start="3367" end="3375" title="Max Bill" label="Max Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029837" start="4036" end="4079" title="Infinite compositions of analytic functions" label="Infinite compositions of analytic functions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405492" wikidata="Q5162696" url="?curid=405492" title="Conroy Maddox">
<text>Conroy Maddox (27 December 1912 – 14 January 2005) was an English surrealist painter, collagist, writer and lecturer; and a key figure in the Birmingham Surrealist movement.

He was born in Ledbury, Herefordshire, and discovered surrealism in 1935, spending the rest of his life exploring its potential through his paintings, collages, photographs, objects and texts. Inspired by artists such as Max Ernst, Óscar Domínguez and Salvador Dalí, he rejected academic painting in favour of techniques that expressed the surrealistic spirit of rebellion. Maddox officially joined the British Surrealist Group in 1938.

His creations soon began not only to challenge the conventional view of reality, but also to push pictorial expression to the limits of consciousness. He was even implicated in both scandal and controversy when, during World War II, Scotland Yard suspected him of fifth columnist sabotage and mounted a surprise raid to seize works thought to contain coded messages to the enemy.

Following the war he moved to Balsall Heath and began his most active period.
In 1948, he married Nan Burton. They had a daughter and a son together, but had the marriage dissolved in 1955. He died in London, aged 92.

==Exhibitions==

* 1938 - Wertheim Gallery, London
* 1940 - London Gallery, London
* 1940 - &quot;Surrealism Today&quot;, Zwemmer Gallery, London
* 1940 - Artists International Association
* 1945 - Leicester Galleries, London
* 1947 - International Surrealist Exhibition, Paris
* 1949 - Royal Birmingham Society of Artists Galleries
* 1949 - Bilston Corporation Art Gallery
* 1951 - Royal Birmingham Society of Artists Galleries
* 1963 - Grabowski Gallery, London
* 1967 - Zwemmer Gallery, London
* 1967 - Exeter City Gallery, Exeter
* 1973 - Hamet Gallery, London
* 1976 - &quot;Gouaches of the 1940s&quot;, Fischer Fine Art, London
* 1978 - &quot;Surrealism Unlimited&quot;, Camden Arts Centre, London
* 1982 - &quot;Peinture Surrealiste en Angleterre 1930-1960&quot;, Galerie 1900–2000, Paris
* 1994 - &quot;Paintings and Objects&quot;, Gallery M, London
* 2000 - &quot;Surrealism in Birmingham 1935-1955&quot;, Birmingham Museums
* 2001 - &quot;Conroy Maddox. A Surrealist Odyssey&quot;, Belgrave Gallery, London

==Bibliography==

* &quot;Free Unions - Unions Libre&quot; - edited by Simon Watson Taylor and with cover by Conroy Maddox (1946)
* &quot;Dali&quot; by Conroy Maddox (Taschen)

==References==
* &quot;The Scandalous Eye: The Surrealism of Conroy Maddox&quot; by Silvano Levy, Liverpool University Press, 2003, 292 pages, .
==External links==
* Obituary from &quot;The Independent&quot; newspaper (UK) by Peter Davies, 15 January 2005
* Obituary from &quot;The Times&quot; newspaper (UK), 17 January 2005
* Obituary from the &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot; newspaper (UK), 21 January 2005
* Conroy Maddox at the Tate Gallery
* Interview National Life Stories</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5162696" start="0" end="13" title="Conroy Maddox" label="Conroy Maddox"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="58" end="65" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="66" end="76" title="surrealist" label="surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="77" end="84" title="Painting" label="painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916829" start="142" end="163" title="Birmingham Surrealists" label="Birmingham Surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q665330" start="190" end="197" title="Ledbury" label="Ledbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q23129" start="199" end="212" title="Herefordshire" label="Herefordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="229" end="239" title="surrealism" label="surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170593" start="326" end="333" title="collage" label="collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q154842" start="396" end="405" title="Max Ernst" label="Max Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q293314" start="407" end="422" title="Óscar Domínguez" label="Óscar Domínguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="427" end="440" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971124" start="578" end="602" title="British Surrealist Group" label="British Surrealist Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="832" end="844" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q184619" start="846" end="859" title="Scotland Yard" label="Scotland Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852528" start="1024" end="1037" title="Balsall Heath" label="Balsall Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996132" start="1411" end="1430" title="Leicester Galleries" label="Leicester Galleries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12403" start="1500" end="1535" title="Royal Birmingham Society of Artists" label="Royal Birmingham Society of Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025726" start="1890" end="1908" title="Camden Arts Centre" label="Camden Arts Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q12355159" start="2302" end="2321" title="Simon Watson Taylor (surrealist)" label="Simon Watson Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q367205" start="2398" end="2405" title="Taschen" label="Taschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15460715" start="2492" end="2504" title="Silvano Levy" label="Silvano Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q430682" start="2837" end="2849" title="Tate Gallery" label="Tate Gallery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405493" wikidata="Q652719" url="?curid=405493" title="Digital physics">
<text>Digital physics is a speculative idea suggesting that the universe can be conceived of as a vast, digital computation device, or as the output of a deterministic or probabilistic computer program. The hypothesis that the universe is a digital computer was proposed by Konrad Zuse in his 1969 book &quot;Rechnender Raum&quot; (&quot;Calculating-space&quot;). The term &quot;digital physics&quot; was coined in 1978 by Edward Fredkin, who later came to prefer the term &quot;digital philosophy&quot;. Fredkin encouraged the establishment of a digital physics group at what was then MIT&#x27;s Laboratory for Computer Science, with Tommaso Toffoli and Norman Margolus playing key roles.

&quot;Digital physics&quot; posits that there exists, at least in principle, a program for a universal computer that computes the evolution of the universe. The computer could be, for example, a huge cellular automaton. It is deeply connected to the concept of information theory, particularly the idea that the universe&#x27;s fundamental building blocks might be bits of information rather than traditional particles or fields. 

However, extant models of digital physics face challenges, particularly in reconciling with several continuous symmetries in physical laws, e.g., rotational symmetry, translational symmetry, Lorentz symmetry, and the Lie group gauge invariance of Yang–Mills theories, all of which are central to current physical theories. Moreover, existing models of digital physics violate various well-established features of quantum physics, as they belong to a class of theories involving local hidden variables. These models have so far been disqualified experimentally by physicists using Bell&#x27;s theorem.

== See also ==
* Mathematical universe hypothesis
* It from bit
* Simulation hypothesis
* Weyl&#x27;s tile argument
* &quot;Natura non facit saltus&quot;

==References==
==Further reading==
* Robert Wright, &quot;Did the Universe Just Happen?&quot;, &quot;Atlantic Monthly&quot;, April 1988 - Article discussing Fredkin and his digital physics ideas</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q652719" start="0" end="15" title="Digital physics" label="Digital physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="58" end="66" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q131133" start="148" end="161" title="deterministic" label="deterministic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="165" end="178" title="probabilistic" label="probabilistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="179" end="195" title="computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="235" end="251" title="digital computer" label="digital computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60093" start="268" end="279" title="Konrad Zuse" label="Konrad Zuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018876" start="303" end="318" title="Rechnender Raum" label="Rechnender Raum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292266" start="417" end="431" title="Edward Fredkin" label="Edward Fredkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q652719" start="473" end="491" title="Digital physics" label="digital philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="580" end="583" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354917" start="591" end="622" title="Laboratory for Computer Science" label="Laboratory for Computer Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074856" start="629" end="644" title="Tommaso Toffoli" label="Tommaso Toffoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052578" start="649" end="664" title="Norman Margolus" label="Norman Margolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="764" end="771" title="computer program" label="program"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="778" end="796" title="universal computer" label="universal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q136407" start="815" end="824" title="cosmic evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="832" end="840" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q189156" start="885" end="903" title="cellular automaton" label="cellular automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455736" start="1228" end="1238" title="symmetry in physics" label="symmetries"/>
<link wikidata="Q593950" start="1263" end="1282" title="rotational symmetry" label="rotational symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116709" start="1284" end="1306" title="translational symmetry" label="translational symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093427" start="1308" end="1324" title="Lorentz symmetry" label="Lorentz symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="1334" end="1343" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192873" start="1364" end="1383" title="Yang–Mills theory" label="Yang–Mills theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="1530" end="1545" title="quantum physics" label="quantum physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q898521" start="1601" end="1617" title="hidden variable theory" label="hidden variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q388525" start="1697" end="1716" title="Bell&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Bell&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5951321" start="1736" end="1768" title="Mathematical universe hypothesis" label="Mathematical universe hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q202631" start="1771" end="1782" title="It from bit" label="It from bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742884" start="1785" end="1806" title="Simulation hypothesis" label="Simulation hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052232" start="1809" end="1834" title="Weyl&amp;#x27;s tile argument" label="Weyl&amp;#x27;s tile argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303286" start="1843" end="1866" title="Natura non facit saltus" label="Natura non facit saltus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405494" wikidata="Q105391289" url="?curid=405494" title="Rogers Commission Report">
<text>The Rogers Commission Report was written by a Presidential Commission charged with investigating the Space Shuttle &quot;Challenger&quot; disaster during its 10th mission, STS-51-L. The report, released and submitted to President Ronald Reagan on June 9, 1986, determined the cause of the disaster that took place 73 seconds after liftoff, and urged NASA to improve and install new safety features on the shuttles and in its organizational handling of future missions.

== Commission members ==

* William P. Rogers, chairman and former United States Secretary of State (under Richard Nixon) and United States Attorney General (under Dwight Eisenhower)
* Neil Armstrong (vice-chairman), retired astronaut and first human to walk on the Moon (Apollo 11)
* David Campion Acheson, diplomat and son of former Secretary of State Dean Acheson
* Eugene E. Covert, aeronautics expert and former Chief Scientist of the U.S. Air Force
* Richard P. Feynman, theoretical physicist and winner of the 1965 Nobel Prize in Physics
* Robert B. Hotz, editor, &quot;Aviation Week and Space Technology&quot;
* Donald J. Kutyna, Air Force general with experience in ICBMs and shuttle management
* Sally K. Ride, engineer, astrophysicist and first female American astronaut in space, flew on &quot;Challenger&quot; as part of missions STS-7 and STS-41-G. Later, she served on the Columbia Accident Investigation Board.
* Robert W. Rummel, Trans World Airlines executive and aviation consultant to NASA
* Joseph F. Sutter, Boeing senior vice president and engineering program director on the Boeing 747 aircraft
* Arthur B. C. Walker, Jr, solar physicist and Stanford University professor
* Albert D. Wheelon, physicist and developer of Central Intelligence Agency&#x27;s aerial surveillance program
* Charles E. (Chuck) Yeager, retired Air Force general and the first person to break the sound barrier in level flight
* Alton G. Keel, Jr., executive director of the commission

==Commission witnesses==
Day 1, February 6, 1986
* Dr. William R. Graham, Acting Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
* Jesse W. Moore, Associate Administrator for space flight, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and chairman, 51L Data Design and Analysis Test Task Force
* Arnold D. Aldrich, Manager, National space transportation systems program, Johnson Space Center
* Dr. Judson A. Lovingood, Deputy Manager, Shuttle Projects office, Marshall Space Flight Center 
*Robert Sieck, Director of Shuttle operations, Kennedy Space Center 
*Richard G. Smith, Director, Kennedy Space Center
*Thomas L. Moser, Director, Engineering, Johnson Space Center
*Richard H. Kohrs, Deputy Manager, National Space transportation systems program, Johnson Space Center

Day 2, February 7, 1986
* Marv Jones
* Stanley Klein, FBI 
* Jesse W. Moore, Associate Administrator for space flight, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and chairman, 51L Data Design and Analysis Test Task Force
* Arnold Aldrich, Manager, National Space Transportation Systems Program, Johnson Space Center

Day 3, February 10, 1986

* Mr L. Michael Weeks, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, NASA
* Irvin Davids, Shuttle propulsion Division
* Lawrence B. Mulloy, project manager, solid rocket boosters, Marshall Space Flight Center

Day 4, February 11, 1986
*William R. Graham, Acting Administrator of NASA
*Jesse W. Moore, Associate Administrator for space Flight, NASA
*Lawrence B. Mulloy, Project Manager, Solid Rocket Boosters, Marshall Space Flight Center, NASA
*Richard C. Cook
*Michael B. Mann, Chief, STS Resources Analysis Branch, Office of The Comptroller, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
*Mr. David Winterhalter, Acting Director, Shuttle Propulsion Group, National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Day 5, February 13, 1986 
*Dick Kohrs, Deputy Manager, NST Program office, Johnson Space Center 
*Charlie Stevenson, Photographic Team Analysis, Kennedy Space Center 
*William R. Lucas 
*Jesse W. Moore 
*Milton Silveira
*Horace Lamberth 
*Jim Harrington 
*T. Jack Lee, Deputy Director, Marshall Space Flight Center, and Head, Marshall Contingency Investigative Team 
*Mr. George Hardy 
*Rick Bachtol 
*T. Moser, Head, Failure Scenario Team, Johnson Space Center

Day 6, February 14, 1986 
*Larry Mulloy 
*Jerry E. Mason, Senior Vice President, Wasatch Operations, Morton Thiokol
*Robert Lund, Morton Thiokol, Inc.
*Roger Boisjoly, Structures Section, Morton Thiokol, Inc.
*Arnold Thompson, Design Engineer, Morton Thiokol, Inc. 
*Allan J. McDonald, Morton Thiokol, Inc.

Day 7, February 25, 1986
*Allan J. McDonald, Manager, SRM Project, Morton-Thiokol, Inc. 
*Jerry E. Mason, Senior Vice President, Wasatch Division, Morton-Thiokol, Inc.
*Roger Boisjoly, Seal Task Force, Thiokol
*Arnie Thompson, Supervisor, Structures, Thiokol 
*Robert Lund, Vice President, Engineering, Thiokol 
*Joe Kilminster, Vice President, Shuttle Project, Huntsville
*Brian G. Russell

Day 8, February 26, 1986
*Larry Mulloy, Manager, Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster Program, Marshall Space Flight Center
*George C. Hardy, Deputy Director, Science and Engineering, Marshall Space Flight Center
*Stanley Reinarz, Manager, Marshall Shuttle projects Office 
*Dr. Judson A. Lovingood, Deputy Manager, Marshall Shuttle Projects Office
*Charles Stevenson, Ice Team member 
*B. K. Davis, Ice Team member 
*Lieutenant Colonel Edward F. Kolczynski, Commander, Detachment 11, 2d Weather Squadron, Patrick Air Force Base

Day 9, February 27, 1986
*Charles Stevenson 
*B.K. Davis 
*Lieutenant Colonel Edward Kolczynski
*Rocco Petrone, President, Space Transportation Systems Division, North American Space Operations, Rockwell International
*Al Martin, Site Director, Launch Support Operations, Kennedy Space Center, Rockwell International
*Bob Glaysher, Vice President and Program Manager, Orbiter Operations Support, Rockwell International 
*Martin Cioffoletti, Vice President, Space Transportation Systems Integration, Rockwell International 
*Arnie Aldrich, Manager, National Space Transportation Systems, Johnson Space Center
*William R. Lucas, Director, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama
*Jesse W. Moore, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, National Aeronautics and Space Administration Headquarters 
*Dick G. Smith, Director, Kennedy Space Center 
*Gene Thomas, Director, Launch and Landing Operations, Kennedy Space Center
*Ben Powers, Engineer, Structures and Propulsion Laboratory, Marshall Space Flight Center

Day 10, March 7, 1986 
*Colonel Edward O&#x27;Connor Jr., USAF, Director of Operations, 6655TH ASTG, ESMC 
*Robert Lang, Shuttle Operations, Mechanical Systems Division, Kennedy Space Center 
*Carver Kennedy, Director, VAB Operations, Morton-Thiokol, Inc.
*Bill Barsh, Engineering Manager, External Tank/Solid Rocket Booster Operations, Lockheed Space Operations Company, KSC 
*Thomas L. Moser, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, NASA 
* Dr. J. Wayne Littles, Associate Director for Engineering, Marshall Space Flight Center
*T. Jack Lee, Deputy Director, MSFC 
*Gary Coultas, Assistant Manager, Orbiter Projects, Johnson Space Center 
*George Hopson, Director, Systems Analysis and Integration Laboratory, Marshall Space Flight Center

Day 11, March 21, 1986 
*James R. Thompson Jr., Vice Chairman, STS 51L, Data and Design and Analyst Task force, Cape Canaveral, Florida 
*Colonel Edward O&#x27;Connor Jr., Chairman, Search, Recovery and Reconstruction, Cape Canaveral, Florida 
*Dan M. Germany, Chairman, photo and television support team, Cape Canaveral, and Deputy Manager, Space Station Project Office, Johnson Flight Space Center, Houston, Texas 
*Charles Stevenson 
*George McDonough
*John Erickson
*J. Wayne Littles, Associate Director for Engineering, Marshall Space Flight Center 
*Harold N. Scofield, Chief, Control Systems Division, Marshall Space Flight Center
* Robert S. Ryan, Chief, Structural Dynamics Division Systems Dynamics Laboratory, Marshall Space Flight Center
*Garry M. Lyles, Propulsion Analysis Branch, Structures and Propulsion Laboratory, Marshall Space Flight Center
*Fredrick D. Bachtel, Thermal Engineering Branch, Structures and Propulsion Laboratory, Marshall Space Flight Center

Day 12, April 3, 1986
*George Abbey, Director of Flight Crew Operations 
*John Young, Chief, Astronaut Office 
*Paul J. Weitz, Deputy Chief, Astronaut Office 
*Bob Crippen, astronaut 
*Hank Hartsfield, astronuat
*Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, Associate Administrator for space flight 
*Arnold D. Aldrich, manager of the space transportation systems 
*Clifford E. Charlesworth, director of space operations

Day 13, May 3, 1986 
*Lawrence B. Mulloy, Manager, Solid Rocket Booster Project Office 
*Lawrence O. Wear, Manager, Solid Rocket Motor Project, Marshall Space Flight Center 
*Brian G. Russell, Program Manager, Department of solid rocket motor and Final Assembly 
*Robert Ebeling, Department of solid rocket motor igniter and Final Assembly 
*J.C. Kilminster, Vice President, Space Booster Programs
*Roger Boisjoly, Seal Task Force, Morton Thiokol, Inc.
*George B. Hardy, Deputy Director, Science and Engineering, former Manager, Solid Rocket Booster office 
*James E. Kingsbury, Science and Engineering 
*Robert G. Eudy, former Chief Engineer, Solid Rocket Motor, Office of Associate Director For Engineering 
*John O. Miller, Technical Assistant To Solid Rocket Motor Manager 
*William L. Ray, Solid Rocket Motor Branch, Propulsion Division, Engineering Directorate 
* L. Michael Weeks, Associate Administrator, (technical) for space flight, NASA 
*Glynn S. Lunney, former Manager, National Space Transportation Systems Program Office 
*John R. Stocker, Assistant General counsel, corporate offices, Rockwell International, corporation

==Findings==
The commission found that the immediate cause of the &quot;Challenger&quot; accident was a failure in the O-rings sealing the aft field joint on the right solid rocket booster, causing pressurized hot gases and eventually flame to &quot;blow by&quot; the O-ring and contact the adjacent external tank, causing structural failure. The failure of the O-rings was attributed to a design flaw, as their performance could be too easily compromised by factors including the low temperature on the day of launch.

===&quot;An accident rooted in history&quot;===
More broadly, the report also determined the contributing causes of the accident. Most salient was the failure of both NASA and its contractor, Morton Thiokol, to respond adequately to the design flaw. The Commission found that as early as 1977, NASA managers had not only known about the flawed O-ring, but that it had the potential for catastrophe. This led the Rogers Commission to conclude that the &quot;Challenger&quot; disaster was &quot;an accident rooted in history&quot;.

===Flawed launch decision===
The report also strongly criticized the decision-making process that led to the launch of &quot;Challenger&quot;, saying that it was seriously flawed. Morton Thiokol called a meeting the night before the launch to raise concerns over the forecast temperature in regards to the O-rings. During the meeting, Morton Thiokol&#x27;s engineers issued a recommendation &quot;not to launch below 53F&quot;, the previous lowest temperature of a launch (STS-51C, a year earlier). The NASA managers challenged this and after a 30 minute offline caucus, Morton Thiokol&#x27;s senior management overruled their engineers&#x27; decision and gave the launch the go-ahead. The concerns were not communicated beyond the Level III Flight Readiness Review (FRR). It is certain that even though members of higher FRR teams knew about the issues, there were plenty of members who could have stopped the launch but decided not to. This was done in large part because of the management structure at NASA and the lack of major checks and balances, which proved to be fatal in this scenario. The report concluded that:

===Role of Richard Feynman===


One of the commission&#x27;s best-known members was theoretical physicist Richard Feynman. His style of investigating with his own direct methods rather than following the commission schedule put him at odds with Rogers, who once commented, &quot;Feynman is becoming a real pain.&quot; During a televised hearing, Feynman famously demonstrated how the O-rings became less resilient and subject to seal failures at low temperatures by compressing a sample of the material in a clamp and immersing it in a glass of ice water. Feynman&#x27;s own investigation reveals a disconnect between NASA&#x27;s engineers and executives that was far more striking than he expected. His interviews of NASA&#x27;s high-ranking managers revealed startling misunderstandings of elementary concepts. One such concept was the determination of a safety factor.

In one example, early tests resulted in some of the booster rocket&#x27;s O-rings burning a third of the way through. These O-rings provided the gas-tight seal needed between the vertically stacked cylindrical sections that made up the solid fuel booster. NASA managers recorded this result as demonstrating that the O-rings had a &quot;safety factor&quot; of 3. Feynman incredulously explains the magnitude of this error: A &quot;safety factor&quot; refers to the practice of building an object to be capable of withstanding more force than the force to which it will conceivably be subjected. To paraphrase Feynman&#x27;s example, if engineers built a bridge that could bear 3,000 pounds without any damage, even though it was never expected to bear more than 1,000 pounds in practice, the safety factor would be 3. If a 1,000-pound truck drove across the bridge and a crack appeared in a beam, even just a third of the way through a beam, the safety factor is now zero: The bridge is defective, there was no safety factor at all even though the bridge did not actually collapse.

Feynman was clearly disturbed by the fact that NASA management not only misunderstood this concept, but inverted it by using a term denoting an extra level of safety to describe a part that was actually defective and unsafe. Feynman continued to investigate the lack of communication between NASA&#x27;s management and its engineers, and was struck by management&#x27;s claim that the risk of catastrophic malfunction on the shuttle was 1 in 105, i.e. 1 in 100,000. Feynman immediately realized that this claim was risible on its face; as he described, this assessment of risk would entail that NASA could expect to launch a shuttle every day for the next 274 years while suffering, on average, only one accident. Investigating the claim further, Feynman discovered that the 1 in 105 figure was stating what they claimed the failure rate ought to be, given that it was a crewed vehicle, and working backward to generate the failure rate of components.

Feynman was disturbed by two aspects of this practice. First, NASA management assigned a probability of failure to each individual bolt, sometimes claiming a probability of 1 in 108, i.e. one in one hundred million. Feynman pointed out that it is impossible to calculate such a remote possibility with any scientific rigor. Secondly, Feynman was bothered not just by this sloppy science but by the fact that NASA claimed that the risk of catastrophic failure was &quot;necessarily&quot; 1 in 105. As the figure itself was beyond belief, Feynman questioned exactly what &quot;necessarily&quot; meant in this context, whether it meant that the figure followed logically from other calculations or that it reflected NASA management&#x27;s desire to make the numbers fit.

Feynman suspected that the 1 in 105 figure was wildly fantastical, and made a rough estimate that the true likelihood of shuttle disaster was closer to 1 in 100. He then decided to poll the engineers themselves, asking them to write down an anonymous estimate of the odds of shuttle explosion. Feynman found that the bulk of the engineers&#x27; estimates fell between 1 in 50 and 1 in 200 (at the time of retirement, the Shuttle suffered two catastrophic failures across 135 flights, for a failure rate of 1 in 67.5). This showed NASA management had clearly failed to communicate with their own engineers. He was upset NASA presented its fantastical figures as fact to convince a member of the public, schoolteacher Christa McAuliffe, to join the crew. Feynman was not uncomfortable with the concept of a risk factor, but felt strongly that the recruitment of laypeople required an honest portrayal of the true risk involved.

Feynman&#x27;s investigation eventually suggested to him that the cause of the &quot;Challenger&quot; disaster was the very part to which NASA management so mistakenly assigned a safety factor. The O-rings were rubber rings designed to form a seal in the shuttle&#x27;s solid rocket boosters, preventing the rockets&#x27; hot gas from escaping and damaging other parts of the vehicle. Feynman suspected that despite NASA&#x27;s claims, the O-rings were unsuitable at low temperatures and lost their resilience when cold, thus failing to maintain a tight seal when rocket pressure distorted the structure of the solid fuel booster. Feynman&#x27;s suspicions were corroborated by General Kutyna, also on the commission, who cunningly provided Feynman with a broad hint by asking about the effect of cold on O-ring seals after mentioning that the temperature on the day of the launch was far lower than had been the case with previous launches: below freezing at ; previously, the coldest launch had been at . In 2013, the BBC film &quot;The Challenger&quot; revealed that the O-ring insight had in fact come to Kutyna from the astronaut and fellow commission member Sally Ride, who had secretly provided him with NASA test results showing the O-rings became stiff when they were too cold.

Feynman&#x27;s investigations also revealed that there had been many serious doubts raised about the O-ring seals by engineers at Morton Thiokol, which made the solid fuel boosters, but communication failures had led to their concerns being ignored by NASA management. He found similar failures in procedure in many other areas at NASA, but singled out its software development for praise due to its rigorous and highly effective quality control procedures – then under threat from NASA management, which wished to reduce testing to save money given that the tests had always been passed.

Based on his experiences with NASA&#x27;s management and engineers, Feynman concluded that the serious deficiencies in NASA management&#x27;s scientific understanding, the lack of communication between the two camps, and the gross misrepresentation of the Shuttle&#x27;s dangers, required that NASA take a hiatus from Shuttle launches until it could resolve its internal inconsistencies and present an honest picture of the shuttle&#x27;s reliability. Feynman soon found that, while he respected the intellects of his fellow Commission members, they universally finished their criticisms of NASA with clear affirmations that the &quot;Challenger&quot; disaster should be addressed by NASA internally, but that there was no need for NASA to suspend its operations or to receive less funding. Feynman felt that the Commission&#x27;s conclusions misrepresented its findings, and he could not in good conscience recommend that such a deeply flawed organization as NASA should continue without a suspension of operations and a major overhaul. His fellow commission members were alarmed by Feynman&#x27;s dissent, and it was only after much petitioning that Feynman&#x27;s minority report was included at all. Feynman was so critical of flaws in NASA&#x27;s &quot;safety culture&quot; that he threatened to remove his name from the report unless it included his personal observations on the reliability of the shuttle, which appeared as &quot;Appendix F&quot;. In the appendix, he stated: 

&quot;For a successful technology,&quot; Feynman concluded, &quot;reality must take precedence over public relations, for nature cannot be fooled.&quot;

Feynman later wrote about the investigation in his 1988 book &quot;What Do You Care What Other People Think?&quot;. The second half of the book covers the investigation and the issues between science and politics, and includes the appendix he wrote.

Feynman later reported that, although he had believed he was making discoveries about the problems at NASA on his own, he eventually realized that either NASA or contractor personnel, in an apparent effort to anonymously focus attention on these problem areas, had carefully led him to the evidence which would support the conclusions on which he would later report.

==Result==
The Rogers Commission offered nine recommendations on improving safety in the space shuttle program, and NASA was directed by President Reagan to report back within thirty days as to how it planned to implement those recommendations. This is a summary of the chapter of Recommendations:
In response to the commission&#x27;s recommendation, NASA initiated a total redesign of the space shuttle&#x27;s solid rocket boosters, which was watched over by an independent oversight group as stipulated by the commission. NASA&#x27;s contract with Morton Thiokol, the contractor responsible for the solid rocket boosters, included a clause stating that in the event of a failure leading to &quot;loss of life or mission,&quot; Thiokol would forfeit $10 million of its incentive fee and formally accept legal liability for the failure. After the &quot;Challenger&quot; accident, Thiokol agreed to &quot;voluntarily accept&quot; the monetary penalty in exchange for not being forced to accept liability.

NASA also created a new Office of Safety, Reliability and Quality Assurance, headed as the commission had specified by a NASA associate administrator who reported directly to the NASA administrator. George Rodney, formerly of Martin Marietta, was appointed to this position. Former &quot;Challenger&quot; flight director Jay Greene became chief of the Safety Division of the directorate.

The unrealistically optimistic launch schedule pursued by NASA had been criticized by the Rogers Commission as a possible contributing cause to the accident. After the accident, NASA attempted to aim at a more realistic shuttle flight rate: it added another orbiter, &quot;Endeavour&quot;, to the space shuttle fleet to replace &quot;Challenger&quot;, and it worked with the Department of Defense to put more satellites in orbit using expendable launch vehicles rather than the shuttle. In August 1986, President Reagan also announced that the shuttle would no longer carry commercial satellite payloads. After a 32-month hiatus, the next shuttle mission, STS-26, was launched on September 29, 1988.

After the Space Shuttle &quot;Columbia&quot; disaster in 2003, attention once again focused on the attitude of NASA management towards safety issues. The &quot;Columbia&quot; Accident Investigation Board (CAIB) concluded that NASA had failed to learn many of the lessons of &quot;Challenger&quot;. In particular, the agency had not set up a truly independent office for safety oversight; the CAIB felt that in this area, &quot;NASA&#x27;s response to the Rogers Commission did not meet the Commission&#x27;s intent&quot;. The CAIB believed that &quot;the causes of the institutional failure responsible for &quot;Challenger&quot; have not been fixed,&quot; saying that the same &quot;flawed decision-making process&quot; that had resulted in the &quot;Challenger&quot; accident was responsible for &quot;Columbia&quot;″s destruction seventeen years later.

==See also==
* 

== References ==
== External links ==
* Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle &quot;Challenger&quot; Accident – the Rogers Commission report on the accident (NASA.gov parsed HTML version)
* Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle &quot;Challenger&quot; Accident – pdf version, compiled by Thomas (&#x27;thomasafb&#x27;) – Volume I only
* Hearing on the Space Shuttle Accident and the Rogers Commission Report. 219 pages (14.2 MB) U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space. Date: 99th Congress, 2nd Session, February 18, June 10 and 17, 1986. See also GPO &quot;Challenger&quot; index page.
* – Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle &quot;Challenger&quot; Accident, Appendix F – Personal Observations on Reliability of Shuttle by R. P. Feynman</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q105391289" start="4" end="28" title="Rogers Commission Report" label="Rogers Commission Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986717" start="46" end="69" title="Presidential Commission (United States)" label="Presidential Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q858145" start="101" end="146" title="Space Shuttle Challenger disaster" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot; disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q19050" start="172" end="180" title="STS-51-L" label="STS-51-L"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="230" end="243" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="350" end="354" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q433180" start="498" end="515" title="William P. Rogers" label="William P. Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="537" end="569" title="United States Secretary of State" label="United States Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="577" end="590" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="596" end="626" title="United States Attorney General" label="United States Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="634" end="651" title="Dwight Eisenhower" label="Dwight Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="655" end="669" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="742" end="751" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q22958317" start="755" end="776" title="David Campion Acheson" label="David Campion Acheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q214758" start="824" end="836" title="Dean Acheson" label="Dean Acheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407190" start="839" end="855" title="Eugene E. Covert" label="Eugene E. Covert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096903" start="887" end="924" title="Chief Scientist of the U.S. Air Force" label="Chief Scientist of the U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q39246" start="927" end="945" title="Richard Feynman" label="Richard P. Feynman"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="992" end="1014" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1017" end="1031" title="Robert B. Hotz" label="Robert B. Hotz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294576" start="1090" end="1106" title="Donald J. Kutyna" label="Donald J. Kutyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q49285" start="1176" end="1189" title="Sally Ride" label="Sally K. Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q734688" start="1313" end="1318" title="STS-7" label="STS-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q600770" start="1323" end="1331" title="STS-41-G" label="STS-41-G"/>
<link wikidata="Q715059" start="1358" end="1395" title="Columbia Accident Investigation Board" label="Columbia Accident Investigation Board"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1399" end="1415" title="Robert W. Rummel" label="Robert W. Rummel"/>
<link wikidata="Q527341" start="1417" end="1437" title="Trans World Airlines" label="Trans World Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030888" start="1482" end="1498" title="Joseph F. Sutter" label="Joseph F. Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="1500" end="1506" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="1569" end="1579" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797877" start="1591" end="1614" title="Arthur B. C. Walker, Jr" label="Arthur B. C. Walker, Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="1636" end="1655" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1668" end="1685" title="Albert D. Wheelon" label="Albert D. Wheelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="1714" end="1741" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q271939" start="1779" end="1804" title="Chuck Yeager" label="Charles E. (Chuck) Yeager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031651" start="1866" end="1879" title="sound barrier" label="sound barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736884" start="1898" end="1916" title="Alton G. Keel, Jr." label="Alton G. Keel, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q8017627" start="2011" end="2028" title="William R. Graham" label="William R. Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="2052" end="2097" title="National Aeronautics and Space Administration" label="National Aeronautics and Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2100" end="2114" title="Jesse W. Moore" label="Jesse W. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="2158" end="2203" title="National Aeronautics and Space Administration" label="National Aeronautics and Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2266" end="2283" title="Arnold D. Aldrich" label="Arnold D. Aldrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="2341" end="2361" title="Johnson Space Center" label="Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q102168647" start="2364" end="2387" title="Dr. Judson A. Lovingood" label="Dr. Judson A. Lovingood"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="2430" end="2458" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q121294868" start="2461" end="2473" title="Robert Sieck" label="Robert Sieck"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="2507" end="2527" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2580" end="2595" title="Thomas L. Moser" label="Thomas L. Moser"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="2620" end="2640" title="Johnson Space Center" label="Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2642" end="2658" title="Richard H. Kohrs" label="Richard H. Kohrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="2723" end="2743" title="Johnson Space Center" label="Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="2799" end="2802" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="2864" end="2909" title="National Aeronautics and Space Administration" label="National Aeronautics and Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="3044" end="3064" title="Johnson Space Center" label="Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3097" end="3113" title="L. Michael Weeks" label="L. Michael Weeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="3164" end="3168" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135571" start="3252" end="3273" title="solid rocket boosters" label="solid rocket boosters"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="3275" end="3303" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017627" start="3331" end="3348" title="William R. Graham" label="William R. Graham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3380" end="3394" title="Jesse W. Moore" label="Jesse W. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3444" end="3462" title="Lawrence B. Mulloy" label="Lawrence B. Mulloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135571" start="3481" end="3502" title="Solid Rocket Boosters" label="Solid Rocket Boosters"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="3504" end="3532" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3540" end="3555" title="Richard C. Cook" label="Richard C. Cook"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3557" end="3572" title="Michael B. Mann" label="Michael B. Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="3639" end="3684" title="National Aeronautics and Space Administration" label="National Aeronautics and Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3686" end="3708" title="Mr. David Winterhalter" label="Mr. David Winterhalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="3753" end="3798" title="National Aeronautics and Space Administration" label="National Aeronautics and Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3827" end="3837" title="Dick Kohrs" label="Dick Kohrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="3875" end="3895" title="Johnson Space Center" label="Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3898" end="3915" title="Charlie Stevenson" label="Charlie Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="3945" end="3965" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017240" start="3968" end="3984" title="William R. Lucas" label="William R. Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3987" end="4001" title="Jesse W. Moore" label="Jesse W. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q14395583" start="4004" end="4019" title="Milton Silveira" label="Milton Silveira"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4021" end="4036" title="Horace Lamberth" label="Horace Lamberth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4039" end="4053" title="Jim Harrington" label="Jim Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668406" start="4056" end="4067" title="T. Jack Lee" label="T. Jack Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="4086" end="4114" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4168" end="4184" title="Mr. George Hardy" label="Mr. George Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4187" end="4199" title="Rick Bachtol" label="Rick Bachtol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4202" end="4210" title="T. Moser" label="T. Moser"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="4241" end="4261" title="Johnson Space Center" label="Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4290" end="4302" title="Larry Mulloy" label="Larry Mulloy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4305" end="4319" title="Jerry E. Mason" label="Jerry E. Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357348" start="4364" end="4378" title="Morton Thiokol" label="Morton Thiokol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4380" end="4391" title="Robert Lund" label="Robert Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357348" start="4393" end="4407" title="Morton Thiokol" label="Morton Thiokol"/>
<link wikidata="Q36245" start="4415" end="4429" title="Roger Boisjoly" label="Roger Boisjoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357348" start="4451" end="4465" title="Morton Thiokol" label="Morton Thiokol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4473" end="4488" title="Arnold Thompson" label="Arnold Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357348" start="4507" end="4521" title="Morton Thiokol" label="Morton Thiokol"/>
<link wikidata="Q105817751" start="4530" end="4547" title="Allan J. McDonald" label="Allan J. McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357348" start="4549" end="4563" title="Morton Thiokol" label="Morton Thiokol"/>
<link wikidata="Q105817751" start="4597" end="4614" title="Allan J. McDonald" label="Allan J. McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357348" start="4638" end="4652" title="Morton-Thiokol" label="Morton-Thiokol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4661" end="4675" title="Jerry E. Mason" label="Jerry E. Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357348" start="4718" end="4732" title="Morton-Thiokol" label="Morton-Thiokol"/>
<link wikidata="Q36245" start="4740" end="4754" title="Roger Boisjoly" label="Roger Boisjoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357348" start="4773" end="4780" title="Thiokol" label="Thiokol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4782" end="4796" title="Arnie Thompson" label="Arnie Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357348" start="4822" end="4829" title="Thiokol" label="Thiokol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4832" end="4843" title="Robert Lund" label="Robert Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357348" start="4874" end="4881" title="Thiokol" label="Thiokol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4884" end="4898" title="Joe Kilminster" label="Joe Kilminster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4945" end="4961" title="Brian G. Russell" label="Brian G. Russell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4989" end="5001" title="Larry Mulloy" label="Larry Mulloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="5056" end="5084" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5086" end="5101" title="George C. Hardy" label="George C. Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="5145" end="5173" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5175" end="5190" title="Stanley Reinarz" label="Stanley Reinarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q102168647" start="5236" end="5259" title="Dr. Judson A. Lovingood" label="Dr. Judson A. Lovingood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5348" end="5359" title="B. K. Davis" label="B. K. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5398" end="5418" title="Edward F. Kolczynski" label="Edward F. Kolczynski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5537" end="5547" title="B.K. Davis" label="B.K. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5569" end="5586" title="Edward Kolczynski" label="Edward Kolczynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q328110" start="5588" end="5601" title="Rocco Petrone" label="Rocco Petrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348664" start="5686" end="5708" title="Rockwell International" label="Rockwell International"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="5763" end="5783" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348664" start="5785" end="5807" title="Rockwell International" label="Rockwell International"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5809" end="5821" title="Bob Glaysher" label="Bob Glaysher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348664" start="5887" end="5909" title="Rockwell International" label="Rockwell International"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5912" end="5930" title="Martin Cioffoletti" label="Martin Cioffoletti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348664" start="5990" end="6012" title="Rockwell International" label="Rockwell International"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6015" end="6028" title="Arnie Aldrich" label="Arnie Aldrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="6078" end="6098" title="Johnson Space Center" label="Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017240" start="6100" end="6116" title="William R. Lucas" label="William R. Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="6128" end="6156" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6179" end="6193" title="Jesse W. Moore" label="Jesse W. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6298" end="6311" title="Dick G. Smith" label="Dick G. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="6400" end="6420" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="6482" end="6510" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6544" end="6568" title="Edward O&amp;#x27;Connor Jr." label="Edward O&amp;#x27;Connor Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="6570" end="6574" title="USAF" label="USAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="6682" end="6702" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6705" end="6719" title="Carver Kennedy" label="Carver Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q901058" start="6731" end="6734" title="Vehicle Assembly Building" label="VAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357348" start="6747" end="6761" title="Morton-Thiokol" label="Morton-Thiokol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6769" end="6779" title="Bill Barsh" label="Bill Barsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061044" start="6802" end="6815" title="External Tank" label="External Tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135571" start="6816" end="6836" title="Solid Rocket Booster" label="Solid Rocket Booster"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="6884" end="6887" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="KSC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6890" end="6905" title="Thomas L. Moser" label="Thomas L. Moser"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="6956" end="6960" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107431" start="6968" end="6984" title="J. Wayne Littles" label="J. Wayne Littles"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="7022" end="7050" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668406" start="7052" end="7063" title="T. Jack Lee" label="T. Jack Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="7082" end="7086" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="MSFC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7089" end="7101" title="Gary Coultas" label="Gary Coultas"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="7140" end="7160" title="Johnson Space Center" label="Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7163" end="7176" title="George Hopson" label="George Hopson"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="7233" end="7261" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141744" start="7288" end="7309" title="James R. Thompson Jr." label="James R. Thompson Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q966657" start="7375" end="7398" title="Cape Canaveral, Florida" label="Cape Canaveral, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7409" end="7433" title="Edward O&amp;#x27;Connor Jr." label="Edward O&amp;#x27;Connor Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q966657" start="7482" end="7505" title="Cape Canaveral, Florida" label="Cape Canaveral, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7508" end="7522" title="Dan M. Germany" label="Dan M. Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q193401" start="7569" end="7583" title="Cape Canaveral" label="Cape Canaveral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7701" end="7717" title="George McDonough" label="George McDonough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107431" start="7734" end="7750" title="J. Wayne Littles" label="J. Wayne Littles"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="7788" end="7816" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7819" end="7837" title="Harold N. Scofield" label="Harold N. Scofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="7872" end="7900" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q121423307" start="7903" end="7917" title="Robert S. Ryan" label="Robert S. Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="7984" end="8012" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8014" end="8028" title="Garry M. Lyles" label="Garry M. Lyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="8096" end="8124" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8126" end="8145" title="Fredrick D. Bachtel" label="Fredrick D. Bachtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="8213" end="8241" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49950" start="8266" end="8278" title="George Abbey (NASA)" label="George Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q107667" start="8317" end="8327" title="John Young (astronaut)" label="John Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q536632" start="8355" end="8368" title="Paul J. Weitz" label="Paul J. Weitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q315737" start="8403" end="8414" title="Bob Crippen" label="Bob Crippen"/>
<link wikidata="Q460161" start="8428" end="8443" title="Hank Hartsfield" label="Hank Hartsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q442233" start="8469" end="8485" title="Richard H. Truly" label="Richard H. Truly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8530" end="8547" title="Arnold D. Aldrich" label="Arnold D. Aldrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101244" start="8595" end="8619" title="Clifford E. Charlesworth" label="Clifford E. Charlesworth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8673" end="8691" title="Lawrence B. Mulloy" label="Lawrence B. Mulloy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8740" end="8756" title="Lawrence O. Wear" label="Lawrence O. Wear"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="8795" end="8823" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8826" end="8842" title="Brian G. Russell" label="Brian G. Russell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8915" end="8929" title="Robert Ebeling" label="Robert Ebeling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8993" end="9008" title="J.C. Kilminster" label="J.C. Kilminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q36245" start="9050" end="9064" title="Roger Boisjoly" label="Roger Boisjoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357348" start="9083" end="9097" title="Morton Thiokol" label="Morton Thiokol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9105" end="9120" title="George B. Hardy" label="George B. Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9210" end="9228" title="James E. Kingsbury" label="James E. Kingsbury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9256" end="9270" title="Robert G. Eudy" label="Robert G. Eudy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135571" start="9295" end="9313" title="Solid Rocket Motor" label="Solid Rocket Motor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9362" end="9376" title="John O. Miller" label="John O. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9430" end="9444" title="William L. Ray" label="William L. Ray"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9521" end="9537" title="L. Michael Weeks" label="L. Michael Weeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032002" start="9601" end="9616" title="Glynn S. Lunney" label="Glynn S. Lunney"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9689" end="9704" title="John R. Stocker" label="John R. Stocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q942417" start="9908" end="9914" title="O-ring" label="O-ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357348" start="10501" end="10515" title="Morton Thiokol" label="Morton Thiokol"/>
<link wikidata="Q858145" start="10909" end="10981" title="Space Shuttle Challenger launch decision" label="decision-making process that led to the launch of &amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q606269" start="11313" end="11320" title="STS-51C" label="STS-51C"/>
<link wikidata="Q39246" start="12070" end="12085" title="Richard Feynman" label="Richard Feynman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="12582" end="12586" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034862" start="12821" end="12834" title="safety factor" label="safety factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q942417" start="12911" end="12917" title="O-ring" label="O-ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q170579" start="14435" end="14442" title="risible" label="risible"/>
<link wikidata="Q229674" start="16358" end="16375" title="Christa McAuliffe" label="Christa McAuliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294576" start="17247" end="17261" title="Donald Kutyna" label="General Kutyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q15691279" start="17604" end="17618" title="The Challenger Disaster" label="The Challenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q49285" start="17733" end="17743" title="Sally Ride" label="Sally Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357348" start="17987" end="18001" title="Thiokol" label="Morton Thiokol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712899" start="20153" end="20194" title="What Do You Care What Other People Think?" label="What Do You Care What Other People Think?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357348" start="21255" end="21269" title="Morton Thiokol" label="Morton Thiokol"/>
<link wikidata="Q626800" start="21936" end="21951" title="Martin Marietta" label="Martin Marietta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166664" start="22031" end="22041" title="Jay Greene" label="Jay Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q182508" start="22366" end="22387" title="Space Shuttle Endeavour" label="&amp;quot;Endeavour&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078724" start="22534" end="22559" title="expendable launch vehicle" label="expendable launch vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="22684" end="22693" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q752766" start="22755" end="22761" title="STS-26" label="STS-26"/>
<link wikidata="Q580867" start="22810" end="22853" title="Space Shuttle Columbia disaster" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Columbia&amp;quot; disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q715059" start="22954" end="23003" title="Columbia Accident Investigation Board" label="&amp;quot;Columbia&amp;quot; Accident Investigation Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q54383" start="23604" end="23612" title="Space Shuttle Columbia" label="Columbia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405500" wikidata="Q3823494" url="?curid=405500" title="Highway Patrol (American TV series)">
<text>Highway Patrol is a 156-episode action crime drama series produced for syndication from 1955 to 1959. It was &quot;one of the most popular syndicated series in television history&quot;, and it was the first American series broadcast in West Germany on that country&#x27;s commercial TV channel.

==Overview==
&quot;Highway Patrol&quot; stars Broderick Crawford as Dan Mathews, the gruff and dedicated head of a police force in an unidentified Western state. Mathews had &quot;no particular title — just the boss,&quot; Crawford said.

The program was &quot;based on authentic stories from the files of highway patrol headquarters throughout the country.&quot; Episodes dealt with pursuing and arresting criminals such as smugglers, hijackers, and robbers. Two technical advisors (one a patrolman on active service and one retired) read scripts before scenes were shot and were present during filming &quot;to speak up whenever a technical violation, however slight, occurred.&quot;

A signature shot of the series is fedora-wearing Matthews barking rapid-fire dialogues into a radio microphone as he leans against the door of his black and white patrol car. Crawford&#x27;s acting style in the series was one of fast-talking, hard as nails, dedication to his job.

Ziv Television Programs produced the show. Crawford signed in April 1955.

&quot;Highway Patrol&quot; premiered October 3, 1955, with &quot;Prison Break&quot;, an episode filmed April 11–13, 1955. Initial ratings were strong, the show running second to &quot;I Love Lucy&quot;.

Ziv Television Programs produced 156 episodes spanning four TV seasons, 1955–59. During the four years of its run, &quot;Highway Patrol&quot; would feature many actors who would later become successful stars in their own right, among them Stuart Whitman, Clint Eastwood, Robert Conrad, Larry Hagman, Barbara Eden, Paul Burke, Leonard Nimoy, and Ruta Lee.

&quot;Highway Patrol&quot; is famous for its period cars and its location shooting around the San Fernando Valley and Simi Valley, then mostly rural. Other notable Los Angeles area locations include Griffith Park, as well as Bronson Canyon just above Hollywood. The show also filmed at railroad stations in Glendale, California, identified by a large sign; Alhambra, California; Santa Susana, California; and Chatsworth, California. 

Officer uniforms are the CHP style of the day. In seasons one to three, the shoulder patch is essentially the CHP patch with &quot;California&quot; and &quot;Eureka&quot; (state motto) removed; the California bear and other California state seal elements are retained. In season four the show adopted a uniform patch that matches its patrol car emblem, and the badge was changed from a seven-point star similar to the actual CHP badge, to a nondescript shield. Highway Patrol Chief Dan Mathews usually wears a suit and fedora.

Art Gilmore&#x27;s narration gives &quot;Highway Patrol&quot; a documentary feel, but several details are never mentioned. While described as a state police agency, the actual state is never identified. It is said to be a western state which borders Mexico. In Season 3, Episode 13, the city where the Highway Patrol headquarters is located is identified as &quot;Hempstead.&quot; 

A key element of the show is two-way radio communication among patrol cars and headquarters, with heavy use of police code &quot;10-4&quot; (meaning &quot;acknowledged&quot;).

&quot;Star Trek&quot; creator Gene Roddenberry wrote five episodes, sometimes using the pseudonym &quot;Robert Wesley&quot;. Future producer Quinn Martin was sound supervisor in the show&#x27;s early years; style elements of &quot;Highway Patrol&quot; are evident in his later productions (&quot;The Untouchables&quot;, &quot;The Fugitive&quot;, &quot;Barnaby Jones&quot;, &quot;The Invaders&quot;, &quot;The FBI&quot; and &quot;The Streets of San Francisco&quot;).

When asked why the popular show ended, Crawford said, &quot;We ran out of crimes&quot;. Crawford reportedly had had his fill of the show&#x27;s hectic television schedule (two shows per week), which had caused him to drink more heavily than ever, and he had decided to leave &quot;Highway Patrol&quot; to make films in Europe. Ziv held up Crawford&#x27;s 10% share of the show&#x27;s gross (some $2 million) until Crawford agreed to sign for a new Ziv pilot and TV show, &quot;King of Diamonds&quot;. After returning from Europe, Crawford signed his new contract with Ziv and later starred in &quot;King of Diamonds&quot; playing diamond insurance investigator John King. &quot;King of Diamonds&quot; lasted only one season before being canceled in 1962. Like most Ziv series, &quot;Highway Patrol&quot; repeats were syndicated for many years, sometimes with name &quot;Ten-4&quot;. In 2010, ThisTV began airing the series. In 2017, it was added to the lineup on MeTV until its removal on December 27, 2024. Starting on April 1, 2024, the show currently airs on FETV.

==Personnel==
The only constant regular on &quot;Highway Patrol&quot; is star Broderick Crawford as Dan Mathews. William Boyett became a regular in the fourth season as Sgt. Ken Williams. Art Gilmore was the narrator. Vernon Clark was the producer. Jack Shoemaker and Frank Runyon were the technical advisors.

==Business aspects==
Ziv Productions minimized expenses in order to keep the program &quot;fast and cheap&quot;. The theme tune was a royalty-free tune that had been used on &quot;Mr. District Attorney&quot; on radio. One three-minute scene that involved a robbery, a murder, and an escape was shot in one take.

The program became Ziv&#x27;s most profitable production, and it was still making money for the company as reruns continued into the mid-1960s. That success led to formation of Economee Films as a subsidiary of Ziv. While the parent company sold first-run episodes to regional sponsors, Economee Films dealt with local TV stations for showing of reruns, which were titled &quot;Ten-Four&quot; to distinguish them from first-run episodes. In 1959, three stations in New York City were showing the program each week. By August 1957, more than 200 stations in the United States carried the show, and in some markets it drew a larger audience than network programs. It was also broadcast in &quot;France, Germany, and nearly all of the Latin-American countries.&quot;

Character Merchandising of New York manufactured clothing and game items for &quot;Highway Patrol&quot;.

==Recognition==
The Billboard&#x27;s Fourth Annual Program and Talent Awards named &quot;Highway Patrol&quot; the best syndicated film series on the market. Voters also rated the show first as best adventure series. In the same poll, Crawford was selected as best actor in a syndicated show, and he came in second as best performer in an adventure. The show was also named the top syndication first-run series in the magazine&#x27;s fifth annual survey.

== In other media ==

Comic adaptations of Highway Patrol appear in five issues of the British anthology comic.

A board game was published, also in the United Kingdom, in 1985 by Bell Toys and Games.

==In popular culture==
MAD Magazine spoofed &quot;Highway Patrol&quot; in its October 1960 issue (#58), with Mort Drucker providing caricatures of Crawford and other cast members.

Crawford makes a cameo in the 1977 episode &quot;Hustle&quot; of &quot;CHiPs&quot;, which is also about the California Highway Patrol. After chatting about &quot;Highway Patrol&quot;, Officer Jon Baker (Larry Wilcox) says, tongue-in-cheek, &quot;they don&#x27;t make TV shows like that anymore.&quot;

Crawford comes back with, &quot;No, they sure don&#x27;t.&quot;

To mark the 75th anniversary of the CHP in 2004, the late Los Angeles City Council Member Tom LaBonge, District 4 (which includes parts of Hollywood) asked his &quot;Dollar a Year Man&quot; Gary Goltz to come up with an idea. In response, Goltz created the 10-4 Day Parade which is held every October 4. Approximately 20 to 30 classic police cars from the CHP, LAPD, and many classic cop TV shows parade down Hollywood Boulevard stopping to pay tribute to Broderick Crawford&#x27;s movie Star on the Walk of Fame. They are often joined by Erik Estrada, Kent McCord and other stars of classic cop TV shows. &quot;The Star and the Car&quot; a documentary about Goltz and his 1955 Broderick Crawford &quot;Highway Patrol&quot; Buick was released in 2018. In 2019 &quot;Broderick Crawford Starring in Highway Patrol&quot; a book on the series written by Goltz was released.

==Show availability==
All the 156 episodes are now available on DVD from the 35mm masters. The rights to all the 156 episodes are held by Ziv Television Productions&#x27; successor United Artists Television under MGM Television. In 2010 episodes began being shown on ThisTV, a network which features classic shows and movies. In 2017, it joined the line-up on MeTV until its removal on December 27, 2024. It has also appeared on MeTV&#x27;s sister network Decades (now Catchy Comedy). Starting on April 1, 2024, the show is currently airing on FETV. Some episodes of &quot;Highway Patrol&quot; have been provided online via Hulu.com. MGM Home Entertainment released the first season of &quot;Highway Patrol&quot; on DVD on August 11, 2010. On April 2, 2013, TGG Direct released seasons 2, 3, and 4 on DVD.

==References==
==External links==

* &quot;Highway Patrol&quot; TV Series Site
* &quot;Highway Patrol&quot; Rolls Again – 10-4! DEAD LINK
* &quot;The Star and The Car&quot; Documentary
* Gary&#x27;s Buick.com
* &quot;Broderick Crawford Starring in Highway Patrol&quot; Book</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1762165" start="32" end="38" title="Action (genre)" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321734" start="39" end="57" title="Police procedural" label="crime drama series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="71" end="82" title="Broadcast syndication" label="syndication"/>
<link wikidata="Q182349" start="342" end="360" title="Broderick Crawford" label="Broderick Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="443" end="450" title="Western United States" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072859" start="1265" end="1288" title="Ziv Television Programs" label="Ziv Television Programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q181943" start="1524" end="1535" title="I Love Lucy" label="I Love Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q470998" start="1783" end="1797" title="Stuart Whitman" label="Stuart Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="1799" end="1813" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q722196" start="1815" end="1828" title="Robert Conrad" label="Robert Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q100440" start="1830" end="1842" title="Larry Hagman" label="Larry Hagman"/>
<link wikidata="Q232298" start="1844" end="1856" title="Barbara Eden" label="Barbara Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279613" start="1858" end="1868" title="Paul Burke (actor)" label="Paul Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16345" start="1870" end="1883" title="Leonard Nimoy" label="Leonard Nimoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q459211" start="1889" end="1897" title="Ruta Lee" label="Ruta Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q816843" start="1994" end="2013" title="San Fernando Valley" label="San Fernando Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q323414" start="2018" end="2029" title="Simi Valley" label="Simi Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340614" start="2099" end="2112" title="Griffith Park" label="Griffith Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926090" start="2125" end="2139" title="Bronson Canyon" label="Bronson Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q485716" start="2207" end="2227" title="Glendale, California" label="Glendale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q752681" start="2257" end="2277" title="Alhambra, California" label="Alhambra, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120698" start="2279" end="2303" title="Santa Susana, California" label="Santa Susana, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020942" start="2309" end="2331" title="Chatsworth, California" label="Chatsworth, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209575" start="3357" end="3368" title="police code" label="police code"/>
<link wikidata="Q191716" start="3453" end="3469" title="Gene Roddenberry" label="Gene Roddenberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q466352" start="3564" end="3576" title="Quinn Martin" label="Quinn Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247488" start="3719" end="3735" title="The Untouchables (1959 TV series)" label="The Untouchables"/>
<link wikidata="Q137034" start="3749" end="3761" title="The Fugitive (1963 TV series)" label="The Fugitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q808420" start="3775" end="3788" title="Barnaby Jones" label="Barnaby Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671694" start="3802" end="3814" title="The Invaders" label="The Invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234407" start="3828" end="3835" title="The F.B.I. (TV series)" label="The FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q973439" start="3852" end="3880" title="The Streets of San Francisco" label="The Streets of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791249" start="4367" end="4383" title="King of Diamonds (TV series)" label="King of Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524762" start="4782" end="4788" title="ThisTV" label="ThisTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303733" start="4853" end="4857" title="MeTV" label="MeTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611599" start="4952" end="4956" title="FETV" label="FETV"/>
<link wikidata="Q182349" start="5037" end="5055" title="Broderick Crawford" label="Broderick Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q595638" start="5072" end="5086" title="William Boyett" label="William Boyett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971317" start="6996" end="7003" title="British comics" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q867242" start="7004" end="7019" title="anthology comic" label="anthology comic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7089" end="7108" title="Bell Toys and Games" label="Bell Toys and Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q312086" start="7134" end="7146" title="Mad (magazine)" label="MAD Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240527" start="7220" end="7232" title="Mort Drucker" label="Mort Drucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023688" start="7363" end="7368" title="CHiPs" label="CHiPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q723783" start="7495" end="7507" title="Larry Wilcox" label="Larry Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879195" start="7825" end="7842" title="One-dollar salary" label="Dollar a Year Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550689" start="8711" end="8736" title="United Artists Television" label="United Artists Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q905791" start="8743" end="8757" title="MGM Television" label="MGM Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524762" start="8797" end="8803" title="ThisTV" label="ThisTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303733" start="8890" end="8894" title="MeTV" label="MeTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350875" start="8986" end="8993" title="Catchy Comedy" label="Decades"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611599" start="9074" end="9078" title="FETV" label="FETV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630304" start="9154" end="9162" title="Hulu.com" label="Hulu.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981249" start="9164" end="9186" title="MGM Home Entertainment" label="MGM Home Entertainment"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405502" wikidata="Q438344" url="?curid=405502" title="Altern-8">
<text>Altern 8 is a British electronic music act, comprising Mark Archer and Chris Peat, until Peat left the group in 1994. Best known in the early 1990s, their trademark was electronic rave music with a heavy bass line. Notable Altern 8 tracks included &quot;Activ 8&quot;, &quot;E-Vapor-8&quot;, &quot;Frequency&quot;, &quot;Brutal-8-E&quot;, &quot;Armageddon&quot;, &quot;Move My Body&quot;, &quot;Hypnotic St8&quot; and &quot;Infiltrate 202&quot;. 

On stage and in music videos, (such as the music video for &quot;E-Vapor-8&quot;), Altern 8&#x27;s members wore their signature fluorescent yellow dust masks and green MK3 chemical warfare suits. The band signed with Network Records based in Stratford House, Birmingham, England.

==History==
===Nexus 21===
Formed in 1989, by Mark Archer and Chris Peat, Nexus 21 was a British techno duo from Stafford, England. The group was signed to the Blue Chip record label, owned by former Wigan Casino DJ Kev Roberts, under which they released &quot;(Still) Life Keeps Moving&quot;: a vocal techno tune, and &quot;The Rhythm Of Life&quot;, an LP album strongly influenced by Detroit techno with acid house, electro and breakbeats elements.

A second album was set for release in late 1991, but due to sample clearance problems, the LP never materialised. A small edition of white labels of &quot;I Know We Can Make It&quot; / &quot;Sychologic PSP&quot; was released, which showcased a bigger hardcore influence.

When the Blue Chip label folded, the duo moved to Network Records, releasing &quot;Another Night&quot;, and &quot;The Detroit remixes&quot;.

After the release of &quot;Overload (EP)&quot;, as Altern 8, the pair released the following tracks as Nexus 21: &quot;Self Hypnosis&quot;: a deep techno contribution to the &quot;Bio Rhythm&quot; compilation, a remix of which appeared on the &quot;Progressive Logic&quot; EP, alongside &quot;Together&quot; (from &quot;Bio Rhythm 2&quot;) and two tunes from &quot;The Rhythm Of Life&quot;, one remixed.

===The beginning of Altern 8===
Altern 8 was formed in Stafford in 1990, as a side project to Nexus 21, (a name chosen because of its &quot;futuristic house sound&quot;), when both members were aged 21. From the outset, the band&#x27;s objective was to develop their style which was influenced by the musical elements of Detroit techno artists Derrick May, Juan Atkins and Kevin Saunderson, as well as the Chicago house music sound of Phuture and early electronic pioneers such as Kraftwerk. Although in the inlay of their first album they credit Manchester-based British acid house group 808 State, by thanking them for starting the UK rave scene. 

Altern 8 tunes influenced many artists, with their mixture of the sounds of the Roland TB-303, 808 and 909 with break-beats and familiar samples. At the time in the UK, outdoor rave events were legal, and Altern 8 had a reputation for turning up to play at major unofficial events. They helped to define harder house tracks relying more heavily on bass and volume. The use of more bass and eclectic noises gradually evolved Altern 8&#x27;s music away from the earlier house music style. The duo, dressed in chemical warfare suits and dancing &quot;like electrofied monkeys&quot;, took part in a large number of live performances.

In 1991, Altern 8 released their first single, &quot;Infiltrate 202&quot;. The same year, the band did a live performance in the car park outside Shelley&#x27;s night club in Longton, Stoke-on-Trent, which can be seen in the video for their second single, &quot;Activ 8 (Come With Me)&quot;.

===&quot;Full On...Mask Hysteria&quot;===
The band released an album on the Network Records label in 1992, called &quot;Full On... Mask Hysteria&quot;, which featured six of their first seven singles. The same year, Peat stood as a candidate for the Stafford constituency in the General Election representing the &#x27;Hardcore (Altern8-ive)&#x27; party. He received 158 votes and finished in fourth place.

In 1993, Archer began producing music. Billed as Slo Moshun, Archer was responsible for the hits &quot;Bells of NY&quot; and &quot;Help My Friend&quot;.

In 1994, Peat and Archer parted ways. Archer continued to DJ under the name Altern 8 until Peat declined permission to use the Altern 8 name and trademarks.

===Comeback - Mark Archer as Altern 8 ===
The 2001 DJ mix album &quot;Old Skool Euphoria&quot;, part of the Euphoria series of albums, was mixed by Archer using the Altern 8 pseudonym. The album is a double album of various &quot;old skool&quot; acid house and rave music produced in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The album includes two Altern 8 songs.

Mark Archer carried on as Altern 8 with the original MCs and dancers from 1999 and performed at Old School Hardcore reunion events throughout the 2000s. Since 2014, Altern 8 have enjoyed a new resurgence in popularity through a series of live appearances at festivals and clubs across the UK, introducing them to a new generation of fans.

In 2013, a campaign was launched on Facebook and Twitter to get Altern 8&#x27;s 1991 song &quot;Activ 8 (Come With Me)&quot; to number 1 in the chart for Christmas. The song ultimately ended up hitting number 33.

In 2020, Altern 8 headlined the Bang Face festival at Pontins in Southport, which was the last large-scale music event held in the UK before the government advised against gatherings of this kind during the coronavirus pandemic. In November, the first &#x27;new&#x27; Altern 8 track since 1993 was released. Called &quot;Hard Crew&quot;, the hardcore tune had been heard in Altern 8 sets over the past few years, but 2020 marked the first time it had been widely available (with the release coming in a number of remixes in support of the #WeAreViable campaign).

==Quotation==
From Andrew Harrison of &quot;Select&quot; magazine as printed in the Infiltr-8 America EP:
&quot;Is it possible to take Altern-8 seriously? It&#x27;s impossible not to. Because behind the rave pantomime and the giant robots and the mask hysteria, this is music for a different generation. These people never wasted their lives waiting for the next punk to arrive. 1988 was their Year Zero. And it&#x27;s still here. All you have to do is close your eyes.&quot;

&quot;This is about people with Kraftwerk and Pierre, Transmat and WARP, 808, 909 and 303 encoded in their DNA. This is a live transmission of the beat you can&#x27;t defeat, sampled over and over and hideously mutated. If you don&#x27;t understand it, you don&#x27;t deserve to. This is the phuture, right now, and THIS is the sound of Altern-8.&quot; 

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
===DJ mix albums===
*&quot;Old Skool Euphoria&quot; (2001) (Telstar Records/BMG)

===Extended plays===
===Singles===
==References==
==External links==
* Mask Hysteria - discography, future events, forums &amp; group contact.
* Discogs: Altern 8
* Altern 8&#x27;s first United States appearance 
* Russian Fan Site
* Mark Archer (Altern 8) interview @ Kmag
* Nexus 21 at discogs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q438344" start="0" end="8" title="Altern-8" label="Altern 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="22" end="38" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="169" end="179" title="electronic music" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q645767" start="180" end="190" title="rave music" label="rave music"/>
<link wikidata="Q88184790" start="595" end="605" title="Dust mask" label="dust masks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16682231" start="616" end="642" title="NBC suit" label="MK3 chemical warfare suits"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049609" start="665" end="680" title="Network Records" label="Network Records"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="690" end="705" title="Highgate, Birmingham#Stratford House" label="Stratford House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="707" end="717" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="719" end="726" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="826" end="832" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q826782" start="842" end="850" title="Stafford" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q841983" start="1083" end="1085" title="LP record" label="LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q341364" start="1135" end="1145" title="acid house" label="acid house"/>
<link wikidata="Q217597" start="1147" end="1154" title="electro (music)" label="electro"/>
<link wikidata="Q663519" start="1159" end="1168" title="breakbeat" label="breakbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141316" start="1314" end="1326" title="White label record" label="white labels"/>
<link wikidata="Q388906" start="1432" end="1440" title="hardcore techno" label="hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049609" start="1503" end="1518" title="Network Records" label="Network Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q826782" start="2055" end="2063" title="Stafford" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q438344" start="2094" end="2102" title="Nexus 21" label="Nexus 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q526463" start="2321" end="2335" title="Detroit techno" label="Detroit techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q923104" start="2344" end="2355" title="Derrick May (musician)" label="Derrick May"/>
<link wikidata="Q366714" start="2357" end="2368" title="Juan Atkins" label="Juan Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q923090" start="2373" end="2389" title="Kevin Saunderson" label="Kevin Saunderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="2414" end="2425" title="house music" label="house music"/>
<link wikidata="Q286750" start="2435" end="2442" title="Phuture" label="Phuture"/>
<link wikidata="Q44892" start="2481" end="2490" title="Kraftwerk" label="Kraftwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q271283" start="2589" end="2598" title="808 State" label="808 State"/>
<link wikidata="Q507314" start="2731" end="2744" title="Roland TB-303" label="Roland TB-303"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414221" start="2746" end="2749" title="Roland TR-808" label="808"/>
<link wikidata="Q978134" start="2754" end="2757" title="Roland TR-909" label="909"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="2788" end="2795" title="Sampling (music)" label="samples"/>
<link wikidata="Q810451" start="2999" end="3003" title="Bass (sound)" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493754" start="3428" end="3442" title="Shelley&amp;#x27;s Laserdome" label="Shelley&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609815" start="3457" end="3464" title="Longton, Staffordshire" label="Longton"/>
<link wikidata="Q134902" start="3466" end="3480" title="Stoke-on-Trent" label="Stoke-on-Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="3638" end="3643" title="album" label="album"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049609" start="3651" end="3666" title="Network Records" label="Network Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508118" start="3695" end="3719" title="Full On... Mask Hysteria" label="Full On... Mask Hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q988420" start="3825" end="3833" title="Stafford (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="3854" end="3870" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997853" start="4075" end="4079" title="hit record" label="hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619673" start="4346" end="4358" title="DJ mix album" label="DJ mix album"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410648" start="4403" end="4411" title="Euphoria (compilations)" label="Euphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242743" start="4495" end="4507" title="double album" label="double album"/>
<link wikidata="Q341364" start="4541" end="4551" title="acid house" label="acid house"/>
<link wikidata="Q645767" start="4556" end="4560" title="rave" label="rave"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="5027" end="5035" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="5040" end="5047" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228301" start="5259" end="5266" title="Pontins" label="Pontins"/>
<link wikidata="Q868647" start="5270" end="5279" title="Southport" label="Southport"/>
<link wikidata="Q84167106" start="5412" end="5432" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447637" start="5813" end="5819" title="Select (magazine)" label="Select"/>
<link wikidata="Q44892" start="6278" end="6287" title="Kraftwerk" label="Kraftwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154222" start="6292" end="6298" title="DJ Pierre" label="Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596094" start="6300" end="6308" title="Transmat" label="Transmat"/>
<link wikidata="Q543707" start="6313" end="6317" title="Warp Records" label="WARP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410648" start="6674" end="6682" title="Euphoria (compilations)" label="Euphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697852" start="6697" end="6712" title="Telstar Records" label="Telstar Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q770103" start="6713" end="6716" title="Bertelsmann Music Group" label="BMG"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405504" wikidata="Q781942" url="?curid=405504" title="The Trials of Life">
<text>The Trials of Life: A Natural History of Behaviour is a BBC nature documentary series written and presented by David Attenborough, first transmitted in the United Kingdom from 3 October 1990.

A study in animal behaviour, it was the third in a trilogy of major series (beginning with &quot;Life on Earth&quot;) that took a broad overview of nature, rather than the more specialised surveys of Attenborough&#x27;s later productions. Each of the twelve 50-minute episodes features a different aspect of the journey through life, from birth to adulthood and continuation of the species through reproduction.

The series was produced by the BBC Natural History Unit in conjunction with the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and Turner Broadcasting System. The executive producer was Peter Jones and the music was composed by George Fenton.

Part of David Attenborough&#x27;s &#x27;Life&#x27; series, it was preceded by &quot;The Living Planet&quot; (1984) and followed by &quot;Life in the Freezer&quot; (1993).

== Background ==
The series took over three-and-a-half years to film, during which time Attenborough travelled almost a quarter of a million miles. The production team sought to further push the boundaries of natural history film-making, following on from the advances made in &quot;The Living Planet&quot;, and were provided with several new challenges.

The sequence of chimpanzees hunting colobus monkeys was only possible through the efforts of Hedwige and Christophe Boesch, who had spent five years studying the apes in the Ivory Coast forests of West Africa.

Meanwhile, a bivouac of army ants in Panama was able to be filmed internally with the aid of a medical endoscope. Furthermore, a new type of camera lens enabled tree ants to be filmed in enlarged close-up just in front of Attenborough – with both subjects in sharp focus. This gave the illusion that the insects were much larger than their actual size.

Filming critical moments in the life of a herd of elephants necessitated the expertise of Cynthia Moss, who had devoted 25 years to researching the animals in Kenya. She was able to advise the production team on the right moments to film specific events.

The camera team had only one chance to film a 60,000-strong flock of waders flying over David Attenborough&#x27;s head in Norfolk, and the RSPB was enlisted to predict their flight path. By contrast, the Florida scrub jays couldn&#x27;t have been more co-operative: since the particular group being filmed had been studied closely and were used to humans, a bird could land on Attenborough&#x27;s hand right on cue.

The inside of a termite mound proved especially challenging for Attenborough: it was so cramped that he could only face in one direction. He therefore had to slowly crawl backwards out of shot when performing re-takes.

Behaviour seen for the first time included the sequence that was eventually selected to illustrate the series&#x27; DVD cover: that of a killer whale pouncing on a colony of sea lions on a Patagonian beach and &#x27;playing&#x27; with its young prey before consuming it. This meant some risks being taken by the cameramen, as they placed themselves in the water just feet away from the creatures in order to obtain close-ups of an attack run.

== Episodes ==
=== 1. &quot;Arriving&quot; ===

Broadcast 3 October 1990, the first episode examines the various methods by which creatures come into the world. Attenborough&#x27;s opening statement alludes to the annual spawning of the Christmas Island red crab, of which there are estimated to be some 120 million. The exercise is all the more hazardous since the species is a land crab, and the eggs have to be deposited in the sea – where the most ancient animals on the planet still live and breed. One of the most prolific aquatic egg producers is the giant clam, but some land animals also lay vast quantities, and the mantis is one example. In the Western United States, Attenborough observes a wasp that digs a burrow, conceals it, and stocks it with fresh caterpillars for her emerging young. The grubs of another start life inside caterpillars, and eat the unsuspecting hosts. The problems of larger animals are illustrated by snow geese in the Arctic, which have to defend their eggs from Arctic foxes. The process of embryonic growth inside the egg, from laying to hatching, is shown in detail. The malleefowl warms its eggs with rotting leaves, and Attenborough demonstrates the care with which it regulates them by adding sand to its mound – to have it kicked back in his (Attenborough&#x27;s) face. The sea louse is a crustacean that commits suicide: its grubs consume so much of the mother&#x27;s energies that she dies after birth. Mammals shown giving birth to fully formed young include wildebeest, antelope, sea lions and chinchillas.

=== 2. &quot;Growing Up&quot; ===

Broadcast 10 October 1990, this programme describes the ways that various species care for their young. Attenborough defines childhood as achieving two tasks: growing and surviving. He highlights the elephant seal as an animal that experiences a compressed childhood, being abandoned after three weeks and left for up to another eight alone, while it becomes large enough to be able to swim. For terns, there is safety in numbers as the dense population works together to drive out marauding gulls. The snow geese in the Russian Arctic show intense devotion as they escort their goslings by foot to the coast some 50 kilometres away. Scorpions carry their young on their backs, while a shrew will leave hers under a stone while she goes to feed. The eider duck is one creature that shares responsibility for its offspring: females regularly supervise the ducklings of others in a group. The mara is another that uses a crèche system, as does the bat, whose nurseries can be up to a million strong. The Florida scrub jay has a complex system of raising young known as cooperative breeding, where young stay on as helpers at the nest of their parents. Such behaviour is exhibited on a larger scale by elephants, where all females take an interest in raising a single calf. A chimpanzee&#x27;s childhood is socially complicated, as an individual must learn how to behave towards others, as well as master the use of tools. Albatrosses must be accomplished fliers as soon as possible – chicks are shown being hunted by tiger sharks.

=== 3. &quot;Finding Food&quot; ===

Broadcast 17 October 1990, the next instalment is devoted to the ways in which animals gather their sustenance. Attenborough begins in the South American rainforest, where the proliferation of animal and plant life does not necessarily make it easy to find food. Some leaves are poisonous, and so those that eat them have to be careful. Other plants use food (or nectar) as a bribe to get their pollen transported, and several species of hummingbird have developed exclusive relationships with certain of them. Fruit is also on offer, again as a means of reproduction, and creatures such as squirrel monkeys eat little else. Meanwhile, parrots and macaws take kaolin as an antidote to their diet of toxic seeds. Attenborough witnesses a 60,000 strong flock of knot and dunlin suddenly take advantage of a low tide to feed on tiny mud-dwelling molluscs. Barracuda hunt small fish, and drive shoals of them into bays to be eaten by pelicans, which are besieged by gulls that attempt to steal their catches. One species of gecko is able to differentiate between worker termites and the more dangerous soldiers. The web of the orb spider is hailed as one of the most elegant food catching devices, and the methods of two others, nephila and its kleptoparasite visitor, argyrodes, are explored in detail. Finally, tropicbirds, their crops full with food en route back to their nests, are ambushed in mid-air by a group of frigatebirds, whose aim is to make them surrender their cargo.

=== 4. &quot;Hunting and Escaping&quot; ===

Broadcast 24 October 1990, this episode looks at those that hunt other creatures and ways of avoiding capture. Attenborough is attacked by a pair of skuas as he approaches their nest, which demonstrates this particular bird&#x27;s aggressive behaviour, both when taking food and defending its young. Off the shores of Patagonia, the same group of killer whales returns each year to ambush sea lion pups, which stray out of the safer shallow waters. Having grabbed their prey, they take it back out to sea and &#x27;play&#x27; with it for some time before killing it. Poison can be used both as a weapon and a deterrent, such as by the viper and tomato frog respectively. Some animals advertise their defensive measures in advance, in case deployment occurs too late. Among them are the skunk, which discharges an appalling smell, and some salamanders that display their toxicity by remaining stationary, with their warning markings visible. Several species of stick insect and their elaborate camouflage are shown. However, none of these methods of protection pose problems to army ants, which can subdue any of their prey, simply by virtue of their size and vast numbers. The Harris hawk is unusual, since it hunts in teams, and a group of six are shown practising their skill in the desert of New Mexico. The final sequence depicts a troop of chimpanzees displaying strategy and co-ordination as it successfully pursues colobus monkeys through a forest in the Ivory Coast.

=== 5. &quot;Finding the Way&quot; ===

Broadcast 31 October 1990, this programme explores forms of navigation. Attenborough starts in Africa at dusk, by describing some of the species that don&#x27;t rely on sight. The spotted hyena uses its acute sense of smell to guide it while it hunts nocturnally, while galagos urinate on their hands so they can completely mark their movements. Some animals use echolocation and these include swiftlets, bats and river dolphins. By contrast, electric eels use fields of electricity to sense their environment. During the hours of daylight, other methods are employed: the rufous elephant shrew, with its carefully cleared network of pathways, has a sharp mental picture of its habitat – even knowing the various shortcuts with which to evade capture. Attenborough visits the Sahara to illustrate a species that makes the longest overland journey of any insect: cataglyphis, an ant that uses the sun&#x27;s position to enable it to return to its nest in a straight line. Lobsters in the Bahamas are shown marching in columns to escape stormy waters. In its search for perpetual daylight in which to fish, the Arctic tern makes a 19,000-kilometre journey from one end of the earth to the other. The albatross is highlighted as one of the most skilled navigators: it can travel up to 1300 kilometres over sea in search of food for its chicks, and still find its way back to the nest. Finally, Attenborough stands on a waterfall in Ireland to tell of the three-year, 10,000-kilometre journey made by elvers.

=== 6. &quot;Home Making&quot; ===

Broadcast 7 November 1990, this instalment deals with how animals construct their shelters from the elements and predators. Burrows and holes can provide considerable refuge, and Attenborough inspects the home of the American prairie dog, an elaborate construction that has its own air conditioning system. Silk is such a valuable commodity that those that can&#x27;t make it steal it instead. The hermit hummingbird uses it to attach its nest to the underside of a leaf, while the Indian tailorbird stitches two leaves together. However, the expert in complex nest-building is the weaverbird which makes its abode from over 1,000 strips of grass that are perfectly interwoven – and dismantling it if it fails to attract a mate. The beaver is responsible for one of the biggest animal dwellings: its wooden lodge that rises from the river bed stays in place from one generation to the next, and so requires constant maintenance. Some stingless bees use their wax and the resin of tree bark to create labyrinthine structures containing various compartments. Mud is also used by several creatures, such as the potter wasp and the cliff swallow. The termites&#x27; intricate creations allow for security, heating, air conditioning, self-contained nurseries and gardens, and sanitation systems. Attenborough hails the species as the consummate home maker, and explores a 15-foot colony in West Africa that contains 1.5 million insects: he crawls right inside to examine its method of ventilation.

=== 7. &quot;Living Together&quot; ===

Broadcast 14 November 1990, this episode focuses on those species that co-operate and depend on (or exploit) others. Spotted deer follow langur monkeys as they travel from tree to tree, eating any leaves that get dropped from above. In return, the deer serve as a lookout when the primates are feeding on the ground. Underwater, a hermit crab is shown adding sea anemones to its shell in order to protect itself from attack by an octopus, and a goby assists a virtually blind shrimp. Fleas, lice and mites are parasites: they share no mutual partnership and instead take advantage of creatures for food or shelter. However, parasites have their predators, and an example are the finches of the Galápagos Islands that clear the resident giant tortoises of their ticks, and oxpeckers, which do the same for giraffes in Africa (and even use its fur to line their nests). Some fish regularly clean others, and wrasse and shrimp appear to specialise in this regard, as do remora, which permanently hang on to their hosts. One parasite that grows inside its host is the fluke, and one is shown gestating inside a snail, having previously been unknowingly eaten. Because it needs to transfer to a bird&#x27;s gut to develop further, it causes the snail to advertise its presence to allow itself to be consumed – thus completing the circle. However, some microscopic creatures inhabit the stomachs of large herbivores in order to break down the cellulose of their diet, thereby aiding their digestion.

=== 8. &quot;Fighting&quot; ===

Broadcast 21 November 1990, this programme details how fighting – both physical and psychological – is used for food, land or to gain a mate. Territorial conflict is demonstrated by the hummingbird, and Attenborough illustrates its aggressiveness by placing a stuffed specimen nearby, only to have it speared by its opponent&#x27;s bill. The midas cichlid on the other hand, has no weapons to speak of, and so uses its mouth to hold on for trials of strength. By contrast, the forelegs of a mantis shrimp are powerful enough to crack the shell of another crustacean: therefore disputes or courtship are fraught with danger. Animals that possess lethal food-gathering weapons usually don&#x27;t use them against one another, as neither side wishes to risk death. For example, one venomous snake will aim to floor the other, rather than bite. Wolves and big cats largely use snarls and body posture to convey their threat. There are no holds barred between rival zebras: kicking and biting is employed until a victor emerges, whereas giraffes slam their necks against each other. Normally peaceful mountain gorillas are shown squabbling when play gets out of hand, and one of them communicates real fright by urinating uncontrollably. Large herbivores that have horns or antlers are naturally inclined to use them to assert their dominance over the females in a herd. Duelling male ibex and Alaskan bull moose undergo some of the most ferocious engagements – sometimes to the death.

=== 9. &quot;Friends and Rivals&quot; ===

Broadcast 28 November 1990, this instalment investigates the ways in which those animals that live in social groups interact with each other. The solitary eagle is contrasted with whooper swans landing in Scotland after a 1,600-kilometre journey from Iceland. Once arrived, they must battle for territory with those already there, and pairs or families are usually victorious. Attenborough uses a group of farmyard chickens to demonstrate a pecking order. Caciques are shown cooperating to deter predators, despite their fights amongst themselves to establish a pecking order. A pride of lions is shown co-operating to subdue a buffalo. Afterwards, each animal peacefully awaits its turn at the carcass. Baboons live in troops of up to 150, and their complex dominance hierarchy is examined in detail. Vampire bats display reciprocal altruism by regurgitating blood for any neighbour that has missed out on a night&#x27;s feeding. Dwarf mongooses live in family groups of around a dozen. While some look for food or sleep, others are always posted on the lookout for predators and quickly raise the alarm if necessary. Meanwhile, some of the most extreme co-operation is demonstrated by the underground naked mole-rat, whose 80-strong clusters are divided into workers (who tunnel perpetually), soldiers (who only act when danger threatens), and a single queen for breeding. Leafcutter ants are shown transporting their food deep below ground: it has to be planted in a special fungus to convert its indigestible cellulose into something edible, and each stage of the operation is carried out by a different caste of individuals.

=== 10. &quot;Talking to Strangers&quot; ===

Broadcast 5 December 1990, this episode concentrates on animal communication. In Kenya, Attenborough accompanies a tribesman who calls to a honeyguide, which in turn answers him and leads the pair to a bees&#x27; nest. The tribesman extracts the honey, and some is left to reward the bird. African hunting dogs are shown hunting gazelles, of which the target is the individual that leaps lowest. Larks evade merlin by sending a similar message: by continuing to sing while being chased, it tells the pursuer that its prey is fit and therefore will be difficult to catch (see handicap principle). (In 80% of cases this turns out to be true.) Vervet monkeys&#x27; cries are among the most complex. Their utterances are effectively words: a vocabulary that defines each of their predators, so an alarm call is specific to a particular threat. Some creatures transmit their presence by display, and Attenborough observes thousands of fireflies illuminating the darkness. Sounds travel faster and further underwater, and over 200 species of fish use them to communicate. In turn, sea lions have become adept at sensing their proximity. However, the most visual aquatic animal is the squid, which uses colour change and posture to communicate. Finally, Attenborough swims with spotted dolphins. They converse with a series of ultrasonic clicks, and each has a family call inherited from its mother: effectively a &#x27;surname&#x27;. They also use normal sound, body posture and touch – in short, in terms of ability to communicate, they are man&#x27;s closest rival.

=== 11. &quot;Courting&quot; ===

Broadcast 12 December 1990, this programme surveys the methods employed in attracting a mate, mainly those of birds. The Indian florican inhabits long grass, and so is difficult to see. In order to gain attention, it &#x27;trampolines&#x27; in the same spot for up to 400 times a day. Whales sing to their prospective partners, and the female&#x27;s calls can be heard by suitors for over eight kilometres. When animals send out signals of attraction, they must also ensure that they don&#x27;t entice the wrong species, and so have markings that differ prominently. Attenborough highlights the booby as an example: there are around half a dozen species, all of which may occupy the same island. However, the blue-footed booby reassures its chosen mate by continually lifting its feet. Tropicbirds and marsh harriers are shown providing graceful aerobatic displays, while the sac-winged bat uses a strong perfume to lure a companion. Among those birds that produce the most spectacular visual displays are the lyrebird (which also has an elaborate song), the peacock, and the riflebird (and indeed most other birds of paradise). The bowerbird invites potential partners to inspect its bower: a specially prepared area that contains a hut or walkway augmented by strikingly coloured objects. The intricate dances performed by manakins in Trinidad are also examined. Finally, Attenborough observes the topi&#x27;s display courts, whose sharply defined boundaries are jealously guarded by rival males.

=== 12. &quot;Continuing the Line&quot; ===

Broadcast 19 December 1990, the final instalment illustrates how species fulfil their ultimate &quot;raison d&#x27;être&quot; and ensure that their genes are passed on to the next generation. It is a universal problem, but one which has given rise to a variety of solutions. Barnacles cannot move, but each has both male and female sex cells, allowing each neighbour to be a potential mate. On the other end of the scale, a female elephant undergoes a long pregnancy – 22 months – and so wishes to ensure that her calf is fathered by a strong and proven male. She is therefore very choosy about her partner. A female chinchilla is even more so, and rejects an unwanted suitor by squirting urine in its face. Mating is a dangerous business when weapons are involved, and a male tarantula approaches his intended with trepidation. Only when he succeeds in holding off her poison fangs is he able to progress any further. For some, the right moments to get together are few and far between: a male crab, for example, must wait until a female moults her shell before he is able to fertilise her. Male sea lions are shown fighting over a harem, and some use the battle to their advantage by making off with reluctant females. Attenborough observes that the monogamous relationships enjoyed by humans are rare within the animal kingdom, but he highlights the royal albatross as a &quot;beautiful&quot; exception. The pair of birds featured met as five-year-olds, and have been together for twenty years.

== Home media ==
The series is available in the UK for Regions 2 and 4 as a 4-disc DVD set (BBCDVD1428, released 27 September 2004) and as part of &quot;The Life Collection&quot;. Erroneously entitled &quot;Trials of Life&quot;, its sole extra feature is a 50-minute documentary: &quot;The Making of The Trials of Life&quot;. It was previously released in 2002 as an abridged 3-disc set, with each episode cut to 35 minutes. The series was released on Blu-ray in the UK on 12 November 2012.

The accompanying book, &quot;The Trials of Life: A Natural History of Behaviour&quot; by David Attenborough (), was published by BBC Books on 4 October 1990 and was shortlisted for the 1991 Rhône-Poulenc Prize. In 2023, the book was given an updated rerelease ().

== References ==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="56" end="59" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760864" start="60" end="78" title="nature documentary" label="nature documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q183337" start="111" end="129" title="David Attenborough" label="David Attenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545267" start="290" end="303" title="Life on Earth (TV series)" label="Life on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834859" start="637" end="661" title="BBC Natural History Unit" label="BBC Natural History Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="686" end="721" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Australian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855903" start="726" end="752" title="Turner Broadcasting System" label="Turner Broadcasting System"/>
<link wikidata="Q920167" start="823" end="836" title="George Fenton" label="George Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747870" start="923" end="940" title="The Living Planet" label="The Living Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043225" start="976" end="995" title="Life in the Freezer" label="Life in the Freezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126704" start="1383" end="1393" title="Common chimpanzee" label="chimpanzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075133" start="1403" end="1417" title="western red colobus" label="colobus monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q118803" start="1472" end="1489" title="Christophe Boesch" label="Christophe Boesch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="1541" end="1552" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="1564" end="1575" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q879186" start="1591" end="1598" title="bivouac (ants)" label="bivouac"/>
<link wikidata="Q332747" start="1602" end="1610" title="army ant" label="army ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="1615" end="1621" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q212809" start="1673" end="1690" title="endoscopy" label="medical endoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="1982" end="1990" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672418" start="2022" end="2034" title="Cynthia Moss" label="Cynthia Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="2091" end="2096" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q26226431" start="2257" end="2262" title="wader" label="wader"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="2310" end="2317" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892802" start="2327" end="2331" title="Royal Society for the Protection of Birds" label="RSPB"/>
<link wikidata="Q530842" start="2392" end="2409" title="Florida scrub jay" label="Florida scrub jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="2621" end="2628" title="termite" label="termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="2962" end="2974" title="orca" label="killer whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887135" start="2999" end="3007" title="sea lion" label="sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="3014" end="3023" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934004" start="3506" end="3531" title="Christmas Island red crab" label="Christmas Island red crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q751784" start="3827" end="3837" title="giant clam" label="giant clam"/>
<link wikidata="Q131250" start="3895" end="3901" title="mantis" label="mantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458574" start="3972" end="3976" title="wasp" label="wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="4035" end="4046" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q595663" start="4129" end="4155" title="parasitoid" label="eat the unsuspecting hosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074540" start="4207" end="4217" title="Snow goose" label="snow geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="4225" end="4231" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82738" start="4270" end="4280" title="Arctic fox" label="Arctic fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="4299" end="4305" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q901228" start="4381" end="4391" title="malleefowl" label="malleefowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="4420" end="4426" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808922" start="4588" end="4597" title="sea louse" label="sea louse"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="4603" end="4613" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="4719" end="4725" title="Mammal" label="Mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609" start="4776" end="4786" title="wildebeest" label="wildebeest"/>
<link wikidata="Q25894" start="4788" end="4796" title="antelope" label="antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887135" start="4798" end="4806" title="sea lion" label="sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q192930" start="4812" end="4822" title="chinchilla" label="chinchilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q185231" start="5061" end="5074" title="elephant seal" label="elephant seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q33140745" start="5257" end="5261" title="tern" label="tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="5353" end="5357" title="gull" label="gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q19125" start="5495" end="5503" title="Scorpion" label="Scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41631" start="5547" end="5552" title="shrew" label="shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q26696" start="5611" end="5621" title="Common eider" label="eider duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q19713921" start="5752" end="5756" title="mara (mammal)" label="mara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151779" start="5780" end="5786" title="Crèche (zoology)" label="crèche"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="5807" end="5810" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427332" start="5928" end="5948" title="cooperative breeding" label="cooperative breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q55805" start="6281" end="6290" title="Albatross" label="Albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q188212" start="6376" end="6387" title="tiger shark" label="tiger shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="6567" end="6580" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="6582" end="6592" title="rainforest" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="6791" end="6797" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="6823" end="6829" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43624" start="6866" end="6877" title="hummingbird" label="hummingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q309200" start="7019" end="7034" title="squirrel monkey" label="squirrel monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q31431" start="7064" end="7070" title="parrot" label="parrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q219035" start="7076" end="7081" title="macaw" label="macaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q223197" start="7088" end="7094" title="kaolinite" label="kaolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27124" start="7188" end="7192" title="Red knot" label="knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q26650" start="7197" end="7203" title="dunlin" label="dunlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="7271" end="7278" title="mollusc" label="mollusc"/>
<link wikidata="Q193921" start="7281" end="7290" title="Barracuda" label="Barracuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q19413" start="7358" end="7365" title="pelican" label="pelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q16546828" start="7448" end="7453" title="gecko" label="gecko"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="7494" end="7501" title="termite" label="termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5883" start="7551" end="7561" title="Orb-weaver spider" label="orb spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q261092" start="7653" end="7660" title="Golden silk orb-weaver" label="nephila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479109" start="7669" end="7683" title="kleptoparasitism" label="kleptoparasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755286" start="7693" end="7702" title="argyrodes" label="argyrodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19264" start="7737" end="7748" title="tropicbirds" label="tropicbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q214934" start="7756" end="7760" title="crop (anatomy)" label="crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q203472" start="7845" end="7856" title="frigatebird" label="frigatebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q205323" start="8103" end="8107" title="skua" label="skua"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="8301" end="8313" title="killer whale" label="killer whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887135" start="8343" end="8351" title="sea lion" label="sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150958" start="8469" end="8473" title="play (activity)" label="play"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="8521" end="8527" title="Poison" label="Poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q163656" start="8589" end="8594" title="viperidae" label="viper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291291" start="8599" end="8610" title="tomato frog" label="tomato frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q43604020" start="8740" end="8745" title="skunk" label="skunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q53663" start="8793" end="8803" title="salamander" label="salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q619751" start="8869" end="8885" title="aposematism" label="warning markings"/>
<link wikidata="Q188029" start="8914" end="8926" title="Phasmatodea" label="stick insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q332747" start="9031" end="9039" title="army ant" label="army ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q742698" start="9131" end="9142" title="Harris&amp;#x27;s hawk" label="Harris hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="9239" end="9245" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="9249" end="9259" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126704" start="9299" end="9309" title="Common chimpanzee" label="chimpanzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q358813" start="9376" end="9391" title="Colobus" label="colobus monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="9565" end="9571" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="9639" end="9644" title="visual perception" label="sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q178089" start="9650" end="9663" title="spotted hyena" label="spotted hyena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541064" start="9688" end="9693" title="olfaction" label="smell"/>
<link wikidata="Q185239" start="9740" end="9746" title="galago" label="galago"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921783" start="9833" end="9845" title="animal echolocation" label="echolocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213958" start="9864" end="9872" title="swiftlet" label="swiftlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q22312407" start="9884" end="9897" title="river dolphin" label="river dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18926800" start="9913" end="9925" title="electric eel" label="electric eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9324400" start="10043" end="10064" title="elephant shrew" label="rufous elephant shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="10246" end="10252" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1717126" start="10332" end="10343" title="Sahara desert ant" label="cataglyphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="10366" end="10369" title="sun" label="sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038113" start="10441" end="10448" title="Lobster" label="Lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="10453" end="10464" title="the Bahamas" label="the Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q26800" start="10579" end="10590" title="Arctic tern" label="Arctic tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="10644" end="10649" title="earth" label="earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q55805" start="10668" end="10677" title="albatross" label="albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q128685" start="10967" end="10972" title="eel" label="elver"/>
<link wikidata="Q30359" start="11238" end="11249" title="prairie dog" label="prairie dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="11319" end="11323" title="Silk" label="Silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q741604" start="11410" end="11428" title="Hermit (hummingbird)" label="hermit hummingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q18340387" start="11494" end="11511" title="Tailorbird" label="Indian tailorbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q211601" start="11594" end="11604" title="Ploceidae" label="weaverbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542" start="11745" end="11751" title="beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="11956" end="11959" title="bee" label="bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695" start="11971" end="11974" title="wax" label="wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="11983" end="11988" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170449" start="12069" end="12072" title="Mud" label="Mud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756486" start="12120" end="12131" title="potter wasp" label="potter wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591775" start="12140" end="12153" title="cliff swallow" label="cliff swallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="12159" end="12166" title="termite" label="termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q232054" start="12663" end="12675" title="Chital" label="Spotted deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q721407" start="12683" end="12696" title="Gray langur" label="langur monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q273291" start="12877" end="12888" title="hermit crab" label="hermit crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q147256" start="12905" end="12916" title="sea anemone" label="sea anemone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40152" start="12976" end="12983" title="octopus" label="octopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q56282003" start="12991" end="12995" title="goby" label="goby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517781" start="13022" end="13028" title="shrimp" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q388162" start="13030" end="13034" title="Flea" label="Flea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481228" start="13037" end="13041" title="louse" label="lice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441993" start="13046" end="13050" title="mite" label="mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="13056" end="13065" title="parasitism" label="parasites"/>
<link wikidata="Q160835" start="13225" end="13230" title="finch" label="finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q38095" start="13240" end="13257" title="Galápagos Islands" label="Galápagos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981205" start="13282" end="13296" title="giant tortoise" label="giant tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q10304508" start="13307" end="13311" title="tick" label="tick"/>
<link wikidata="Q644442" start="13318" end="13326" title="oxpecker" label="oxpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q862089" start="13351" end="13358" title="giraffe" label="giraffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q208722" start="13452" end="13458" title="wrasse" label="wrasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q239771" start="13513" end="13519" title="remora" label="remora"/>
<link wikidata="Q207547" start="13610" end="13615" title="Trematoda" label="fluke"/>
<link wikidata="Q308841" start="13653" end="13658" title="snail" label="snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="14216" end="14227" title="Territoriality" label="Territorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q191797" start="14306" end="14320" title="aggression" label="aggressiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406" start="14416" end="14429" title="cichlid" label="midas cichlid"/>
<link wikidata="Q334855" start="14565" end="14578" title="mantis shrimp" label="mantis shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="14629" end="14639" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="14862" end="14867" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="14915" end="14921" title="Wolf" label="Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667323" start="14926" end="14933" title="big cat" label="big cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q32789" start="15035" end="15040" title="zebra" label="zebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q737878" start="15170" end="15186" title="mountain gorilla" label="mountain gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="15313" end="15322" title="herbivore" label="herbivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q834007" start="15343" end="15349" title="antler" label="antler"/>
<link wikidata="Q951220" start="15454" end="15458" title="ibex" label="ibex"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="15476" end="15481" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="15754" end="15759" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25612" start="15779" end="15791" title="whooper swan" label="whooper swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="15850" end="15857" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="16014" end="16021" title="chicken" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438403" start="16040" end="16053" title="pecking order" label="pecking order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821411" start="16055" end="16063" title="Cacique (bird)" label="Caciques"/>
<link wikidata="Q140" start="16187" end="16191" title="lion" label="lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q160042" start="16227" end="16234" title="African buffalo" label="buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q159429" start="16303" end="16309" title="Baboon" label="Baboon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438403" start="16358" end="16377" title="dominance hierarchy" label="dominance hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190691" start="16401" end="16412" title="Vampire bat" label="Vampire bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q429787" start="16422" end="16441" title="reciprocal altruism" label="reciprocal altruism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="16459" end="16464" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q80479" start="16530" end="16544" title="Mongoose" label="Dwarf mongoose"/>
<link wikidata="Q276290" start="16802" end="16816" title="naked mole-rat" label="naked mole-rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q882257" start="16974" end="16988" title="Leafcutter ant" label="Leafcutter ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="17077" end="17083" title="fungus" label="fungus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="17112" end="17121" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q753694" start="17207" end="17212" title="eusociality" label="caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434121" start="17332" end="17352" title="animal communication" label="animal communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="17357" end="17362" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q214137" start="17416" end="17426" title="honeyguide" label="honeyguide"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="17522" end="17527" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q173651" start="17566" end="17585" title="African wild dog" label="African hunting dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q29001815" start="17605" end="17612" title="gazelle" label="gazelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747821" start="17658" end="17663" title="stotting" label="leaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q29858" start="17672" end="17676" title="Lark" label="Lark"/>
<link wikidata="Q131918" start="17684" end="17690" title="merlin (bird)" label="merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428558" start="17851" end="17869" title="handicap principle" label="handicap principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061088" start="17917" end="17930" title="Chlorocebus" label="Vervet monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745023" start="18069" end="18079" title="alarm call" label="alarm call"/>
<link wikidata="Q25420" start="18206" end="18215" title="firefly" label="fireflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887135" start="18351" end="18359" title="sea lion" label="sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q81900" start="18454" end="18459" title="squid" label="squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q504699" start="18472" end="18485" title="Chromatophore" label="colour change"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="18555" end="18562" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="18596" end="18606" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101352" start="18689" end="18696" title="surname" label="surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="18812" end="18815" title="human" label="man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273465" start="19001" end="19009" title="Lesser florican" label="florican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="19158" end="19163" title="Whale" label="Whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q612817" start="19468" end="19473" title="booby" label="booby"/>
<link wikidata="Q457267" start="19582" end="19599" title="blue-footed booby" label="blue-footed booby"/>
<link wikidata="Q19264" start="19659" end="19669" title="Tropicbird" label="Tropicbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706270" start="19675" end="19688" title="marsh harrier" label="marsh harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q838530" start="19749" end="19763" title="sac-winged bat" label="sac-winged bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q214096" start="19883" end="19891" title="lyrebird" label="lyrebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q201251" start="19932" end="19939" title="peafowl" label="peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080561" start="19949" end="19958" title="riflebird" label="riflebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q179333" start="19982" end="19999" title="birds of paradise" label="birds of paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q215603" start="20006" end="20015" title="bowerbird" label="bowerbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q379200" start="20198" end="20205" title="manakin" label="manakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q128323" start="20210" end="20218" title="Trinidad" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12745019" start="20273" end="20277" title="topi" label="topi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="20566" end="20570" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q220457" start="20693" end="20701" title="Barnacle" label="Barnacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44148" start="20734" end="20738" title="male" label="male"/>
<link wikidata="Q43445" start="20743" end="20749" title="female" label="female"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="20875" end="20884" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192930" start="21035" end="21045" title="chinchilla" label="chinchilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q40924" start="21107" end="21112" title="urine" label="urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q213383" start="21195" end="21204" title="tarantula" label="tarantula"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="21288" end="21294" title="poison" label="poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="21413" end="21417" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q381084" start="21457" end="21462" title="moult" label="moult"/>
<link wikidata="Q243688" start="21551" end="21556" title="polygyny" label="harem"/>
<link wikidata="Q184211" start="21670" end="21680" title="monogamy" label="monogamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q748236" start="21771" end="21786" title="Southern royal albatross" label="royal albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747123" start="22070" end="22089" title="The Life Collection" label="The Life Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="22369" end="22376" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q11346" start="22599" end="22618" title="Rhône-Poulenc Prize" label="Rhône-Poulenc Prize"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405505" wikidata="Q2193964" url="?curid=405505" title="Sergio Coggiola">
<text>Sergio Coggiola (1928-1989) was an Italian designer known primarily for his automotive work at Carrozzeria Ghia in Turin for 15 years — serving as the head of Ghia&#x27;s prototype shop until 1952 — and later at his own company, , which he founded in 1966 in Orbassano, Italy, a commune of Turin.

In the 1980s, Coggiola freelanced for car manufacturers, sometimes executing third-party designs, such as Trevor Fiores&#x27; design of the concept car Citroën Karin, the Lamborghini Portofino or prototypes of the Renault Mégane. Coggiola also produced individual vehicles, special ordered by customers as one-off cars, including Bentley B2 and B3 coupés and convertibles, which Pininfarina had designed for the Sultan of Brunei — Coggiola making a total of 17 copies of this model from 1994 to 1996.

Other original work included the asymmetrically designed Coggiola Janus (1978), the Fiat Punto Surf pick-up study and the 2000 Coggiola T-Rex, an SUV that used a Hummer chassis.

Other work included the Saab Sonett III, Volvo 262C, Lancia Thema Coupé, Lancia Dunja (build only), Fiat Brava Sentiero, Pontiac CF 428 (with Paul Farago), the Copper Development Association (CDA) Exemplar I and the 1976 Honda Civic &quot;Lady&quot; prototype.

Carrozzeria Coggiola declined quickly after founder and owner Sergio Coggiola died suddenly. The other Turin design houses, including IDEA and Ital Design, declined offers to take over.

==See also==
*Car body style
*Car classification

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2193964" start="0" end="15" title="Sergio Coggiola" label="Sergio Coggiola"/>
<link wikidata="Q82604" start="43" end="49" title="design" label="design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045339" start="95" end="111" title="Carrozzeria Ghia" label="Carrozzeria Ghia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193964" start="229" end="229" title="Sergio Coggiola" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q9519" start="259" end="275" title="Orbassano" label="Orbassano, Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974507" start="450" end="463" title="Citroën Karin" label="Citroën Karin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513643" start="469" end="490" title="Lamborghini Portofino" label="Lamborghini Portofino"/>
<link wikidata="Q222764" start="512" end="526" title="Renault Mégane" label="Renault Mégane"/>
<link wikidata="Q213853" start="646" end="651" title="coupé" label="coupé"/>
<link wikidata="Q55989" start="657" end="668" title="convertible" label="convertible"/>
<link wikidata="Q223864" start="884" end="894" title="Fiat Punto" label="Fiat Punto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1003" end="1018" title="Saab Sonett#Sonett III" label="Saab Sonett III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417558" start="1020" end="1030" title="Volvo 262C" label="Volvo 262C"/>
<link wikidata="Q578833" start="1032" end="1044" title="Lancia Thema" label="Lancia Thema"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1052" end="1064" title="Lancia Dunja" label="Lancia Dunja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359725" start="1079" end="1089" title="Fiat Brava" label="Fiat Brava"/>
<link wikidata="Q40990" start="1100" end="1107" title="Pontiac (automobile)" label="Pontiac"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1121" end="1132" title="Paul Farago" label="Paul Farago"/>
<link wikidata="Q15729598" start="1442" end="1456" title="Car body style" label="Car body style"/>
<link wikidata="Q836985" start="1458" end="1476" title="Car classification" label="Car classification"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405506" wikidata="Q1646474" url="?curid=405506" title="The Blue Planet">
<text>The Blue Planet is a British nature documentary series created and co-produced as a co-production between the BBC Natural History Unit and Discovery Channel. It premiered on 12 September 2001 in the United Kingdom. It is narrated by David Attenborough.

Described as &quot;the first ever comprehensive series on the natural history of the world&#x27;s oceans&quot;, each of the eight 50-minute episodes examines a different aspect of marine life. The underwater photography included creatures and behaviour that had previously never been filmed.

The series won a number of Emmy and BAFTA TV awards for its music and cinematography. The executive producer was Alastair Fothergill and the music was composed by George Fenton. Attenborough narrated this series before presenting the next in his &#x27;Life&#x27; series of programmes, &quot;The Life of Mammals&quot; (2002), and the same production team created &quot;Planet Earth&quot; (2006).

A sequel series, &quot;Blue Planet II&quot; was aired on BBC One in 2017.

== Background ==
The series took almost five years to make, involving nearly 200 filming locations. The fact that most of the ocean environment remains a mystery presented the production team with many challenges. Besides witnessing some animal behaviours for the first time, the crew also observed some that were new to science. The producers were helped by marine scientists all over the world with state-of-the-art equipment.

Blue whales – whose migration routes were previously unknown – were located by air, after some of the animals had been given temporary radio tags. The camera team spent three years on standby, using a microlight to land on the water nearby when they finally caught up with the creatures in the Gulf of California. The open ocean proved more difficult and over 400 days were spent in often unsuccessful filming trips. After six weeks, the crew chanced upon a school of spinner dolphins, which in turn led them to a shoal of tuna. Off Mexico, the behaviour of a flock of frigatebirds guided the cameramen to a group of sailfish and marlin: the fastest inhabitants of the sea. Near the coast of Natal in South Africa, the team spent two seasons attempting to film the annual sardine run, a huge congregation of predators such as sharks and dolphins, that assembles to feast on the migrating fish by corralling them into &quot;bait balls&quot;. Meanwhile, in Monterey Bay, orca were documented attacking gray whales and killing a calf. Filming in the deep ocean required the use of special submersibles. One of them enabled the crew to dive over a mile into the San Diego trench, where the carcass of a 40-ton gray whale had been placed to attract a large variety of scavengers.

When first transmitted on BBC One, over 12 million people watched the series and it regularly achieved an audience share of over 30%.

In 2018 a newly-discovered species of phytoplankton (&quot;Syracosphaera azureaplaneta&quot;) was named by scientists in honour of the programme, and in recognition of David Attenborough&#x27;s contribution to promoting wider understanding and awareness of the oceanic environment.

== Episodes ==


== Merchandise ==
===DVD and Blu-ray===
The series was available as a 3-disc DVD set (BBCDVD1089, released 3 December 2001 and re-released in 2003), including interviews with the production team, a photo gallery and three additional programmes:
* &quot;Making Waves&quot;: the making of &quot;The Blue Planet&quot; (50 mins)
* &quot;Deep Trouble&quot;: an ecological documentary (50 mins)
* &quot;Blue&quot;: a five-minute theatrical short

The first DVD has now been superseded by a 4-disc Special Edition (BBCDVD1792, released 3 October 2005), which has three extra programmes:
* &quot;The Abyss&quot;
* &quot;Dive to Shark Volcano&quot;
* &quot;Amazon Abyss&quot;

In the US, there is a 4-disc Collector&#x27;s Set edition (Released 2002), including 8 featurettes, interviews, photo galleries and one additional programmes:
* &quot;Deep Trouble&quot;: an ecological documentary (50 mins)

In the US, there is also a 5-disc Special Edition (BBC040754, released 6 May 2008). It contains the same features as the US 4-disc versions, but includes a fifth disk containing four special presentations:
* &quot;Amazon Abyss&quot;: discover an array of creatures living in the Amazon
* &quot;Dive to Shark Volcano&quot;: venture to Cocoa Island, an underwater volcano
* &quot;Beneath the Tides&quot;: explore an estuary in winter
* &quot;Antarctica&quot;

BBC released a 3-disc &quot;The Blue Planet: Seas of Life&quot; on Blu-ray on 9 April 2013. It contains the featured presentations as well as a third disk containing interviews, behind-the-scenes footage and five special presentations:
* &quot;Amazon Abyss&quot;
* &quot;Dive to Shark Volcano&quot;
* &quot;Beneath the Tides&quot;
* &quot;Antarctica&quot;
* &quot;Deep Trouble&quot;.

===Books===
The accompanying book, &quot;The Blue Planet: A Natural History of the Oceans&quot; by Andrew Byatt, Alastair Fothergill and Martha Holmes (with a foreword by David Attenborough), was published by BBC Worldwide on 27 September 2001 ().

The companion volume for the US market of the same book was published by Dorling Kindersley (DK) and released in 2002 ().

== Film ==

&quot;Deep Blue&quot; is a 2003 nature documentary film that is a theatrical version of &quot;The Blue Planet&quot;. Alastair Fothergill and Andy Byatt are credited as directors, and six cinematographers are also credited. The film was premiered at the San Sebastian Film Festival in Spain on 2003. It screened in more than from 2003 to 2005 and grossed over at the box office.

== Live concert tour ==
&quot;The Blue Planet&quot; was turned into a theatrical presentation entitled &quot;The Blue Planet Live!&quot; which toured the UK from 2006 to 2008. The UK live shows were presented by World Class Service Ltd. George Fenton conducted the Manchester Camerata Orchestra in Manchester, Newcastle and Nottingham during December 2006, in three critically acclaimed shows. The tour continued in April 2007, again conducted by Fenton, in London, Cardiff, Birmingham and returning to Manchester and Nottingham.

For the show, some of the most spectacular sequences from the series have been edited together and are displayed on a huge screen (18 metres wide and 3 storeys high). The presentation is introduced by a special guest.

The tour continued in April 2008 with dates at Wembley Arena, Nottingham Arena, Manchester Central, Cardiff St. David&#x27;s and Birmingham Symphony Hall.

&quot;The Blue Planet Live!&quot; continues to be staged:
* on 7 May 2010 at the Morsani Hall of the Straz Center for the Performing Arts in Tampa, Florida performed by the Florida Orchestra and conducted by Ward Stare.
* in July 2011 in the Mann Center for the Performing Arts in Philadelphia performed by the Russian National Orchestra, narrator Jane Pauley
* in June 2012 in Singapore performed by the Singapore Symphony Orchestra
* in December 2014 in Abu Dhabi at Corniche performed by the National Symphony Orchestra
* on 22 January 2015 in London at Royal Festival Hall, as a part of the &quot;Philharmonia at the Movies&quot; series.

==Sequel==

In February 2017, the BBC announced a seven-part sequel had been commissioned, titled &quot;Blue Planet II&quot;, with Sir David Attenborough returning as narrator and presenter. The sequel debuted on BBC One, BBC One HD and BBC Earth channel on 29 October 2017.

== Overseas ==
The series was sold to over 50 countries. In the United States, it was shown as &quot;The Blue Planet: Seas of Life&quot; with the episodes in a different order, the first one being retitled &quot;Ocean World&quot;. The series was shown on the Discovery Channel and was narrated by Pierce Brosnan.

==Awards and nominations==
== Criticism ==
The series attracted some criticism when it was revealed that some of the footage was filmed at an aquarium in Wales. The series producer, Alastair Fothergill, said that around 2% of the whole series was filmed in tanks at aquariums. A BBC spokesman argued that it would&#x27;ve been unethical to actually disturb the breeding process of wild lobsters for one of the scenes, which was why they made the decision to use the aquarium footage.

== References ==
== External links ==
* &quot;The Blue Planet&quot; at BBC Earth
* &quot;The Blue Planet&quot; at Hulu
* &quot;The Blue Planet&quot; on the Eden website
* Discovery Channel&#x27;s &quot;Blue Planet&quot; homepage
* Simon King, Cameraman
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1760864" start="29" end="47" title="nature documentary" label="nature documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834859" start="110" end="134" title="BBC Natural History Unit" label="BBC Natural History Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q43404" start="139" end="156" title="Discovery Channel" label="Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183337" start="233" end="251" title="David Attenborough" label="David Attenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230015" start="434" end="445" title="marine life" label="marine life"/>
<link wikidata="Q569406" start="451" end="473" title="underwater photography" label="underwater photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="574" end="578" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369077" start="583" end="598" title="British Academy Television Awards" label="BAFTA TV awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q721429" start="660" end="679" title="Alastair Fothergill" label="Alastair Fothergill"/>
<link wikidata="Q920167" start="710" end="723" title="George Fenton" label="George Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140053" start="838" end="857" title="The Life of Mammals" label="The Life of Mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q377165" start="915" end="927" title="Planet Earth (2006 TV series)" label="Planet Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q28963175" start="966" end="980" title="Blue Planet II" label="Blue Planet II"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="1000" end="1007" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="1144" end="1149" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q42196" start="1448" end="1458" title="Blue whale" label="Blue whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q678305" start="1649" end="1659" title="ultralight aviation" label="microlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q132811" start="1742" end="1760" title="Gulf of California" label="Gulf of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132245" start="1906" end="1912" title="Shoaling and schooling" label="school"/>
<link wikidata="Q649513" start="1916" end="1931" title="spinner dolphin" label="spinner dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="1971" end="1975" title="tuna" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1981" end="1987" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q203472" start="2017" end="2028" title="frigatebird" label="frigatebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q127497" start="2065" end="2073" title="sailfish" label="sailfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q123478185" start="2078" end="2084" title="marlin" label="marlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81725" start="2140" end="2145" title="KwaZulu-Natal Province" label="Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="2149" end="2161" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142402" start="2220" end="2231" title="sardine run" label="sardine run"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="2274" end="2279" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="2285" end="2292" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q852569" start="2326" end="2340" title="Fish migration" label="migrating fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q584588" start="2403" end="2415" title="Monterey Bay" label="Monterey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="2417" end="2421" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q179154" start="2448" end="2458" title="gray whale" label="gray whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570255" start="2534" end="2545" title="submersible" label="submersible"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="2750" end="2757" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="2897" end="2910" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q55634520" start="2918" end="2945" title="Syracosphaera azureaplaneta" label="Syracosphaera azureaplaneta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="3236" end="3239" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q253632" start="5031" end="5044" title="Martha Holmes (broadcaster)" label="Martha Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071905" start="5103" end="5116" title="BBC Worldwide" label="BBC Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245484" start="5216" end="5239" title="Dorling Kindersley" label="Dorling Kindersley (DK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q721429" start="5395" end="5414" title="Alastair Fothergill" label="Alastair Fothergill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849077" start="5419" end="5429" title="Andy Byatt" label="Andy Byatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q622423" start="5531" end="5558" title="San Sebastián International Film Festival" label="San Sebastian Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747294" start="5922" end="5941" title="Manchester Camerata" label="Manchester Camerata"/>
<link wikidata="Q815571" start="6454" end="6467" title="Wembley Arena" label="Wembley Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q15207459" start="6469" end="6485" title="Nottingham Arena" label="Nottingham Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747302" start="6487" end="6505" title="Manchester Central Convention Complex" label="Manchester Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258519" start="6507" end="6531" title="St. David&amp;#x27;s (Cardiff)" label="Cardiff St. David&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507908" start="6536" end="6560" title="Birmingham Symphony Hall" label="Birmingham Symphony Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="6704" end="6709" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="6711" end="6718" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734517" start="6736" end="6753" title="Florida Orchestra" label="Florida Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750669" start="6805" end="6840" title="Mann Center for the Performing Arts" label="Mann Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="6844" end="6856" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330105" start="6874" end="6900" title="Russian National Orchestra" label="Russian National Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11274043" start="6911" end="6922" title="Jane Pauley" label="Jane Pauley"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="6941" end="6950" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144875" start="6968" end="6996" title="Singapore Symphony Orchestra" label="Singapore Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519" start="7019" end="7028" title="Abu Dhabi" label="Abu Dhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744749" start="7058" end="7085" title="National Symphony Orchestra" label="National Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="7110" end="7116" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q647390" start="7120" end="7139" title="Royal Festival Hall" label="Royal Festival Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="7419" end="7426" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="7428" end="7438" title="BBC One HD" label="BBC One HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q17481860" start="7443" end="7452" title="BBC Earth (TV channel)" label="BBC Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q43404" start="7741" end="7758" title="Discovery Channel" label="Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81520" start="7779" end="7793" title="Pierce Brosnan" label="Pierce Brosnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038113" start="8182" end="8190" title="lobsters" label="lobsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834809" start="8352" end="8361" title="BBC Earth" label="BBC Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630304" start="8395" end="8399" title="Hulu" label="Hulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336810" start="8437" end="8441" title="Eden (British TV channel)" label="Eden"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405507" wikidata="Q3043225" url="?curid=405507" title="Life in the Freezer">
<text>Life in the Freezer is a BBC nature documentary series written and presented by David Attenborough, first transmitted in the United Kingdom from 18 November 1993.

A study of the seasonal cycle of Antarctica, it was the first of Attenborough&#x27;s more specialised surveys following his major trilogy that began with &quot;Life on Earth&quot;. Each of the six 30-minute episodes (except the last) examines how species cope with life on the Antarctic continent during the year.

The series was produced by the BBC Natural History Unit in conjunction with The National Geographic Society and Lionheart International, Inc. The producer was Alastair Fothergill and the music was composed by George Fenton.

Part of David Attenborough&#x27;s &#x27;Life&#x27; series of programmes, it was preceded by &quot;The Trials of Life&quot; (1990) and followed by &quot;The Private Life of Plants&quot; (1995).

== Background ==

Over the course of the series, the seasonal effect on the continent is explored, from one of the harshest winters on the planet to the arrival of spring, which welcomes a population of ocean travellers returning to breed. Then, in the summer, creatures such as seals and penguins struggle to raise their young before winter once again sets in. At this point, the ice sheet doubles and animals must leave to find food.

David Attenborough accompanied a 20-strong crew to Antarctica and spent three years filming the series. They had to contend with monolithic glaciers and extreme weather conditions, including mountainous seas, 160 km/h blizzards and harsh temperatures.

Once again, following on from &quot;The Trials of Life&quot;, the team used the latest camera technology and techniques, and had to travel into territory that had been previously inaccessible to filmmakers. For example, to photograph the wildlife of the sea, boats, divers, suspended capsules and remotely controlled cameras mounted on inflatables were used. Particularly dangerous to divers were leopard seals and other predators, so some underwater sequences necessitated the use of cages for safety. The team also used a small, steel-hulled yacht, the &quot;Damien II&quot;. It had a retractable keel, which enabled the vessel to venture into shallow bays and land camera crews on to remote islands, where they could remain in contact via radio. A steadicam was used to obtain close-ups of fighting fur seals, with another person carrying a pair of wooden poles close by, in case one of the creatures attacked the human visitors.

Cameraman Michael deGruy gave an account of what it was like to film beneath the ice during a blizzard:
I jumped into a seal hole, pushing the ice away as I entered, and they handed me my camera. Surprisingly, I wasn&#x27;t too cold, except around where my mouth held on to my regulator, and that instantly froze and became numb. Suddenly everything was quiet and I found myself looking at easily one of the most extraordinary scenes I had ever, ever experienced. When I dropped down through a hole in the ice, I was completely surrounded by ice: a tunnel maybe twenty feet across. Everything above me on the land was roaring with wind and down there, there was absolutely no sound except for the distant trills of Weddell seals.

The last episode looks at the race by humans to be the first to reach the South Pole, and its second half describes how the series was made.

== Episodes ==
=== 1. &quot;The Bountiful Sea&quot; ===

Broadcast 18 November 1993, the first episode introduces the continent of Antarctica and the surrounding sea and islands, its glaciers and the icebergs that form from it. It describes how the continent changes throughout the seasons, as it effectively doubles in size in winter when the surrounding sea freezes over, &quot;the greatest seasonal change that takes place on this planet.&quot; Penguins, whales and seals are shown feeding in the Southern Ocean. Many of them eat the abundant krill (which in turn feed on phytoplankton and ice-algae). Humpback whales are shown catching krill through sophisticated co-operation: they create spiralling curtains of air bubbles that drive it into their centre, where the whales can then catch them by surging upwards in the middle of the spiral. Also shown are the various seabirds which feed in the Antarctic sea, especially albatrosses, whose impressive wingspans are possible because they utilise the updraft generated by the huge waves in the stormy southern waters. Because of the patchiness of krill, albatrosses can travel for many hundreds or indeed thousands of miles on a single trip in search of it. All birds scavenge, and a group (including giant petrels) is shown taking the remains of a whale, left by orca. Many birds (including penguins) lay their eggs and feed their chicks on the islands surrounding the Antarctic continent, especially South Georgia where both albatross and king penguins have their nesting sites throughout the year.

=== 2. &quot;The Ice Retreats&quot; ===

Broadcast 25 November 1993, the second programme examines what happens during spring on Antarctica. The sea ice extends for hundreds of miles around the continent, but there are a few subantarctic islands that escape it. Such places are highly valued, for as the sea never freezes, animals can always get ashore. Elephant seals are the first creatures to return to the beaches. They form large breeding colonies, where the males fight fierce battles to gain and retain permanent access to a great number of females and mate with them as soon as they are receptive again. Millions of macaroni penguins occupy huge territories on the islands to breed, as do thousands of albatrosses. The Antarctic Peninsula is one of the few regions of the continent inhabited by animals, even in summer. Gentoo penguins build their nests on bare rock and humpback whales seek krill along the coast, while Adelie penguins nest even further south. Crabeater seals, one of the most numerous mammals on Earth, live and reproduce in the pack ice zone around Antarctica. Snow petrels fly many miles into the island to find rock on which to lay their eggs.

=== 3. &quot;The Race to Breed&quot; ===

Broadcast 2 December 1993, this instalment looks at the summer, when almost all life in the region breeds. A South Georgian colony of fur seals is shown: the pups grow fast on the rich, fatty milk provided by their mothers and double their weight in just sixty days. As the females become sexually available, the mating season begins – males try to claim territory and mate with females. Chinstrap penguins form large groups on Deception Island, climbing up its steep slopes to find mountain ridges free of snow. Returning birds find their partners by recognising their voice (performing a brief greeting ritual when they find them), which is why the colonies are very noisy during the breeding season. Males and females take turns in catching food, some of which they later regurgitate for their chicks. The summer also thaws some of the ice on the continent&#x27;s shores. The fresh water allows moss and other plants to grow, which in turn provide food for mites that are adapted to the cold climate – they can survive temperatures up to minus 30 °C because they contain a kind of antifreeze. They become active as soon as the ice melts, and reproduce whenever they get an opportunity to do so. Lichens grow even further south than moss, and algae populate some of the snow. In the ocean, life is much more diverse, and blue-eyed shags dive for fish near the peninsula. More than 300,000 petrels come to breed to the Scullin Monolith, one of the few areas of open rock.

=== 4. &quot;The Door Closes&quot; ===

Broadcast 9 December 1993, this episode describes the migration of most animals northwards (some from the Antarctic continent, others from the few islands surrounding it) as the continent and surrounding sea freeze over at the end of summer. At Cape Royds, the most southernly colony of Adelie penguins is virtually emptied as adults lead their newly feathered young to the sea. Young penguins often fall prey to leopard seals as they try to make their way across the already partially frozen water – and their stripped remains become food for isopods and meter-long nemerteans. However, before going to the sea, the adult penguins must moult their coats. The freezing sea ice usually does not reach South Georgia, and seal pups are still fed there by their mothers in autumn to be ready for the winter. They use their remaining time for play and mock fights in the ocean. Those who do not survive become food for the predator birds – the skuas and the giant petrels. Elephant seals also undergo moulting while on the island. Albatrosses nesting on South Georgia continue to feed and mate, but the ever harsher weather forces most animals further northwards.

=== 5. &quot;The Big Freeze&quot; ===

Broadcast 16 December 1993, this programme deals with those who stay during the coldest weather. As almost all animal inhabitants of Antarctica are forced to migrate, the sea underneath the ice still provides a home to many specially adapted fish whose cells are protected from freezing through an inherent &quot;antifreeze&quot;. Many feed on the faeces of other animals. Perhaps the most notable larger creature that does not journey north is the Weddell seal, which can be found as close as 1300 kilometres to the pole. Groups of seals tear holes into the ice to dive for food and come up to breathe. The females come back to the ice to give birth. Also described is primitive plant life such as lichen, which can still be found on the continent in winter, even in the extremely dry and permanently frozen valleys – conditions under which dead animals can lie frozen for many centuries without decomposing. Attenborough observes that the Antarctic plateau is so &quot;forbidding, hostile and desolate&quot; that human life there seems not only insignificant, but also &quot;totally irrelevant&quot;. Also explored is the life of the emperor penguin, &quot;the only birds to lay their eggs directly on ice&quot;. While others retreat, emperors migrate not just to the ice, but into Antarctica itself. The newly laid egg is quickly transferred from female to male. They then incubate the eggs under the harshest conditions on Earth (huddling closely together in temperatures of minus 70 °C), while their partners return to the sea.

=== 6. &quot;Footsteps in the Snow&quot; ===

Broadcast 23 December 1993, the final instalment discusses human exploration of Antarctica, in particular the mission led by Captain Robert Falcon Scott, whose team died on the way back from the South Pole. Attenborough visits the hut at Cape Evans where Scott and his team spent the winter of 1911. It shows their well-equipped laboratory and the darkroom where the group&#x27;s photographer, Herbert Ponting, developed his films. Attenborough contrasts the transportation used by Scott (initially motor sledge, ponies and dogs before ending up on foot) with today&#x27;s helicopters. The episode also details the scientific work in the modern human bases in Antarctica, especially Mawson Station and its observation of Adelie penguins (partially through tracking devices). The film concludes that although working in Antarctica is now much easier than during the early days of exploration, human footsteps on the continent are still exceedingly rare – in part because of international treaties prohibiting industrial exploitation.

== A. N. Wilson controversy ==

After &quot;Life in the Freezer&quot; was broadcast, A. N. Wilson, then a television reviewer for &quot;The Independent&quot;, wrote a column accusing the production team of staging a harrowing sequence in which a leopard seal killed and dismembered a young penguin. He claimed that the chances of filming natural behaviour like this were far too low, and that the crew must have thrown baby penguins to the seal until they got the shot they wanted.

Alastair Fothergill responded by threatening to sue. In a private settlement, Wilson was forced to publish an apology and retraction acknowledging that there had been no basis for his claims. &quot;The Independent&quot; also paid an undisclosed sum of money, which Fothergill and Attenborough donated to a fund for the penguins of the Falkland Islands.

Wilson had previously made similar claims about Attenborough&#x27;s previous series, &quot;The Trials of Life&quot;, regarding the filming of the malleefowl, and had been forced to retract those as well.

== DVD , book and videogame ==

The series is available in the UK for Regions 2 and 4 as a single DVD (BBCDVD1106, released 16 September 2002) and as part of &quot;The Life Collection&quot;. There are no extra features.

The accompanying book, &quot;Life in the Freezer: A Natural History of the Antarctic&quot; by Alastair Fothergill with a foreword by David Attenborough ( ), was published by BBC Books on 4 November 1993. It is currently out of print.

BBC Multimedia released videogame playable on Windows 3.1, Windows 95, Windows 98 platforms titled &#x27;Attenborough&#x27;s Antarctic: An Exploration of Life in the Freezer&#x27; in 1997 .

==See also==
*&quot;BBC Atlas of the Natural World&quot;, a 2006-07 compilation series for North America

== References ==

==External links==
* 
* &quot;Life in the Freezer&quot; on the Eden website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="25" end="28" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760864" start="29" end="47" title="nature documentary" label="nature documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q183337" start="80" end="98" title="David Attenborough" label="David Attenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="197" end="207" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545267" start="324" end="337" title="Life on Earth (TV series)" label="Life on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834859" start="510" end="534" title="BBC Natural History Unit" label="BBC Natural History Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q167186" start="559" end="586" title="National Geographic Society" label="National Geographic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q721429" start="638" end="657" title="Alastair Fothergill" label="Alastair Fothergill"/>
<link wikidata="Q920167" start="688" end="701" title="George Fenton" label="George Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q781942" start="802" end="820" title="The Trials of Life" label="The Trials of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988846" start="856" end="882" title="The Private Life of Plants" label="The Private Life of Plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311" start="1022" end="1028" title="winter" label="winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312" start="1062" end="1068" title="spring (season)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313" start="1151" end="1157" title="summer" label="summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="1177" end="1181" title="seal (mammal)" label="seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147" start="1187" end="1194" title="penguin" label="penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="1475" end="1483" title="glaciers" label="glaciers"/>
<link wikidata="Q186663" start="1985" end="1997" title="leopard seal" label="leopard seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q744618" start="2339" end="2348" title="steadicam" label="steadicam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043473" start="2390" end="2398" title="fur seal" label="fur seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849378" start="2532" end="2546" title="Michael deGruy" label="Michael deGruy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="3291" end="3296" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q933" start="3327" end="3337" title="South Pole" label="South Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107" start="3513" end="3522" title="continent" label="continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="3578" end="3585" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q47568" start="3595" end="3602" title="iceberg" label="iceberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="3853" end="3859" title="whales" label="whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354" start="3895" end="3909" title="Southern Ocean" label="Southern Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q29498" start="3941" end="3946" title="krill" label="krill"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="3970" end="3983" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="4000" end="4014" title="Humpback whale" label="Humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="4269" end="4276" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q55805" start="4322" end="4331" title="albatross" label="albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q598979" start="4650" end="4662" title="giant petrel" label="giant petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="4713" end="4717" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="4761" end="4764" title="egg" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137202" start="4851" end="4864" title="South Georgia Island" label="South Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182209" start="4890" end="4902" title="king penguin" label="king penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q783935" start="5176" end="5196" title="subantarctic islands" label="subantarctic islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q185231" start="5305" end="5318" title="Elephant seal" label="Elephant seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q217494" start="5575" end="5591" title="macaroni penguin" label="macaroni penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185605" start="5678" end="5697" title="Antarctic Peninsula" label="Antarctic Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q213021" start="5779" end="5793" title="Gentoo penguin" label="Gentoo penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187958" start="5880" end="5894" title="Adelie penguin" label="Adelie penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q626027" start="5921" end="5935" title="Crabeater seal" label="Crabeater seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378564" start="6007" end="6015" title="pack ice" label="pack ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q166442" start="6040" end="6051" title="Snow petrel" label="Snow petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="6354" end="6357" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="6360" end="6364" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q126643" start="6556" end="6573" title="Chinstrap penguin" label="Chinstrap penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045820" start="6596" end="6612" title="Deception Island" label="Deception Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="7066" end="7070" title="moss" label="moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441993" start="7128" end="7132" title="mite" label="mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q503288" start="7252" end="7262" title="antifreeze" label="antifreeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901247" start="7491" end="7505" title="cormorant" label="blue-eyed shag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092053" start="7559" end="7565" title="petrel" label="petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q206338" start="8226" end="8232" title="isopod" label="isopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q185631" start="8249" end="8257" title="nemertea" label="nemertea"/>
<link wikidata="Q381084" start="8319" end="8324" title="moult" label="moult"/>
<link wikidata="Q205323" start="8621" end="8625" title="skua" label="skua"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="9134" end="9138" title="Cell (biology)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q313166" start="9330" end="9342" title="Weddell seal" label="Weddell seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="9561" end="9566" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="9580" end="9586" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39816" start="9690" end="9696" title="valley" label="valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q161829" start="10017" end="10032" title="emperor penguin" label="emperor penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q102527" start="10594" end="10613" title="Robert Falcon Scott" label="Robert Falcon Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q127805" start="10855" end="10870" title="Herbert Ponting" label="Herbert Ponting"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="11034" end="11044" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434388" start="11144" end="11158" title="Mawson Station" label="Mawson Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648203" start="11580" end="11592" title="A. N. Wilson" label="A. N. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="11631" end="11646" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="12313" end="12329" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q781942" start="12423" end="12441" title="The Trials of Life" label="The Trials of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q901228" start="12478" end="12488" title="malleefowl" label="malleefowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747123" start="12701" end="12720" title="The Life Collection" label="The Life Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834789" start="13204" end="13234" title="BBC Atlas of the Natural World" label="BBC Atlas of the Natural World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336810" start="13371" end="13375" title="Eden (British TV channel)" label="Eden"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405508" wikidata="Q1169496" url="?curid=405508" title="The Life of Birds">
<text>The Life of Birds is a BBC nature documentary series written and presented by David Attenborough, first transmitted in the United Kingdom from 21 October 1998.

A study of the evolution and habits of birds, it was the third of Attenborough&#x27;s specialised surveys following his major trilogy that began with &quot;Life on Earth&quot;. Each of the ten 50-minute episodes discusses how the huge variety of birds in the world deal with a different aspect of their day-to-day existence.

The series was produced by the BBC Natural History Unit in conjunction with BBC Worldwide Americas Inc. and PBS. The executive producer was Mike Salisbury and the music was composed by Ian Butcher and Steven Faux. It won a Peabody Award in 1999 for combining &quot;spectacular imagery and impeccable science.&quot;

Part of Attenborough&#x27;s &#x27;Life&#x27; series of programmes, it was preceded by &quot;The Private Life of Plants&quot; (1995), and followed by &quot;The Life of Mammals&quot; (2002). Before the latter was transmitted, David Attenborough presented &quot;State of the Planet&quot; (2000) and narrated &quot;The Blue Planet&quot; (2001).

== Background ==
In common with Attenborough&#x27;s previous productions, the programmes include sequences that were filmed in many locales. The series took three years to make, involving visits to 42 countries. The subject matter had been covered before by Attenborough within &quot;Life on Earth&quot;, in an episode entitled &quot;Lords of the Air&quot;, but now he was free to expand on it. However, by his own confession, despite being especially fascinated by one family, the birds of paradise, Attenborough was not an expert in ornithology. Nevertheless, the notion of an entire series devoted to the creatures excited him, as he would be able to not only communicate his findings to the viewing audience, but further his own knowledge as well.

From the outset, the production team were determined that the sound of birds calling and singing would not be dubbed on to the filmed pictures afterwards: it would be recorded simultaneously. To that end, meticulous care was taken not to include man-made &#x27;noises off&#x27; from the likes of cars and aeroplanes. For one particular sequence, Britain&#x27;s dawn chorus, it was important that the movement of the beak and the expelled warm air was synchronous with the accompanying song.

A trick used to entice some of the animals near the camera was to play a recording of the same species in the hope that the target would not only answer back, but investigate its source as well. This was employed in the episode &quot;Signals and Songs&quot;, where Attenborough encouraged a superb lyrebird—one of nature&#x27;s best mimics—to perform on cue. Despite such fortuity, filming on the series was not all plain sailing: in &quot;Finding Partners&quot;, Attenborough was chased by a capercaillie, which didn&#x27;t even stop when the presenter fell over.

A technique that had been previously used for &quot;The Living Planet&quot; was again called for to film greylag geese in flight. The newly hatched goslings were imprinted with a human &#x27;mother&#x27;, and, when fully grown, were able to be photographed flying alongside an open-top car.
Computer animation was utilised in the first episode to illustrate extinct species, such as the terror bird and the moa.

Production was suddenly halted during a trip to New Zealand in early 1997 when Attenborough&#x27;s wife, Jane, died:

The next filming trip for the &quot;Birds&quot; series was, of course, cancelled. But I could not simply abandon the series. Three quarters of the filming had been done. The film of some of the programmes had been edited but none of the commentaries had yet been written. There was a lot of work that I had to do—and I was grateful that this was so.
Segments that were shot after the passing of his wife include those in the Galápagos Islands, which were filmed in mid-1997.

== Episodes ==
=== 1. &quot;To Fly or Not to Fly?&quot; ===
Broadcast 21 October 1998, the first episode looks at how birds first took to the skies in the wake of the insects. It begins in Mexico, where Attenborough observes bats being outmaneuvered by a red-tailed hawk. Pterosaurs were the birds&#x27; forerunners, some 150 million years after dragonflies developed the means of flight, but eventually became extinct together with the dinosaurs. Birds had by then already evolved from early forms like &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;, the first creature to possess feathers. Its ancestry can be traced through reptiles, and some current species, such as the flying lizard, possibly show paths this evolution may have taken. One of the biggest birds to have ever existed was the terror bird, which proliferated after dinosaurs vanished and stood up to 2.5 metres tall. By comparison, the ostrich, while not closely related, is the largest and heaviest living bird. It was probably the evasion of predators that drove most birds into the air, so their flightless cousins evolved because they had few enemies. Accordingly, such species are more likely to be found on islands, and Attenborough visits New Zealand to observe its great variety, most especially the kiwi. Also depicted is the moa, another huge creature that is now gone. The takahe is extremely rare, and high in the mountains of New Zealand, Attenborough discovers one from a population of only 40 pairs. Finally, another example on the brink of extinction is the kākāpō, which at one point numbered only 61 individuals. A male is heard calling — an immensely amplified deep note that can be heard at great distances from its nest.

=== 2. &quot;The Mastery of Flight&quot; ===
Broadcast 28 October 1998, the second programme deals with the mechanics of flight. Getting into the air is by far the most exhausting of a bird&#x27;s activities, and Attenborough observes shearwaters in Japan that have taken to climbing trees to give them a good jumping-off point. The albatross is so large that it can only launch itself after a run-up to create a flow of air over its wings. A combination of aerodynamics and upward air currents (or thermals), together with the act of flapping or gliding is what keeps a bird aloft. Landing requires less energy but a greater degree of skill, particularly for a big bird, such as a swan. Weight is kept to a minimum by having a beak made of keratin instead of bone, a light frame, and a coat of feathers, which is maintained fastidiously. The peregrine falcon holds the record for being fastest in the air, diving at speeds of over 300 km/h. Conversely, the barn owl owes its predatory success to flying slowly, while the kestrel spots its quarry by hovering. However, the true specialists in this regard are the hummingbirds, whose wings beat at the rate of 25 times a second. The habits of migratory birds are explored. After stocking up with food during the brief summer of the north, such species will set off on huge journeys southwards. Some, such as the snow goose, travel continuously, using both the stars and the sun for navigation. They are contrasted with hawks and vultures, which glide overland on warm air, and therefore have to stop overnight.

=== 3. &quot;The Insatiable Appetite&quot; ===
Broadcast 4 November 1998, the next installment focuses on dietary needs and how different species have evolved beaks to suit their individual requirements. The latter come in a multitude of forms. Blue tits and goldfinches have beaks akin to tweezers, with which to extract seeds, while the hawfinch&#x27;s razor-like bill can deal with a cherry-stone. However, the crossbill is the only finch that can twist its mandibles in opposite directions. Jays store acorns for winter by burying them in the ground, whereas woodpeckers can keep up to 60,000 of them in one tree trunk. Sap is also desirable, and there are a variety of methods used to obtain it. The hoatzin is the only specialised leaf-eater, and accordingly has a digestive system more akin to that of cattle. Plants recruit birds to aid pollination, and offer nectar as a reward. hummingbirds eat little else, and the sword-bill&#x27;s beak is the longest of any bird in relation to its body. Insects are also highly prized, and Galápagos finches are shown to possess some ingenuity as they not only strip bark, but also use &#x27;tools&#x27; to reach their prey. Crows are hailed as being among the most intelligent birds, and one is shown using a twig to spear a grub within a fallen log. The robin is an opportunist, and Attenborough observes one seizing morsels as he digs a patch of earth. In South America, a cattle tyrant sits atop an obliging capybara and uses its vantage point to spot passing food that may be dislodged by its grazing partner.

=== 4. &quot;Meat-Eaters&quot; ===
Broadcast 11 November 1998, this episode examines those birds whose sustenance comes from flesh and their methods of hunting. In New Zealand, Attenborough observes keas, parrots that do not eat meat exclusively, raiding a shearwater&#x27;s burrow for a chick. However, it is the dedicated birds of prey, such as owls, buzzards, eagles, falcons and vultures, to which much of the programme is devoted. In order to spot and pursue their victims, senses of sight and hearing are very acute. Vultures are the exception, in that they eat what others have left, and once a carcass is found, so many birds descend on it that the carrion seems submerged beneath them. The turkey vulture is an anomaly within its group, as it also has a keen sense of smell. Eagles defend their territory vigorously, and a pair of sea eagles are shown engaging in an aerial battle. The Galápagos hawk hunts marine iguanas, but can only do so when its quarry is vulnerable, during the breeding season. The African harrier-hawk has adapted to extracting burrowing animals by virtue of an especially long, double-jointed pair of legs. By contrast, a shrike is not equipped with the requisite sharp beak and talons needed for butchery, and so dismembers its kill by impaling it on the thorns of acacias. The lammergeier eats bones, and will drop them on to rocks from a great height in order to break them down to a digestible size. Also featured are the Eurasian sparrowhawk, goshawk and peregrine falcon.

=== 5. &quot;Fishing for a Living&quot; ===
Broadcast 18 November 1998, the next programme details river and ocean dwellers. The dipper swims completely below water to search for food, whereas the kingfisher uses a &#x27;harpoon&#x27; technique, diving from a vantage point. However, the darter uses a combination of both methods, stalking its prey underwater before spearing it. By contrast, the reddish egret uses a kind of dance to flush out the aquatic inhabitants. Skimmers have different-sized mandibles, the lower one being used to skim the water&#x27;s surface for small fish. Ducks have developed an assortment of angling skills. Some dabble, like the mallard, while others are of a more streamlined design and are at home underwater, such as the merganser. Waders, which specialise in feeding on mud flats at low tide, include avocets, godwits, dowitchers and sanderlings. The pelican feeds in groups, their pouch-like bills being more successful when used collectively. Boobies fish in the open ocean and are shown dive-bombing shoals &quot;en masse&quot;. Attenborough visits Lord Howe Island, off Australia, and by imitating the calls of various birds, invites a group of curious Providence petrels — which are indigenous — to investigate. Because there are no humans in their habitat, they are a very trusting species, as Attenborough discovers when one perches on his hand. Out on a seemingly empty area of ocean, the presenter is able to fill it with various sea birds within seconds, simply by throwing fish oil on to the water.

=== 6. &quot;Signals and Songs&quot; ===
Broadcast 25 November 1998, this installment describes ways of communicating. A colony of fieldfares in Sweden deters a raven from raiding a nest by collectively raising an audible alarm. However, in an English wood, all species co-operate to warn each other surreptitiously of approaching danger. By contrast, a sunbittern is shown expanding its plumage to discourage a group of marauding hawks. The members of the finch family exemplify how colour aids recognition. Birds have excellent colour vision, and the feathers of many species react to ultraviolet light. Flocking birds, such as sparrows, also have a &#x27;ranking system&#x27; that determines seniority. In Patagonia, Attenborough demonstrates the effectiveness of sound: he summons a Magellanic woodpecker by knocking on a tree. The nature of tropical rainforests means that their occupants tend to make much louder calls than those in other habitats, and several such species are shown. Saddlebacks vary their calls so that even individuals from different areas can be identified. The dawn chorus provides a mystery, as there is still much to learn about why so many different birds sing together at the same time of day. (Proclaiming territory or attracting mates are two likely reasons.) Finally, Attenborough introduces the superb lyrebird as one of the most versatile performers: it is a skilled mimic, and this particular one imitates not only other species, but also cameras, a car alarm and a chain saw.

=== 7. &quot;Finding Partners&quot; ===
Broadcast 2 December 1998, this programme discusses mating rituals. If a male bird is on the lookout for a partner and has a suitable nest, it must advertise the fact, either by its call, a visual display or both. The frigatebird provides an example of the latter, with its inflated throat pouch. The hornbill&#x27;s courtship, among that of many others, also runs to the offer of a gift. For some species, dancing can also be an important component, and grebes are shown performing a &quot;pas de deux&quot;. The cock-of-the-rock, which dances solo within a group, is contrasted with the team performance of the manakin. Once trust has been established between a pair, mutual preening can follow. After mating, the individuals usually remain together to rear their eventual family. The Temminck&#x27;s Tragopan with its beautiful and colorful neck, the Himalayan Monal with glowing feather&#x27;s colors and the huge tailed great argus to the peacock with its colorful and huge tail.

In this regard, the rhea and the phalarope are highlighted as unusual because in both instances, it is the male that incubates the eggs. Some females judge a prospective companion on its nest-building ability, and this is a conspicuous part of the weaver&#x27;s behaviour. The bowerbird puts on one of the most elaborate displays: a hut-like construction, completed by a collection of objects designed to impress. Competition among males can be fierce and in Scotland, Attenborough observes rival capercaillies engaging in battle — after one of them chases the presenter. Avian polyandry is not widespread, but is illustrated by the superb fairy-wren, where the male&#x27;s family can easily comprise young that it did not father.

=== 8. &quot;The Demands of the Egg&quot; ===
Broadcast 9 December 1998, this episode explores the lengths to which birds will go to ensure that their chicks are brought into the world. Attenborough begins on an island in the Seychelles, where sooty terns, which have hitherto spent their lives on the wing, have landed to lay their eggs. This is a necessity for birds, as eggs are too heavy to be borne in the air for any considerable length of time. It is imperative that nests are kept as far away from predators as possible, and unusual locations for them are shown, such as: behind the water curtain of Iguazu Falls in South America (as chosen by swifts), cliffs on Argentina&#x27;s coast favoured by parrots, an ants&#x27; nest occupied by a woodpecker, and a tree hole inside which a female hornbill seals itself. Eggs require warmth, and some nests are insulated by the owners&#x27; feathers, others from ones found elsewhere. External temperatures dictate how the eggs are incubated. The snowy owl has to do so itself, because of its habitat; however, the maleo is able to take advantage of solar heating. The amount of eggs laid also varies: for example, the kiwi lays just one, whereas the blue tit will deposit many. Their mottled surface serves to camouflage them. Birds that steal eggs include toucans and currawongs. A number of strategies are employed to deter the thieves, as illustrated by the yellow-rumped thornbill, which builds a decoy nest atop its actual one, and the plover, which distracts marauders by feigning injury.

=== 9. &quot;The Problems of Parenthood&quot; ===
Broadcast 16 December 1998, the penultimate installment concentrates on the ways in which birds rear their offspring. Having successfully incubated their eggs, the moment arrives when they hatch — and then the real challenge begins: feeding the chicks. Lapland buntings and dippers are shown doing so virtually non-stop throughout the day. The Gouldian finch has a further problem in that its tree-hollow nest is dark inside, so its young have conspicuous markings inside their mouths for identification. Grebes are fed feathers with which to line the stomach, and so protect it from fish bones. Coots and pelicans are among those that turn on their own and force death by starvation if there is insufficient food. The European cuckoo tricks other species into raising its chick, but it is by no means alone in doing this. Protecting a family is also a priority, and brent geese are shown nesting close to snowy owls as a means of insurance, but as soon as the eggs hatch, they and their young must flee to avoid giving their neighbours an easy meal. The million or so sooty terns in the Seychelles prove that there is safety in numbers and the nearby predatory egrets have little success when attempting to steal. The behaviour of Arabian babblers is more akin to that of a troop of monkeys: they do everything for the benefit of a group as a whole. Eventually the day will come when flight beckons, and the grown bird will leave the nest to start a family of its own.

=== 10. &quot;The Limits of Endurance&quot; ===
Broadcast 23 December 1998, the final programme investigates the challenges that must be surmounted if birds are to survive. The sandgrouse is a species that has adapted to desert living: its breast feathers are capable of absorbing water, which it can pass on to its young. The crab plover also nests in the sand, and burrows until it finds a comfortable temperature. Birds that choose remote places can proliferate hugely, like the flamingos on an African soda lake. Meanwhile, during winter, the entire world population of spectacled eiders can be found in just a few assemblies on patches of the Arctic Ocean. The city is a relatively recent habitat, but many have become accustomed to it, such as the American black vultures in São Paulo. In Japan, crows have learned to crack nuts by dropping them on to pedestrian crossings — and waiting for the traffic to stop before collecting them. In North America, purple martins have become totally dependent on humans for their nest sites. Attenborough highlights man&#x27;s influence by describing the Pacific island of Guam, whose bird population was wiped out following the accidental introduction of brown tree snakes during the 1940s. Examples of species that were hunted to extinction are the huia, the great auk and, most famously, the dodo. However, there are conservation efforts being made, such as those for Australia&#x27;s orange-bellied parrot, the pink pigeon and the echo parakeet (the latter two both of Mauritius).

== DVD and book ==
The series is available in the UK for Regions 2 and 4 as a three-disc DVD (BBCDVD1020, released 4 December 2000) and as part of &quot;The Life Collection&quot;. Each episode features additional footage, accessed separately.

The accompanying book, &quot;The Life of Birds&quot; by David Attenborough, was published by BBC Books on 24 September 1998.

== References ==
== External links ==
* &quot;The Life of Birds&quot; at the PBS Television website
* &quot;The Life of Birds&quot; on the Eden website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="23" end="26" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760864" start="27" end="45" title="nature documentary" label="nature documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q183337" start="78" end="96" title="David Attenborough" label="David Attenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="200" end="204" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545267" start="317" end="330" title="Life on Earth (TV series)" label="Life on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834859" start="518" end="542" title="BBC Natural History Unit" label="BBC Natural History Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="595" end="598" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848678" start="627" end="641" title="Mike Salisbury" label="Mike Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="710" end="723" title="Peabody Award" label="Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988846" start="895" end="921" title="The Private Life of Plants" label="The Private Life of Plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140053" start="958" end="977" title="The Life of Mammals" label="The Life of Mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160304" start="1062" end="1081" title="State of the Planet" label="State of the Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646474" start="1114" end="1129" title="The Blue Planet" label="The Blue Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q179333" start="1627" end="1644" title="birds of paradise" label="birds of paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q44703" start="1680" end="1691" title="ornithology" label="ornithology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="2244" end="2251" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755022" start="2259" end="2270" title="dawn chorus (birds)" label="dawn chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q214096" start="2681" end="2696" title="lyrebird" label="superb lyrebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q756174" start="2883" end="2895" title="capercaillie" label="capercaillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747870" start="3008" end="3025" title="The Living Planet" label="The Living Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q25882" start="3061" end="3074" title="Greylag goose" label="greylag geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="3247" end="3265" title="Computer animation" label="Computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q752173" start="3343" end="3354" title="phorusrhacidae" label="terror bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q452969" start="3363" end="3366" title="moa" label="moa"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="3417" end="3428" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q38095" start="3912" end="3929" title="Galápagos Islands" label="Galápagos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="4130" end="4136" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="4152" end="4158" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="4188" end="4191" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q457471" start="4218" end="4233" title="red-tailed hawk" label="red-tailed hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q179204" start="4235" end="4244" title="Pterosaur" label="Pterosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q80066" start="4309" end="4320" title="dragonfly" label="dragonflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q100196" start="4473" end="4486" title="Archaeopteryx" label="Archaeopteryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="4524" end="4531" title="feather" label="feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="4569" end="4576" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599361" start="4617" end="4630" title="Draco maculatus" label="flying lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="4775" end="4783" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576337" start="4846" end="4853" title="ostrich" label="ostrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q865137" start="5009" end="5027" title="flightless bird" label="flightless cousins"/>
<link wikidata="Q43642" start="5218" end="5222" title="Kiwi (bird)" label="kiwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q452969" start="5245" end="5248" title="moa" label="moa"/>
<link wikidata="Q212302" start="5294" end="5300" title="takahē" label="takahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q179959" start="5484" end="5490" title="kākāpō" label="kākāpō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137226" start="5646" end="5650" title="Bird nest" label="nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729486" start="5888" end="5898" title="shearwater" label="shearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q55805" start="5986" end="5995" title="albatross" label="albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="6111" end="6123" title="aerodynamics" label="aerodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q752823" start="6152" end="6159" title="thermal" label="thermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564928" start="6335" end="6339" title="swan" label="swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="6381" end="6385" title="beak" label="beak"/>
<link wikidata="Q189474" start="6394" end="6401" title="keratin" label="keratin"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="6413" end="6417" title="bone" label="bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="6496" end="6512" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131528250" start="6611" end="6619" title="Barn-owl" label="barn owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488588" start="6675" end="6682" title="kestrel" label="kestrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43624" start="6766" end="6777" title="hummingbird" label="hummingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="6845" end="6854" title="Bird migration" label="migratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074540" start="7014" end="7024" title="snow goose" label="snow goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="7062" end="7066" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="7076" end="7079" title="sun" label="sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q846664" start="7121" end="7125" title="hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q123120" start="7131" end="7138" title="vulture" label="vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q25404" start="7459" end="7467" title="Blue tit" label="Blue tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25418" start="7473" end="7482" title="European goldfinch" label="goldfinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q174088" start="7553" end="7561" title="hawfinch" label="hawfinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q339517" start="7628" end="7637" title="crossbill" label="crossbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968813" start="7709" end="7712" title="Jay" label="Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914781" start="7720" end="7725" title="acorn" label="acorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25439" start="7777" end="7787" title="woodpecker" label="woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q76626" start="7838" end="7841" title="Plant sap" label="Sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q188660" start="7919" end="7926" title="hoatzin" label="hoatzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="8023" end="8029" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="8031" end="8036" title="Plant" label="Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="8059" end="8070" title="pollination" label="pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="8082" end="8088" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q385548" start="8140" end="8150" title="Sword-billed hummingbird" label="sword-bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q756311" start="8251" end="8268" title="Darwin&amp;#x27;s finches" label="Galápagos finches"/>
<link wikidata="Q388450" start="8386" end="8390" title="Crow" label="Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="8487" end="8491" title="larva" label="grub"/>
<link wikidata="Q25334" start="8517" end="8522" title="European robin" label="robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="8620" end="8633" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q656000" start="8637" end="8650" title="cattle tyrant" label="cattle tyrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131538" start="8673" end="8681" title="capybara" label="capybara"/>
<link wikidata="Q193337" start="8976" end="8979" title="kea" label="kea"/>
<link wikidata="Q31431" start="8982" end="8988" title="parrot" label="parrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="9101" end="9114" title="bird of prey" label="birds of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="9124" end="9127" title="owl" label="owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251488" start="9130" end="9137" title="buzzard" label="buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="9140" end="9145" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43489" start="9148" end="9154" title="falcon" label="falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q123120" start="9160" end="9167" title="vulture" label="vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q245181" start="9476" end="9490" title="turkey vulture" label="turkey vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253080" start="9617" end="9626" title="sea eagle (bird)" label="sea eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q840141" start="9672" end="9686" title="Galápagos hawk" label="Galápagos hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q208796" start="9693" end="9706" title="marine iguana" label="marine iguana"/>
<link wikidata="Q512792" start="9791" end="9811" title="African harrier-hawk" label="African harrier-hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q171052" start="9933" end="9939" title="shrike" label="shrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q201851" start="10067" end="10072" title="spine (botany)" label="thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q81666" start="10077" end="10083" title="acacia" label="acacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q126167" start="10090" end="10101" title="lammergeier" label="lammergeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q25380" start="10237" end="10257" title="Eurasian sparrowhawk" label="Eurasian sparrowhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q121076142" start="10259" end="10266" title="Northern goshawk" label="goshawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="10271" end="10287" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192575" start="10419" end="10425" title="dipper" label="dipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q8154335" start="10487" end="10497" title="kingfisher" label="kingfisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q13168473" start="10578" end="10584" title="darter" label="darter"/>
<link wikidata="Q258791" start="10687" end="10700" title="reddish egret" label="reddish egret"/>
<link wikidata="Q212941" start="10760" end="10767" title="Skimmer (bird)" label="Skimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736439" start="10875" end="10879" title="Duck" label="Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348" start="10951" end="10958" title="mallard" label="mallard"/>
<link wikidata="Q180991" start="11046" end="11055" title="Common merganser" label="merganser"/>
<link wikidata="Q26226431" start="11057" end="11062" title="Wader" label="Wader"/>
<link wikidata="Q286072" start="11127" end="11133" title="avocet" label="avocet"/>
<link wikidata="Q585636" start="11136" end="11142" title="godwit" label="godwit"/>
<link wikidata="Q838747" start="11145" end="11154" title="dowitcher" label="dowitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q58958" start="11160" end="11170" title="sanderling" label="sanderling"/>
<link wikidata="Q19413" start="11177" end="11184" title="pelican" label="pelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q612817" start="11271" end="11278" title="Booby" label="Boobies"/>
<link wikidata="Q104784" start="11378" end="11394" title="Lord Howe Island" label="Lord Howe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268746" start="11483" end="11500" title="Providence petrel" label="Providence petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25777" start="11968" end="11977" title="fieldfare" label="fieldfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q8335" start="11998" end="12003" title="raven" label="raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137226" start="12019" end="12023" title="Bird nest" label="nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q601107" start="12191" end="12201" title="sunbittern" label="sunbittern"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="12424" end="12435" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28922" start="12467" end="12474" title="Old World sparrow" label="sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="12546" end="12555" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q284331" start="12624" end="12645" title="Magellanic woodpecker" label="Magellanic woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q158579" start="12683" end="12703" title="Tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests" label="tropical rainforests"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405119" start="12828" end="12838" title="Tieke" label="Saddleback"/>
<link wikidata="Q757013" start="13168" end="13183" title="superb lyrebird" label="superb lyrebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q228395" start="13445" end="13451" title="mating" label="mating"/>
<link wikidata="Q203472" start="13611" end="13622" title="frigatebird" label="frigatebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q26773" start="13694" end="13702" title="hornbill" label="hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q21695" start="13848" end="13853" title="grebe" label="grebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q909781" start="13884" end="13895" title="pas de deux" label="pas de deux"/>
<link wikidata="Q669771" start="13907" end="13923" title="cock-of-the-rock" label="cock-of-the-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q379200" start="14006" end="14013" title="manakin" label="manakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q827262" start="14180" end="14204" title="Temminck&amp;#x27;s tragopan" label="Temminck&amp;#x27;s Tragopan"/>
<link wikidata="Q742818" start="14247" end="14262" title="Himalayan monal" label="Himalayan Monal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19171" start="14399" end="14403" title="rhea (bird)" label="rhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q253776" start="14412" end="14421" title="phalarope" label="phalarope"/>
<link wikidata="Q954226" start="14496" end="14505" title="avian incubation" label="incubates"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="14510" end="14514" title="egg (biology)" label="eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q211601" start="14627" end="14633" title="Ploceidae" label="weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q215603" start="14656" end="14665" title="bowerbird" label="bowerbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q756174" start="14876" end="14888" title="capercaillie" label="capercaillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q420813" start="15012" end="15029" title="superb fairy-wren" label="superb fairy-wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="15337" end="15347" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q28482" start="15355" end="15365" title="sooty tern" label="sooty tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q36332" start="15719" end="15731" title="Iguazu Falls" label="Iguazu Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q26617" start="15763" end="15768" title="Swift (bird)" label="swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q107679" start="15772" end="15777" title="cliff" label="cliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="15782" end="15791" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q170177" start="16108" end="16117" title="snowy owl" label="snowy owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q836291" start="16176" end="16181" title="maleo" label="maleo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325045" start="16419" end="16425" title="toucan" label="toucan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136293" start="16431" end="16440" title="currawong" label="currawong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300214" start="16523" end="16546" title="yellow-rumped thornbill" label="yellow-rumped thornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q139321" start="16603" end="16609" title="plover" label="plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q208703" start="16961" end="16976" title="Lapland bunting" label="Lapland bunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q752146" start="17052" end="17066" title="Gouldian finch" label="Gouldian finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q637533" start="17304" end="17308" title="Coot" label="Coot"/>
<link wikidata="Q26381" start="17427" end="17442" title="Cuckoo" label="European cuckoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27050" start="17575" end="17586" title="Brent goose" label="brent geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060012" start="17870" end="17875" title="egret" label="egret"/>
<link wikidata="Q28922092" start="17940" end="17955" title="Arabian babbler" label="Arabian babbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367" start="17992" end="17998" title="monkey" label="monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q179983" start="18356" end="18366" title="sandgrouse" label="sandgrouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="18400" end="18406" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q213836" start="18506" end="18517" title="crab plover" label="crab plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901583" start="18661" end="18669" title="flamingo" label="flamingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="18677" end="18683" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q833508" start="18753" end="18769" title="spectacled eider" label="spectacled eider"/>
<link wikidata="Q788" start="18827" end="18839" title="Arctic Ocean" label="Arctic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="18845" end="18849" title="city" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q213366" start="18933" end="18955" title="American black vulture" label="American black vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="18960" end="18969" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="19123" end="19136" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062485" start="19138" end="19151" title="purple martin" label="purple martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="19186" end="19191" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="19278" end="19285" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="19296" end="19300" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q900781" start="19379" end="19395" title="brown tree snake" label="brown tree snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q285008" start="19474" end="19478" title="huia" label="huia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189193" start="19484" end="19493" title="great auk" label="great auk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43502" start="19518" end="19522" title="dodo" label="dodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071681" start="19611" end="19632" title="orange-bellied parrot" label="orange-bellied parrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q940792" start="19638" end="19649" title="pink pigeon" label="pink pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253103" start="19658" end="19671" title="Mauritius parakeet" label="echo parakeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="19696" end="19705" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747123" start="19862" end="19881" title="The Life Collection" label="The Life Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834796" start="20046" end="20055" title="BBC Books" label="BBC Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336810" start="20218" end="20222" title="Eden (British TV channel)" label="Eden"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405509" wikidata="Q1140053" url="?curid=405509" title="The Life of Mammals">
<text>The Life of Mammals is a nature documentary series written and presented by David Attenborough, first transmitted in the United Kingdom from 20 November 2002.

It is a documentary on the study of the evolution and habits of the various mammal species. It was the fourth of Attenborough&#x27;s specialised surveys following his major trilogy that began with &quot;Life on Earth&quot;. Each of the ten episodes looks at one (or several closely related) mammal groups and discusses the different facets of their day-to-day existence and their evolutionary origins. All the programs are of 50 minutes duration except the last, which extends to 59 minutes.

The series was produced by the BBC Natural History Unit in conjunction with the Discovery Channel. The executive producer was Mike Salisbury and the music was composed by Dan Jones and Ben Salisbury. It was later shown on the Discovery Channel.

Part of David Attenborough&#x27;s &quot;Life&quot; series, it was preceded by &quot;The Life of Birds&quot; (1998) and followed by &quot;Life in the Undergrowth&quot; (2005). However, in between the former and this series, David Attenborough presented &quot;State of the Planet&quot; (2000) and narrated &quot;The Blue Planet&quot; (2001).

== Background ==
The mammals are such a widespread, varied and successful group of animals that Attenborough had previously devoted no fewer than five episodes of &quot;Life on Earth&quot; to them. Nevertheless, there was much that remained untold and behaviour that was not hitherto filmed. &quot;The Life of Mammals&quot; was intended to be his definitive account of the subject.

Attenborough took on the series at the suggestion of the BBC Natural History Unit. The naturalist&#x27;s wife, Jane, had died in 1997, midway through the making of &quot;The Life of Birds&quot;, which had caused its postponement. However, Attenborough had been grateful for the fact that there was still work to be done to ensure its completion. Similarly, he was glad of another opportunity to keep himself occupied:
&quot;&quot;The Life of Birds&quot; was transmitted in the autumn of 1998, and was sufficiently well received for the Unit to ask me if I would like to tackle another similar series about another group of animals. How about mammals? I was in my mid-seventies, but I decided I would rather do that than sit at home by myself.&quot;
== Production ==
Despite his age, Attenborough travelled just as extensively as in all his previous productions, with each episode leapfrogging to a multitude of locations around the world.

The filming, as ever, provided many challenges. To capture footage for the first time of skunks foraging in a cave of bats, extra protective measures had to be taken for the crew, as it was a very hostile environment. The air was full of ammonia, the main occupants urinated copiously from above, and other inhabitants included flesh-eating maggots and a rattlesnake.

For a sequence featuring grizzly bears at close quarters, the camera team were accompanied by Buck Wilde, an ursine specialist. When a bear was too inquisitive, he was able to command it to turn away simply by raising his hands. However, a cameraman confessed that at the time, he was sure there would come a moment when the animal would just continue towards them regardless.

To get themselves up into the canopy of a tropical rainforest the crew used a catapult to fire a fishing line 100 metres into the uppermost branches. This was then attached to a rope and pulley counterbalance system. The difficulties involved were first actually finding an ideal tree, and then, having settled on one, watching out for passing snakes and primates en-route to the top.

Big cats that hunt nocturnally, such as lions, leopards and tigers, had never been extensively filmed doing so before. But the latest infrared technology revealed behaviour that had previously been guessed at from evidence discovered the next day.

The series was among the first to benefit from the features of digital television. After each episode&#x27;s transmission on BBC One, terrestrial viewers were shown a ten-minute featurette on an aspect of its making. Those with digital equipment had the option of switching to an interactive quiz, hosted by Attenborough.

== Themes ==
In his previous natural history series, Attenborough had been reticent about describing man&#x27;s impact on the natural environment (unless it was relevant to the content, as in the last episode of &quot;The Living Planet&quot; or &quot;The First Eden&quot;). However, since &quot;State of the Planet&quot;, the presenter had become more publicly outspoken on the subject. In the final program of this series, &quot;Food for Thought&quot;, he took the opportunity to put the case explicitly for finding ways to deal with overpopulation.

== Episodes ==


== DVD and book ==
The series is available in the UK for Regions 2 and 4 as a 4-disc DVD (BBCDVD1128, released 7 April 2003) and as part of &quot;The Life Collection&quot;. Its special features include six &quot;behind the scenes&quot; featurettes, fact files, a photo gallery, the original score and a special 10-minute video-to-music montage.

The accompanying book, &quot;The Life of Mammals&quot; by David Attenborough (), was published by BBC Books on 17 October 2002.

Both DVD and book have been translated to other languages.

The Dutch version of the DVD produced by Evangelische Omroep removed all references to (amongst others) evolution, fossils, and continental drift. The narration by David Attenborough has been replaced by a not always accurate Dutch translation, and cuts were made to the episodes. The tenth episode was not broadcast at all on Evangelische Omroep, and is not included on the EO DVD of the series. The Dutch version of the book includes the full text of the original book, as did the Dutch language version of the programme broadcast on the Belgian broadcaster Canvas.

== References ==
== External links ==
* &quot;The Life of Mammals&quot; on the Eden website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1760864" start="25" end="43" title="nature documentary" label="nature documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q183337" start="76" end="94" title="David Attenborough" label="David Attenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="236" end="242" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545267" start="363" end="376" title="Life on Earth (TV series)" label="Life on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834859" start="684" end="708" title="BBC Natural History Unit" label="BBC Natural History Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q43404" start="733" end="750" title="Discovery Channel" label="Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848678" start="779" end="793" title="Mike Salisbury" label="Mike Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213767" start="824" end="833" title="Dan Jones (composer)" label="Dan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921422" start="838" end="851" title="Ben Salisbury" label="Ben Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169496" start="983" end="1000" title="The Life of Birds" label="The Life of Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545195" start="1036" end="1059" title="Life in the Undergrowth" label="Life in the Undergrowth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160304" start="1157" end="1176" title="State of the Planet" label="State of the Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646474" start="1209" end="1224" title="The Blue Planet" label="The Blue Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834859" start="1680" end="1704" title="BBC Natural History Unit" label="BBC Natural History Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q43604020" start="2652" end="2657" title="skunk" label="skunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="2681" end="2684" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="2801" end="2808" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q853811" start="2904" end="2910" title="maggot" label="maggot"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282840" start="2918" end="2929" title="rattlesnake" label="rattlesnake"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="2957" end="2969" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q158579" start="3352" end="3371" title="Tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests" label="tropical rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="3654" end="3659" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="3665" end="3672" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667323" start="3696" end="3703" title="Big cat" label="Big cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q140" start="3736" end="3740" title="lion" label="lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34706" start="3743" end="3750" title="leopard" label="leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q19939" start="3756" end="3761" title="tiger" label="tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="3830" end="3838" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q202255" start="4008" end="4026" title="digital television" label="digital television"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="4070" end="4077" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="4394" end="4413" title="natural environment" label="natural environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747870" start="4486" end="4503" title="The Living Planet" label="The Living Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734122" start="4519" end="4533" title="The First Eden" label="The First Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160304" start="4563" end="4582" title="State of the Planet" label="State of the Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113866" start="4803" end="4817" title="Overpopulation (biology)" label="overpopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747123" start="4983" end="5002" title="The Life Collection" label="The Life Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834796" start="5281" end="5290" title="BBC Books" label="BBC Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514841" start="5413" end="5432" title="Evangelische Omroep" label="Evangelische Omroep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033960" start="5932" end="5938" title="Canvas (TV channel)" label="Canvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336810" start="6020" end="6024" title="Eden (British TV channel)" label="Eden"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405512" wikidata="Q1066983" url="?curid=405512" title="Almost periodic function">
<text>In mathematics, an almost periodic function is, loosely speaking, a function of a real variable that is periodic to within any desired level of accuracy, given suitably long, well-distributed &quot;almost-periods&quot;. The concept was first studied by Harald Bohr and later generalized by Vyacheslav Stepanov, Hermann Weyl and Abram Samoilovitch Besicovitch, amongst others. There is also a notion of almost periodic functions on locally compact abelian groups, first studied by John von Neumann.

Almost periodicity is a property of dynamical systems that appear to retrace their paths through phase space, but not exactly. An example would be a planetary system, with planets in orbits moving with periods that are not commensurable (i.e., with a period vector that is not proportional to a vector of integers). A theorem of Kronecker from diophantine approximation can be used to show that any particular configuration that occurs once, will recur to within any specified accuracy: if we wait long enough we can observe the planets all return to within a second of arc to the positions they once were in.

==Motivation==

There are several inequivalent definitions of almost periodic functions. The first was given by Harald Bohr. His interest was initially in finite Dirichlet series. In fact by truncating the series for the Riemann zeta function &quot;ζ&quot;(&quot;s&quot;) to make it finite, one gets finite sums of terms of the type

:formula_1

with &quot;s&quot; written as &quot;σ&quot; + &quot;it&quot; – the sum of its real part &quot;σ&quot; and imaginary part &quot;it&quot;. Fixing &quot;σ&quot;, so restricting attention to a single vertical line in the complex plane, we can see this also as

:formula_2

Taking a &quot;finite&quot; sum of such terms avoids difficulties of analytic continuation to the region σ &lt; 1. Here the &#x27;frequencies&#x27; log &quot;n&quot; will not all be commensurable (they are as linearly independent over the rational numbers as the integers &quot;n&quot; are multiplicatively independent – which comes down to their prime factorizations).

With this initial motivation to consider types of trigonometric polynomial with independent frequencies, mathematical analysis was applied to discuss the closure of this set of basic functions, in various norms.

The theory was developed using other norms by Besicovitch, Stepanov, Weyl, von Neumann, Turing, Bochner and others in the 1920s and 1930s.

===Uniform or Bohr or Bochner almost periodic functions===

Bohr (1925) defined the uniformly almost-periodic functions as the closure of the trigonometric polynomials with respect to the uniform norm 
:formula_3
(on bounded functions &quot;f&quot; on R). In other words, a function &quot;f&quot; is uniformly almost periodic if for every &quot;ε&quot; &gt; 0 there is a finite linear combination of sine and cosine waves that is of distance less than &quot;ε&quot; from &quot;f&quot; with respect to the uniform norm. The sine and cosine frequencies can be arbitrary real numbers. Bohr proved that this definition was equivalent to the existence of a relatively dense set of &quot;ε&quot; almost-periods, for all &quot;ε&quot; &gt; 0: that is, translations &quot;T&quot;(&quot;ε&quot;) = &quot;T&quot; of the variable &quot;t&quot; making

:formula_4

An alternative definition due to Bochner (1926) is equivalent to that of Bohr and is relatively simple to state:
A function &quot;f&quot; is almost periodic if every sequence {&quot;ƒ&quot;(&quot;t&quot; + &quot;T&quot;&quot;n&quot;)} of translations of &quot;f&quot; has a subsequence that converges uniformly for &quot;t&quot; in (−∞, +∞).

The Bohr almost periodic functions are essentially the same as continuous functions on the Bohr compactification of the reals.

===Stepanov almost periodic functions===
The space &quot;S&quot;&quot;p&quot; of Stepanov almost periodic functions (for &quot;p&quot; ≥ 1) was introduced by V.V. Stepanov (1925). It contains the space of Bohr almost periodic functions. It is the closure of the trigonometric polynomials under the norm

:formula_5

for any fixed positive value of &quot;r&quot;; for different values of &quot;r&quot; these norms give the same topology and so the same space of almost periodic functions (though the norm on this space depends on the choice of &quot;r&quot;).

===Weyl almost periodic functions===
The space &quot;W&quot;&quot;p&quot; of Weyl almost periodic functions (for &quot;p&quot; ≥ 1) was introduced by Weyl (1927). It contains the space &quot;S&quot;&quot;p&quot; of Stepanov almost periodic functions. 
It is the closure of the trigonometric polynomials under the seminorm

:formula_6

Warning: there are nonzero functions &quot;ƒ&quot; with ||&quot;ƒ&quot;||&quot;W&quot;,&quot;p&quot; = 0, such as any bounded function of compact support, so to get a Banach space one has to quotient out by these functions.

===Besicovitch almost periodic functions===
The space &quot;B&quot;&quot;p&quot; of Besicovitch almost periodic functions was introduced by Besicovitch (1926).
It is the closure of the trigonometric polynomials under the seminorm

:formula_7

Warning: there are nonzero functions &quot;ƒ&quot; with ||&quot;ƒ&quot;||B,&quot;p&quot; = 0, such as any bounded function of compact support, so to get a Banach space one has to quotient out by these functions.

The Besicovitch almost periodic functions in &quot;B&quot;2 have an expansion (not necessarily convergent) as

:formula_8

with Σ&quot;a&quot; finite and &quot;λ&quot;&quot;n&quot; real. Conversely every such series is the expansion of some Besicovitch periodic function (which is not unique).

The space &quot;B&quot;&quot;p&quot; of Besicovitch almost periodic functions (for &quot;p&quot; ≥ 1) contains the space &quot;W&quot;&quot;p&quot; of Weyl almost periodic functions. If one quotients out a subspace of &quot;null&quot; functions, it can be identified with the space of &quot;L&quot;&quot;p&quot; functions on the Bohr compactification of the reals.

===Almost periodic functions on a locally compact group===
With these theoretical developments and the advent of abstract methods (the Peter–Weyl theorem, Pontryagin duality and Banach algebras) a general theory became possible. The general idea of almost-periodicity in relation to a locally compact abelian group &quot;G&quot; becomes that of a function &quot;F&quot; in &quot;L&quot;∞(&quot;G&quot;), such that its translates by &quot;G&quot; form a relatively compact set.
Equivalently, the space of almost periodic functions is the norm closure of the finite linear combinations of characters of &quot;G&quot;. If &quot;G&quot; is compact the almost periodic functions are the same as the continuous functions.

The Bohr compactification of &quot;G&quot; is the compact abelian group of all possibly discontinuous characters of the dual group of &quot;G&quot;, and is a compact group containing &quot;G&quot; as a dense subgroup. The space of uniform almost periodic functions on &quot;G&quot; can be identified with the space of all continuous functions on the Bohr compactification of &quot;G&quot;. More generally the Bohr compactification can be defined for any topological group &quot;G&quot;, and the spaces of continuous or &quot;L&quot;&quot;p&quot; functions on the Bohr compactification can be considered as almost periodic functions on &quot;G&quot;.
For locally compact connected groups &quot;G&quot; the map from &quot;G&quot; to its Bohr compactification is injective if and only if &quot;G&quot; is a central extension of a compact group, or equivalently the product of a compact group and a finite-dimensional vector space.

A function on a locally compact group is called &quot;weakly almost periodic&quot; if its orbit is weakly relatively compact in formula_9.

Given a topological dynamical system formula_10 consisting of a compact topological space &quot;X&quot; with an action of the locally compact group &quot;G&quot;, a continuous function on &quot;X&quot; is (weakly) almost periodic if its orbit is (weakly) precompact in the Banach space formula_11.

== Quasiperiodic signals in audio and music synthesis ==

In speech processing, audio signal processing, and music synthesis, a quasiperiodic signal, sometimes called a quasiharmonic signal, is a waveform that is virtually periodic microscopically, but not necessarily periodic macroscopically. This does not give a quasiperiodic function, but something more akin to an almost periodic function, being a nearly periodic function where any one period is virtually identical to its adjacent periods but not necessarily similar to periods much farther away in time. This is the case for musical tones (after the initial attack transient) where all partials or overtones are harmonic (that is all overtones are at frequencies that are an integer multiple of a fundamental frequency of the tone).

When a signal formula_12 is fully periodic with period formula_13, then the signal exactly satisfies

: formula_14

or

: formula_15

The Fourier series representation would be

: formula_16

or

: formula_17

where formula_18 is the fundamental frequency and the Fourier coefficients are

:formula_19

:formula_20

:formula_21

:where formula_22 can be any time: formula_23.

The fundamental frequency formula_24, and Fourier coefficients formula_25, formula_26, formula_27, or formula_28, are constants, i.e. they are not functions of time. The harmonic frequencies are exact integer multiples of the fundamental frequency.

When formula_12 is quasiperiodic then

: formula_30

or

: formula_31

where

: formula_32

Now the Fourier series representation would be

: formula_33

or

: formula_34

or

: formula_35

where formula_36 is the possibly &quot;time-varying&quot; fundamental frequency and the &quot;time-varying&quot; Fourier coefficients are

:formula_37

:formula_38

:formula_39

and the instantaneous frequency for each partial is

:formula_40

Whereas in this quasiperiodic case, the fundamental frequency formula_41, the harmonic frequencies formula_42, and the Fourier coefficients formula_43, formula_44, formula_45, or formula_46 are not necessarily constant, and are functions of time albeit &quot;slowly varying&quot; functions of time. Stated differently these functions of time are bandlimited to much less than the fundamental frequency for formula_12 to be considered to be quasiperiodic.

The partial frequencies formula_42 are very nearly harmonic but not necessarily exactly so. The time-derivative of formula_46, that is formula_50, has the effect of detuning the partials from their exact integer harmonic value formula_51. A rapidly changing formula_46 means that the instantaneous frequency for that partial is severely detuned from the integer harmonic value which would mean that formula_12 is not quasiperiodic.

==See also==
*Quasiperiodic function
*Aperiodic function
*Quasiperiodic tiling
*Fourier series
*Additive synthesis
*Harmonic series (music)
*Computer music

==References==
==Bibliography==
*A.S. Besicovitch, &quot;Almost periodic functions&quot;, Cambridge Univ. Press (1932)
*S. Bochner and J. von Neumann, &quot;Almost Periodic Function in a Group II&quot;, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 37 no. 1 (1935) pp. 21–50
* H. Bohr, &quot;Almost-periodic functions&quot;, Chelsea, reprint (1947) 
*
*
*J. von Neumann, &quot;Almost Periodic Functions in a Group I&quot;, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 36 no. 3 (1934) pp. 445–492

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066983" start="19" end="43" title="Almost periodic function" label="almost periodic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="68" end="76" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="82" end="86" title="real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q184743" start="104" end="112" title="periodic function" label="periodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q310009" start="253" end="264" title="Harald Bohr" label="Harald Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587134" start="290" end="309" title="Vyacheslav Stepanov" label="Vyacheslav Stepanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q71029" start="311" end="323" title="Hermann Weyl" label="Hermann Weyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q331089" start="328" end="358" title="Abram Samoilovitch Besicovitch" label="Abram Samoilovitch Besicovitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122103" start="431" end="460" title="locally compact abelian group" label="locally compact abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="480" end="496" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066983" start="499" end="517" title="Almost periodic function" label="Almost periodicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="535" end="551" title="dynamical system" label="dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q62542" start="596" end="607" title="phase space" label="phase space"/>
<link wikidata="Q206717" start="648" end="664" title="planetary system" label="planetary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="671" end="677" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="682" end="687" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q37640" start="701" end="707" title="Orbital period" label="period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091134" start="722" end="735" title="commensurability (mathematics)" label="commensurable"/>
<link wikidata="Q51379" start="776" end="788" title="Proportionality (mathematics)" label="proportional"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="804" end="811" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q848810" start="817" end="837" title="Kronecker&amp;#x27;s theorem on diophantine approximation" label="theorem of Kronecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227061" start="843" end="868" title="diophantine approximation" label="diophantine approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="1059" end="1072" title="second of arc" label="second of arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q620595" start="1272" end="1288" title="Dirichlet series" label="Dirichlet series"/>
<link wikidata="Q187235" start="1331" end="1352" title="Riemann zeta function" label="Riemann zeta function"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="1534" end="1543" title="real part" label="real part"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="1562" end="1576" title="imaginary part" label="imaginary part"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="1673" end="1686" title="complex plane" label="complex plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q485287" start="1794" end="1815" title="analytic continuation" label="analytic continuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="1964" end="1979" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969650" start="2146" end="2170" title="trigonometric polynomial" label="trigonometric polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754" start="2201" end="2222" title="mathematical analysis" label="mathematical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q956437" start="2301" end="2305" title="norm (mathematics)" label="norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q331089" start="2355" end="2366" title="Abram Samoilovitch Besicovitch" label="Besicovitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587134" start="2368" end="2376" title="Vyacheslav Stepanov" label="Stepanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q71029" start="2378" end="2382" title="Hermann Weyl" label="Weyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="2384" end="2395" title="John von Neumann" label="von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="2397" end="2403" title="Alan Turing" label="Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q215967" start="2405" end="2412" title="Salomon Bochner" label="Bochner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202673" start="2637" end="2649" title="uniform norm" label="uniform norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267362" start="2666" end="2682" title="bounded function" label="bounded function"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538" start="3036" end="3042" title="mathematical proof" label="proved"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254313" start="3101" end="3121" title="relatively dense set" label="relatively dense set"/>
<link wikidata="Q211459" start="3194" end="3206" title="Translation (geometry)" label="translations"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="3468" end="3476" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332977" start="3576" end="3587" title="subsequence" label="subsequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411887" start="3593" end="3612" title="uniform convergence" label="converges uniformly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938217" start="3736" end="3757" title="Bohr compactification" label="Bohr compactification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529941" start="6145" end="6163" title="Peter–Weyl theorem" label="Peter–Weyl theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632419" start="6165" end="6183" title="Pontryagin duality" label="Pontryagin duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q806066" start="6188" end="6202" title="Banach algebra" label="Banach algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122103" start="6295" end="6324" title="locally compact abelian group" label="locally compact abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q610232" start="6463" end="6481" title="relatively compact" label="relatively compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938217" start="6731" end="6752" title="Bohr compactification" label="Bohr compactification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358061" start="8156" end="8173" title="speech processing" label="speech processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719318" start="8175" end="8198" title="audio signal processing" label="audio signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="8204" end="8219" title="synthesizer" label="music synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165717" start="8291" end="8299" title="waveform" label="waveform"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="8318" end="8326" title="Frequency" label="periodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870963" start="8411" end="8433" title="quasiperiodic function" label="quasiperiodic function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8740" end="8747" title="Harmonic series (music)#Partial" label="partial"/>
<link wikidata="Q261967" start="8752" end="8760" title="overtone" label="overtone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148098" start="8766" end="8774" title="harmonic" label="harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331774" start="8851" end="8872" title="fundamental frequency" label="fundamental frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="9026" end="9040" title="Fourier series" label="Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331774" start="9269" end="9290" title="fundamental frequency" label="fundamental frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q50700" start="9315" end="9326" title="coefficient" label="coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9891" end="9914" title="instantaneous phase#Instantaneous frequency" label="instantaneous frequency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9924" end="9931" title="Harmonic series (music)#Partial" label="partial"/>
<link wikidata="Q806263" start="10295" end="10306" title="bandlimited" label="bandlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870963" start="10852" end="10874" title="Quasiperiodic function" label="Quasiperiodic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q184743" start="10876" end="10894" title="Aperiodic function" label="Aperiodic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269516" start="10896" end="10916" title="Quasiperiodic tiling" label="Quasiperiodic tiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="10918" end="10932" title="Fourier series" label="Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q353280" start="10934" end="10952" title="Additive synthesis" label="Additive synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q263961" start="10954" end="10977" title="Harmonic series (music)" label="Harmonic series (music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122550" start="10979" end="10993" title="Computer music" label="Computer music"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405514" wikidata="Q7574301" url="?curid=405514" title="Speaker of the New Zealand House of Representatives">
<text>In New Zealand, the speaker of the House of Representatives, commonly known as the speaker of the House (), is the presiding officer and highest authority of the New Zealand House of Representatives. The individual who holds the position is elected by members of the House from among their number in the first session after each general election. They hold one of the highest-ranking offices in New Zealand. The current Speaker is Gerry Brownlee, who was elected on 5 December 2023.

The speaker&#x27;s role – similar to that of speakers in other countries that use the Westminster system – involves presiding over debates by determining who may speak, maintaining order during debate, and disciplining members who break the rules of the House. Aside from duties relating to presiding over the House, the speaker also performs administrative and procedural functions, and remains a member of Parliament (MP).
==Role==
===In the debating chamber===

The speaker&#x27;s most visible role is that of presiding over the House of Representatives when it is in session. The speaker presides from an elevated chair behind the Table in the debating chamber. This involves overseeing the order in which business is conducted, and determining who should speak at what time. The speaker is also responsible for granting or declining requests for certain events, such as a snap debate on a particular issue.

An important part of the speaker&#x27;s role is enforcing discipline in the House. They are expected to conduct the business of the House in an impartial manner. The speaker defers to &#x27;Standing Orders&#x27;, which are the written rules of conduct governing the business of the House. Included in these rules are certain powers available to the speaker to ensure reasonable behaviour by MPs, including the ability to order disruptive MPs to leave the debating chamber. MPs who feel one of these rules has been breached by another member can interrupt a debate by using a procedure known as a &#x27;point of order&#x27;. The speaker must then determine whether the complaint is just. Earlier speakers&#x27; rulings on similar points of order are referred to in considering the point raised. The clerk of the House, who sits directly in front of the speaker, assists the speaker in making such rulings.

By convention, speakers have traditionally been addressed inside the debating chamber as &quot;Mr Speaker&quot; or &quot;Madam Speaker&quot;.

===Outside the debating chamber===
The speaker is also responsible for directing and overseeing the administration and security of the buildings and grounds of Parliament, and the general provision of services to members. In doing so, the speaker consults and receives advice from the Parliamentary Service Commission, which comprises MPs from across the House.

As the most senior office of Parliament, the speaker has other statutory responsibilities, for example under the Electoral Act 1993. In this role a portion of the Parliament Buildings are given over to the speaker. Known as the Speaker&#x27;s Apartments these include his personal office, sitting rooms for visiting dignitaries, and a small residential flat which the speaker may or may not use as living quarters.

The speaker chairs three select committees:
*the Standing Orders Committee
*the Business Committee
*the Officers of Parliament Committee.

The Business Committee chaired by the speaker controls the organisation of the business of the House. Also on the committee, established after the first mixed member proportional (MMP) election in 1996, is the leader of the House, the Opposition shadow leader, and the party whips.

===Neutrality===
The speaker is expected to conduct the functions of the office in a neutral manner, even though the speaker is generally a member of the governing party. Only three people have held the office despite not being from the governing party. In 1923, Charles Statham (an independent, but formerly a member of the Reform Party) was backed by Reform so as not to endanger the party&#x27;s slim majority, and later retained his position under the United Party. In 1993, Peter Tapsell (a member of the Labour Party) was backed by the National Party for the same reason. Bill Barnard, who had been elected Speaker in 1936, resigned from the Labour Party in 1940 but retained his position.

Historically, a speaker lost the right to cast a vote, except when both sides were equally balanced. The speaker&#x27;s lack of a vote created problems for a governing party – when the party&#x27;s majority was small, the loss of the speaker&#x27;s vote could be problematic. Since the shift to MMP in 1996, however, the speaker has been counted for the purposes of casting party votes, to reflect the proportionality of the party&#x27;s vote in the general election. The practice has also been for the speaker to participate in personal votes, usually by proxy. In the event of a tied vote the motion in question lapses.

==Election==
The speaker is always a member of Parliament (MP), and is elected to the position by other MPs at the beginning of a parliamentary term, or when a speaker dies, resigns or is removed from the position (via a vote of no confidence) intra-term. The election of a speaker is presided over by the clerk of the House. It is unusual for an election to be contested, with only six votes since 1854 having more than one candidate. The first such contested vote did not occur for 69 years until 1923. It took 73 years for the second contested vote for Speaker in 1996. If there are two candidates, members vote in the lobbies for their preferred candidate. In the case of three or more candidates, a roll-call vote is conducted and the candidate with the fewest votes eliminated, with the process continuing (or reverting to a two-way run-off) until one candidate has a majority. Members may vote only if they are present in person: no proxy votes are permitted.

It is traditional for the newly elected speaker to pretend he or she did not want to accept the position; the speaker feigns resistance as they are &#x27;dragged&#x27; to their chair, in a practice dating from the days when British speakers risked execution if the news they reported to the king was displeasing.

After being elected by the House, the speaker-elect is formally confirmed in office by the governor-general. At the start of a term of Parliament, the newly confirmed speaker follows the tradition of claiming the privileges of the House.

==Precedence, salary and privileges==

Each day, prior to the sitting of the House of Representatives, the speaker and other officials travel in procession from the speaker&#x27;s personal apartments to the debating chamber. The procession includes the doorkeeper, the serjeant-at-arms, the speaker and the speaker&#x27;s assistant. When the speaker reaches the chamber, the serjeant-at-arms announces their arrival and places the mace on the Table of the House.

, the annual salary is NZ$296,007.

The office is third most important constitutionally, after the governor-general and the prime minister. (See New Zealand order of precedence.)

===Official dress===
Originally, speakers wore a gown and formal wig in the chamber. This practice has fallen into disuse since the 1990s. Speakers now generally wear what they feel appropriate, usually an academic gown of their highest held degree or a Māori cloak.

==Holders of the office==
The current Speaker is Gerry Brownlee, a member of the National Party.

Since the creation of Parliament, 32 people have held the office of speaker. Two people have held the office on more than one occasion. A full list of speakers is below.

;Key
† indicates Speaker died in office.



==Deputies==
There are currently four presiding officers appointed to deputise for the Speaker:

* Deputy Speaker: Barbara Kuriger
* First Assistant Speaker: Maureen Pugh
* Second Assistant Speaker: Greg O&#x27;Connor
* Third Assistant Speaker: Teanau Tuiono

Between 1854 and 1992, the Chairman of Committees chaired the House when in Committee of the whole House (i.e., taking a bill&#x27;s committee stage) and presided in the absence of the Speaker or when the Speaker so requested. These arrangements were based on those of the House of Commons of the United Kingdom. Until 1992, the Chairman of Committees was known as the Deputy Speaker only when presiding over the House. That year, the position of Deputy Speaker was made official, and the role of Chairman of Committees was discontinued. The first Deputy Speaker was appointed on 10 November 1992. Additionally, two Assistant Speakers are usually appointed. The first Assistant Speaker was appointed in 1996, replacing the position of Deputy Chairman of Committees, which had been established in 1975. The Deputy Speaker and Assistant Speakers take the chair and may exercise the Speaker&#x27;s authority in his or her absence. 

Notably during the 53rd New Zealand Parliament a succession of temporary Assistant Speakers were appointed. Ian McKelvie was appointed as a third Assistant Speaker from 1 March 2022 but only while the House was sitting with some members participating remotely during the COVID-19 pandemic. Two further temporary Assistant Speakers (David Bennett and Greg O&#x27;Connor) were added for the sitting week of 9 to 11 August 2022, to cover absences. Barbara Kuriger was added for the period of 22 to 26 November 2022, when the government accorded urgency to business as a result of the sitting time lost from the death of Elizabeth II. Poto Williams was reappointed as Assistant Speaker during the final week of the Parliament, from 29 to 31 August. A review of standing orders at the end of the Parliament recommended a permanent appointment of a third Assistant Speaker starting from the 54th Parliament.

=== Deputy speakers ===
;Key


=== First assistant speakers ===
;Key



=== Second assistant speakers ===
;Key


=== Third assistant speakers ===
;Key

=== Temporary assistant speakers ===
;Key


==See also==
*Speaker of the New Zealand Legislative Council
*Constitution of New Zealand

==Notes==
==References==
*

==External links==

*Office of the Speaker – New Zealand House of Representatives (Official)
*NZ Speakers of the House of Representatives, ©1986 Air New Zealand Almanac</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7574301" start="20" end="59" title="Speaker of the New Zealand House of Representatives" label="speaker of the House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574301" start="83" end="103" title="Speaker of the New Zealand House of Representatives" label="speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034424" start="162" end="198" title="New Zealand House of Representatives" label="New Zealand House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352603" start="431" end="445" title="Gerry Brownlee" label="Gerry Brownlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758037" start="529" end="537" title="Speaker (politics)" label="speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="570" end="588" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="882" end="902" title="member of Parliament" label="member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099281" start="1132" end="1148" title="debating chamber" label="debating chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119819" start="1632" end="1648" title="rules of conduct" label="rules of conduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099281" start="1852" end="1868" title="debating chamber" label="debating chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518216" start="1999" end="2013" title="point of order" label="point of order"/>
<link wikidata="Q24998470" start="2195" end="2213" title="Clerk of the New Zealand House of Representatives" label="clerk of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015565" start="2581" end="2616" title="New Zealand Parliament Buildings" label="buildings and grounds of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q117485300" start="2731" end="2763" title="New Zealand Parliamentary Service" label="Parliamentary Service Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610675" start="2922" end="2940" title="Electoral Act 1993" label="Electoral Act 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447671" start="3250" end="3266" title="select committee (parliamentary system)" label="select committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q133" start="3517" end="3542" title="mixed member proportional" label="mixed member proportional"/>
<link wikidata="Q39069874" start="3574" end="3593" title="Leader of the House (New Zealand)" label="leader of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q124005617" start="3633" end="3644" title="Party whip (New Zealand)" label="party whips"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082645" start="3910" end="3925" title="Charles Statham" label="Charles Statham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132236" start="3972" end="3984" title="Reform Party (New Zealand)" label="Reform Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495287" start="4103" end="4115" title="United Party (New Zealand)" label="United Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177251" start="4126" end="4139" title="Peter Tapsell (New Zealand politician)" label="Peter Tapsell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908036" start="4225" end="4237" title="Bill Barnard" label="Bill Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q133" start="4639" end="4642" title="Mixed-member proportional representation" label="MMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433039" start="4900" end="4905" title="proxy vote" label="proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q109236416" start="5097" end="5115" title="List of parliaments of New Zealand" label="parliamentary term"/>
<link wikidata="Q112980424" start="5466" end="5470" title="1923 Speaker of the New Zealand House of Representatives election" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q112980590" start="5534" end="5538" title="1996 Speaker of the New Zealand House of Representatives election" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q11626449" start="5671" end="5685" title="roll-call vote" label="roll-call vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q455690" start="6340" end="6356" title="Governor-General of New Zealand" label="governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6757" end="6773" title="serjeant-at-arms#New Zealand" label="serjeant-at-arms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6919" end="6923" title="Ceremonial mace#New Zealand" label="mace"/>
<link wikidata="Q455690" start="7051" end="7067" title="Governor-General of New Zealand" label="governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071117" start="7076" end="7090" title="Prime Minister of New Zealand" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016292" start="7097" end="7128" title="New Zealand order of precedence" label="New Zealand order of precedence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349227" start="7338" end="7351" title="academic gown" label="academic gown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7386" end="7397" title="Māori traditional textiles#Fine cloaks / kākahu" label="Māori cloak"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="7481" end="7495" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q18098422" start="7828" end="7843" title="Barbara Kuriger" label="Barbara Kuriger"/>
<link wikidata="Q17466674" start="7871" end="7883" title="Maureen Pugh" label="Maureen Pugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q28600237" start="7912" end="7930" title="Greg O&amp;#x27;Connor (politician)" label="Greg O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q99767963" start="7958" end="7971" title="Teanau Tuiono" label="Teanau Tuiono"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068085" start="8000" end="8022" title="Chairman of Committees (New Zealand House of Representatives)" label="Chairman of Committees"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="8246" end="8284" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q85738447" start="8922" end="8949" title="53rd New Zealand Parliament" label="53rd New Zealand Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732336" start="9011" end="9023" title="Ian McKelvie" label="Ian McKelvie"/>
<link wikidata="Q87250803" start="9174" end="9191" title="COVID-19 pandemic in New Zealand" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231315" start="9235" end="9248" title="David Bennett (New Zealand politician)" label="David Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q28600237" start="9253" end="9271" title="Greg O&amp;#x27;Connor (politician)" label="Greg O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18098422" start="9348" end="9363" title="Barbara Kuriger" label="Barbara Kuriger"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="9520" end="9532" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016818" start="9534" end="9547" title="Poto Williams" label="Poto Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q116674345" start="9788" end="9803" title="54th New Zealand Parliament" label="54th Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574302" start="10016" end="10062" title="Speaker of the New Zealand Legislative Council" label="Speaker of the New Zealand Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995141" start="10064" end="10091" title="Constitution of New Zealand" label="Constitution of New Zealand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405515" wikidata="Q1292266" url="?curid=405515" title="Edward Fredkin">
<text>Edward Fredkin (October 2, 1934 – June 13, 2023) was an American computer scientist, physicist and businessman who was an early pioneer of digital physics.

Fredkin&#x27;s primary contributions included work on reversible computing and cellular automata. While Konrad Zuse&#x27;s book, &quot;Calculating Space&quot; (1969), mentioned the importance of reversible computation, the Fredkin gate represented the essential breakthrough. In more recent work, he used the term &quot;digital philosophy&quot; (DP).

During his career, Fredkin was a professor of computer science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a Fairchild Distinguished Scholar at Caltech, a distinguished career professor at Carnegie Mellon University, and a Research Professor of Physics at Boston University.

==Early life and education==
Fredkin&#x27;s mother and father were both Russian-Jewish immigrants who met in Los Angeles, and he was the youngest child of four. His mother was a concert pianist, although she did not perform professionally. She died from cancer when he was 11. His father was a businessman but had lost everything in the 1929 stock market crash and as a result, the family was relatively poor. At times he lived with other families or with his older sister. Eventually, his father remarried, and he and his sister moved back in. As a child, he was both entrepreneurial and interested in science and how things work. He did various weekend and after-school things to earn money, eventually handling a large newspaper delivery route. At age 10 he bought chemistry supplies and made his own fireworks, which were then illegal in Los Angeles. He did poorly in school because he didn&#x27;t do homework. He graduated from John Marshall High School a semester early so that he could earn money for Caltech tuition and living expenses. Caltech later told him he had been admitted with the worst high school grades they had ever seen. He quit Caltech partway through his sophomore year.

In 1952, he joined the United States Air Force (USAF) to become a fighter pilot avoid being drafted into the Korean War. His computer career started in 1956 when the Air Force assigned him to MIT Lincoln Laboratory where he worked on the SAGE computer.

==Career==
Fredkin worked with a number of companies in the computer field and held academic positions at a number of universities. He was a computer programmer, a pilot, an advisor to businesses and governments, and a physicist. His main interests concerned digital computer-like models of basic processes in physics.

Fredkin&#x27;s initial focus was physics; however, he became involved with computers in 1956 when he was sent by the Air Force, where he had trained as a jet pilot, to the MIT Lincoln Laboratory. On completing his service in 1958, Fredkin was hired by J. C. R. Licklider to work at the research firm, Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman (BBN). After seeing the PDP-1 computer prototype at the Eastern Joint Computer Conference in Boston, in December 1959, Fredkin recommended that BBN purchase the very first PDP-1 to support research projects at BBN. The new hardware was initially delivered with no software whatsoever.

Fredkin wrote a PDP-1 assembler language called FRAP (Free of Rules Assembly Program, also sometimes called Fredkin&#x27;s Assembly Program), and its first operating system (OS). He organized and founded the Digital Equipment Computer Users&#x27; Society (DECUS) in 1961, and participated in its early projects. Working directly with Ben Gurley, the designer of the PDP-1, Fredkin designed significant modifications to the hardware to support time-sharing via the BBN Time-Sharing System. He invented and designed the first modern interrupt system, which Digital called the &quot;Sequence Break&quot;. He went on to become a contributor in the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI).

In 1962, he founded Information International, Inc., an early computer technology company which developed high-precision film-to-digital scanners, as well as other leading-edge hardware. The company became publicly traded and Fredkin became a millionaire.

In 1968, Marvin Minsky (who he had met at BBN) recruited Fredkin to work at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) as a full professor despite the fact that he had never graduated from college. From 1971 to 1974, Fredkin was the Director of Project MAC at MIT. (Project MAC was renamed the MIT Laboratory for Computer Science in 1976.) He spent a year at Caltech as a Fairchild Distinguished Scholar, teaching Nobel Prize-winning physicist Richard Feynman about computing and learning quantum mechanics from him. Then he was a Professor of Physics at Boston University for six years.

Fredkin had formal and informal associations with Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) over several decades. His later academic interests were in the area of digital mechanics, which is the study of discrete models of fundamental process in physics. Fredkin has been a Distinguished Career Professor of Computer Science at CMU, and also a visiting scientist at MIT Media Laboratory. , he was Distinguished Career Professor of Robotics at CMU.

Fredkin served as the founder or CEO of a diverse set of companies, including Information International, Three Rivers Computer Corporation, New England Television Corporation (owner of Boston&#x27;s then CBS affiliate WNEV on channel 7), and The Reliable Water Company (manufacturer of advanced sea water desalination plants).

Fredkin was broadly interested in computation, including hardware and software. He was the inventor of the trie data structure, radio transponders for vehicle identification, the concept of computer navigation for automobiles, the Fredkin gate, and the Billiard-Ball Computer Model for reversible computing. He has also been involved in computer vision, chess, and other areas of Artificial Intelligence research.

Fredkin also worked at the intersection of theoretical issues in the physics of computation with computational models of physics. He invented the SALT Cellular Automata family. Dan Miller designed and programmed the Busy Boxes implementation of Salt, with assistance from Suresh Kumar Devanathan. The early SALT models are 2+1 dimensional quasi-physical, reversible, universal cellular automata, that are second order in time, and that follow rules that model CPT reversibility.

==Fredkin&#x27;s version of digital philosophy==
Digital Philosophy (DP) is one type of digital physics/pancomputationalism, a school of philosophy which claims that all the physical processes of nature are forms of computation or information processing at the most fundamental level of reality. Pancomputationalism is related to several larger schools of philosophy: atomism, determinism, mechanism, monism, naturalism, philosophical realism, reductionism, and scientific empiricism.

Pancomputationalists believe that biology reduces to chemistry which reduces to physics which reduces to the computation of information. Fredkin&#x27;s career and achievements had much of their motivation in digital philosophy, a particular type of &quot;pancomputationalism&quot; described in Fredkin&#x27;s papers, including &quot;Introduction to Digital Philosophy&quot;, &quot;On the Soul&quot;, &quot;Finite Nature&quot;, &quot;A New Cosmogony&quot;, and &quot;Digital Mechanics&quot;.

Fredkin&#x27;s digital philosophy contains several fundamental ideas:

* Everything in physics and physical reality must have a digital informational representation.
* All changes in physical nature are consequences of digital informational processes.
* Nature is finite and digital.
* The traditional Judaeo-Christian concept of the soul has a counterpart in a static/dynamic soul defined in terms of digital philosophy.

==Later projects==
===PDP-1 Restoration Project===
Fredkin chaired the PDP-1 Restoration Project, which was able to restore and reactivate the Computer History Museum&#x27;s PDP-1 computer after seven months of work.

==Death==
Fredkin died in Brookline, Massachusetts, on June 13, 2023, at the age of 88.

==Awards and honors==
In 1984, Fredkin was awarded the Carnegie Mellon University Dickson Prize in Science, given annually to the person who has been judged to have made the most progress in a scientific field in the United States during that year. In 1999, CMU established the Fredkin professorship.

==Cultural references==
A profile of Fredkin, along with a readable explanation of some of his theories, can be found in the first part of &quot;Three Scientists and Their Gods&quot; by Robert Wright (1988). The section of the book covering Fredkin was excerpted in &quot;The Atlantic Monthly&quot; in April 1988.

According to biographer Robert Wright, the character Stephen Falken in the film &quot;WarGames&quot; was modeled after Fredkin.

==See also==
*Fredkin&#x27;s paradox

==References==
===Works cited===

==Further reading==
* 
* (Article contains extensive biographical content on Fredkin.)

==External links==

* Digital Philosophy.org 
* Did the Universe Just Happen? The Atlantic Monthly, by Robert Wright, 1988.
* Two-state, Reversible, Universal Cellular Automata in Three Dimensions by Edward Fredkin,
*Information International, Inc.
*Fredkin Prize World Champion team 1997 and Chess Pioneers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1292266" start="0" end="14" title="Edward Fredkin" label="Edward Fredkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="65" end="83" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="85" end="94" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q652719" start="139" end="154" title="digital physics" label="digital physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q185410" start="211" end="231" title="reversible computing" label="reversible computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q189156" start="236" end="253" title="cellular automata" label="cellular automata"/>
<link wikidata="Q60093" start="261" end="272" title="Konrad Zuse" label="Konrad Zuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018876" start="292" end="309" title="Calculating Space" label="Calculating Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q338556" start="380" end="392" title="Fredkin gate" label="Fredkin gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="579" end="616" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="655" end="662" title="Caltech" label="Caltech"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="700" end="726" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="767" end="784" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="1124" end="1147" title="1929 stock market crash" label="1929 stock market crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246887" start="1720" end="1745" title="John Marshall High School (Los Angeles)" label="John Marshall High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="2006" end="2029" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q618694" start="2049" end="2062" title="fighter pilot" label="fighter pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="2092" end="2102" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138607" start="2175" end="2197" title="MIT Lincoln Laboratory" label="MIT Lincoln Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q963418" start="2221" end="2234" title="SAGE computer" label="SAGE computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138607" start="2729" end="2751" title="MIT Lincoln Laboratory" label="MIT Lincoln Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q92778" start="2809" end="2827" title="J. C. R. Licklider" label="J. C. R. Licklider"/>
<link wikidata="Q891612" start="2858" end="2883" title="Bolt Beranek &amp;amp; Newman" label="Bolt Beranek &amp;amp; Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758866" start="2908" end="2913" title="PDP-1" label="PDP-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="3192" end="3210" title="assembler language" label="assembler language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="3326" end="3342" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011192" start="3378" end="3424" title="Digital Equipment Computer Users&amp;#x27; Society" label="Digital Equipment Computer Users&amp;#x27; Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q63862312" start="3634" end="3657" title="BBN Time-Sharing System" label="BBN Time-Sharing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q220764" start="3701" end="3710" title="interrupt" label="interrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="3823" end="3846" title="Artificial Intelligence" label="Artificial Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030735" start="3874" end="3905" title="Information International, Inc." label="Information International, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q204815" start="4120" end="4133" title="Marvin Minsky" label="Marvin Minsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="4191" end="4228" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354917" start="4361" end="4372" title="Project MAC" label="Project MAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="4475" end="4482" title="Caltech" label="Caltech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="4530" end="4541" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q39246" start="4560" end="4575" title="Richard Feynman" label="Richard Feynman"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="4671" end="4688" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="4755" end="4781" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q652719" start="4859" end="4876" title="digital physics" label="digital mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373549" start="5062" end="5075" title="MIT Media Lab" label="MIT Media Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051440" start="5250" end="5283" title="Three Rivers Computer Corporation" label="Three Rivers Computer Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="5349" end="5352" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564679" start="5363" end="5367" title="WHDH (TV)" label="WNEV"/>
<link wikidata="Q190873" start="5450" end="5462" title="desalination" label="desalination"/>
<link wikidata="Q387015" start="5580" end="5584" title="trie" label="trie"/>
<link wikidata="Q338556" start="5704" end="5716" title="Fredkin gate" label="Fredkin gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911818" start="5726" end="5748" title="Billiard-Ball Computer" label="Billiard-Ball Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q185410" start="5759" end="5779" title="reversible computing" label="reversible computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q844240" start="5810" end="5825" title="computer vision" label="computer vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q652719" start="6456" end="6471" title="digital physics" label="digital physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q652719" start="6472" end="6491" title="pancomputationalism" label="pancomputationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178668" start="6736" end="6743" title="atomism" label="atomism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131133" start="6745" end="6756" title="determinism" label="determinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103443" start="6758" end="6767" title="Mechanism (philosophy)" label="mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178801" start="6769" end="6775" title="monism" label="monism"/>
<link wikidata="Q56000" start="6777" end="6787" title="Naturalism (philosophy)" label="naturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q735590" start="6789" end="6810" title="philosophical realism" label="philosophical realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q206829" start="6812" end="6824" title="reductionism" label="reductionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="6830" end="6851" title="scientific empiricism" label="scientific empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359782" start="7648" end="7664" title="Judaeo-Christian" label="Judaeo-Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="7680" end="7684" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758866" start="7840" end="7845" title="PDP-1" label="PDP-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q964035" start="7912" end="7935" title="Computer History Museum" label="Computer History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49142" start="8013" end="8037" title="Brookline, Massachusetts" label="Brookline, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="8131" end="8157" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8158" end="8182" title="Dickson Prize#Dickson Prize in Science" label="Dickson Prize in Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123126" start="8564" end="8577" title="Robert Wright (journalist)" label="Robert Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="8650" end="8670" title="The Atlantic Monthly" label="The Atlantic Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123126" start="8717" end="8730" title="Robert Wright (journalist)" label="Robert Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q504697" start="8779" end="8787" title="WarGames" label="WarGames"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499361" start="8836" end="8858" title="Fredkin&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Fredkin&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030735" start="9199" end="9230" title="Information International, Inc." label="Information International, Inc."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405517" wikidata="Q883006" url="?curid=405517" title="Blue-gray gnatcatcher">
<text>The blue-gray gnatcatcher (Polioptila caerulea) is a very small gnatcatcher native to North America. 
==Description==
It is in length, 6.3 in (16 cm) in wingspan, and weighing only . Adult males are blue-gray on the upperparts with white underparts, slender dark bill, and a long black tail edged in white. Females are less blue, while juveniles are greenish-gray. Both sexes have a white eye ring.
==Distribution and habitat==
The blue-gray gnatcatcher&#x27;s breeding habitat includes open deciduous woods and shrublands in southern Ontario, the eastern and southwestern United States, and Mexico. Though gnatcatcher species are common and increasing in number while expanding to the northeast, it is the only one to breed in Eastern North America. They migrate to the southern United States, Mexico, northern Central America (Belize, Guatemala, and Honduras), Cuba, the Bahamas, the Turks and Caicos Islands, and the Cayman Islands. 

==Diet and behaviour==
Blue-gray gnatcatchers prefer humid areas with large leaves, woodlands, and more open sandy areas with sparse trees where they mainly eat insects, insect eggs, and spiders. The males often work to build nests, help incubate and raise the young, as well as feed the children, often thought to be a mother&#x27;s role. Their nests are often built far out on a tree&#x27;s branch with spider silks and lichen plants holding them together. They may hover over foliage while snatching prey (gleaning), or fly to catch insects in flight (hawking). The tail is often held upright while defending territory or searching for food.

==Sounds==

The songs (and calls) are often heard on breeding grounds, (usually away from nest) and occasionally heard other times of the year. Calls: &quot;zkreee, zkreee, zkreee&quot;, Songs: &quot;szpree zpree spreeeeey spree spre sprzrreeeee&quot;

==Breeding==
Both parents build a cone-like nest on a horizontal tree branch, and share feeding the young. The incubation period is 10–15 days for both sexes, where the female lays a clutch of 4–5 eggs. The blue-gray gnatcatcher can raise up to two broods in a season.
== References ==

==External links==
* Blue-gray gnatcatcher - &quot;Polioptila caerula&quot; - USGS Patuxent Bird Identification InfoCenter
* from Turks and Caicos at 
* 
* Blue-gray gnatcatcher Bird Sound at Florida Museum of Natural History
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q883006" start="4" end="25" title="Blue-gray gnatcatcher" label="blue-gray gnatcatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q752549" start="64" end="75" title="gnatcatcher" label="gnatcatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="86" end="99" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="492" end="501" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="535" end="542" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189650" start="548" end="555" title="Eastern United States" label="eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="560" end="586" title="southwestern United States" label="southwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="592" end="598" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="756" end="763" title="bird migration" label="migrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="812" end="827" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q242" start="829" end="835" title="Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="837" end="846" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="852" end="860" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="863" end="867" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="873" end="880" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18221" start="886" end="910" title="Turks and Caicos Islands" label="Turks and Caicos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5785" start="920" end="934" title="Cayman Islands" label="Cayman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241565" start="1022" end="1031" title="Woodland" label="woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="1099" end="1106" title="Insect" label="insects"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="1108" end="1119" title="Insect egg" label="insect eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357" start="1125" end="1131" title="spider" label="spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q954226" start="1176" end="1184" title="Egg incubation" label="incubate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="1360" end="1366" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848703" start="1447" end="1455" title="gleaning (birds)" label="gleaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685100" start="1493" end="1500" title="hawking (birds)" label="hawking"/>
<link wikidata="Q193566" start="1948" end="1965" title="incubation period" label="incubation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750820" start="2020" end="2026" title="Clutch (eggs)" label="clutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q18221" start="2254" end="2270" title="Turks and Caicos" label="Turks and Caicos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405525" wikidata="Q7776091" url="?curid=405525" title="The World and the Child">
<text>The World and the Child () is an anonymous English morality play. Its source is a late 14th-century or 15th-century poem &quot;The Mirror of the Periods of Man&#x27;s Life&quot;, from which the play borrows significantly while reducing the number of characters. It is thought to have influenced William Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Henry IV, Part 1&quot;.

==Date==
The earliest surviving edition (printed by Wynkyn de Worde) is dated 17 July 1522, although the play is believed to have been written earlier than that and to have circulated in manuscript form. A bookseller in Oxford records the sale of &quot;mundus a play&quot; in 1520. T. W. Craik suggests a date of 1508 while MacCracken offers sometime in the late 15th century.

==References==
==Sources==

* Craik, Thomas Wallace. 1958. &quot;The Tudor Interlude: Stage, Costume and Acting.&quot; Leicester: Leicester UP.
* Lester, G. A., ed. 1981. &quot;Three Late Medieval Morality Plays.&quot; The New Mermaids ser. London: A&amp;C Black. . 
* MacCracken, Henry Noble. 1908. &quot;A Source of &quot;Mundus et Infans&quot;.&quot; &quot;PMLA&quot; 23.3: 486-496.
* Southern, Richard. 1973. &quot;The Staging of Plays Before Shakespeare.&quot; London: Faber. .
* Wickham, Glynne, ed. 1976. &quot;English Moral Interludes.&quot; London: Dent. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q929047" start="51" end="64" title="morality play" label="morality play"/>
<link wikidata="Q95074" start="250" end="260" title="Character (arts)" label="characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="295" end="314" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q631855" start="328" end="344" title="Henry IV, Part 1" label="Henry IV, Part 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q725733" start="405" end="420" title="Wynkyn de Worde" label="Wynkyn de Worde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808024" start="439" end="443" title="1522 in literature" label="1522"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348837" start="666" end="670" title="1508 in literature" label="1508"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405532" wikidata="Q211922" url="?curid=405532" title="W and Z bosons">
<text>In particle physics, the W and Z bosons are vector bosons that are together known as the weak bosons or more generally as the intermediate vector bosons. These elementary particles mediate the weak interaction; the respective symbols are , , and . The  bosons have either a positive or negative electric charge of 1 elementary charge and are each other&#x27;s antiparticles. The  boson is electrically neutral and is its own antiparticle. The three particles each have a spin of 1. The  bosons have a magnetic moment, but the has none. All three of these particles are very short-lived, with a half-life of about . Their experimental discovery was pivotal in establishing what is now called the Standard Model of particle physics.

The  bosons are named after the &quot;weak&quot; force. The physicist Steven Weinberg named the additional particle the &quot; particle&quot;, and later gave the explanation that it was the last additional particle needed by the model. The  bosons had already been named, and the  bosons were named for having &quot;zero&quot; electric charge.

The two  bosons are verified mediators of neutrino absorption and emission. During these processes, the  boson charge induces electron or positron emission or absorption, thus causing nuclear transmutation.

The  boson mediates the transfer of momentum, spin and energy when neutrinos scatter &quot;elastically&quot; from matter (a process which conserves charge). Such behavior is almost as common as inelastic neutrino interactions and may be observed in bubble chambers upon irradiation with neutrino beams. The  boson is not involved in the absorption or emission of electrons or positrons. Whenever an electron is observed as a new free particle, suddenly moving with kinetic energy, it is inferred to be a result of a neutrino interacting with the electron (with the momentum transfer via the Z boson) since this behavior happens more often when the neutrino beam is present. In this process, the neutrino simply strikes the electron (via exchange of a boson) and then scatters away from it, transferring some of the neutrino&#x27;s momentum to the electron.

==Basic properties==
These bosons are among the heavyweights of the elementary particles. With masses of and , respectively, the and  bosons are almost 80 times as massive as the proton – heavier, even, than entire iron atoms.

Their high masses limit the range of the weak interaction. By way of contrast, the photon is the force carrier of the electromagnetic force and has zero mass, consistent with the infinite range of electromagnetism; the hypothetical graviton is also expected to have zero mass. (Although gluons are also presumed to have zero mass, the range of the strong nuclear force is limited for different reasons; &quot;see Color confinement&quot;.)

All three bosons have particle spin &quot;s&quot; = 1. The emission of a or  boson either lowers or raises the electric charge of the emitting particle by one unit, and also alters the spin by one unit. At the same time, the emission or absorption of a  boson can change the type of the particle – for example changing a strange quark into an up quark. The neutral Z boson cannot change the electric charge of any particle, nor can it change any other of the so-called &quot;charges&quot; (such as strangeness, baryon number, charm, etc.). The emission or absorption of a  boson can only change the spin, momentum, and energy of the other particle. (See also &quot;Weak neutral current&quot;.)

==Relations to the weak nuclear force==

The and  bosons are carrier particles that mediate the weak nuclear force, much as the photon is the carrier particle for the electromagnetic force.

===W bosons===
The  bosons are best known for their role in nuclear decay. Consider, for example, the beta decay of cobalt-60.

This reaction does not involve the whole cobalt-60 nucleus, but affects only one of its 33 neutrons. The neutron is converted into a proton while also emitting an electron (often called a beta particle in this context) and an electron antineutrino:

Again, the neutron is not an elementary particle but a composite of an up quark and two down quarks (). It is one of the down quarks that interacts in beta decay, turning into an up quark to form a proton (). At the most fundamental level, then, the weak force changes the flavour of a single quark:
which is immediately followed by decay of the itself:

===Z bosons ===
The  boson is its own antiparticle. Thus, all of its flavour quantum numbers and charges are zero. The exchange of a  boson between particles, called a neutral current interaction, therefore leaves the interacting particles unaffected, except for a transfer of spin and/or momentum.

 boson interactions involving neutrinos have distinct signatures: They provide the only known mechanism for elastic scattering of neutrinos in matter; neutrinos are almost as likely to scatter elastically (via  boson exchange) as inelastically (via W boson exchange). Weak neutral currents via  boson exchange were confirmed shortly thereafter (also in 1973), in a neutrino experiment in the Gargamelle bubble chamber at CERN.

==Predictions of the W, W and Z bosons==

Following the success of quantum electrodynamics in the 1950s, attempts were undertaken to formulate a similar theory of the weak nuclear force. This culminated around 1968 in a unified theory of electromagnetism and weak interactions by Sheldon Glashow, Steven Weinberg, and Abdus Salam, for which they shared the 1979 Nobel Prize in Physics. Their electroweak theory postulated not only the  bosons necessary to explain beta decay, but also a new  boson that had never been observed.

The fact that the and  bosons have mass while photons are massless was a major obstacle in developing electroweak theory. These particles are accurately described by an SU(2) gauge theory, but the bosons in a gauge theory must be massless. As a case in point, the photon is massless because electromagnetism is described by a U(1) gauge theory. Some mechanism is required to break the SU(2) symmetry, giving mass to the and in the process. The Higgs mechanism, first put forward by the 1964 PRL symmetry breaking papers, fulfills this role. It requires the existence of another particle, the Higgs boson, which has since been found at the Large Hadron Collider. Of the four components of a Goldstone boson created by the Higgs field, three are absorbed by the , , and  bosons to form their longitudinal components, and the remainder appears as the spin-0 Higgs boson.

The combination of the SU(2) gauge theory of the weak interaction, the electromagnetic interaction, and the Higgs mechanism is known as the Glashow–Weinberg–Salam model. Today it is widely accepted as one of the pillars of the Standard Model of particle physics, particularly given the 2012 discovery of the Higgs boson by the CMS and ATLAS experiments.

The model predicts that and  bosons have the following masses:
: formula_1
where formula_2 is the SU(2) gauge coupling, formula_3 is the U(1) gauge coupling, and formula_4 is the Higgs vacuum expectation value.

==Discovery==

Unlike beta decay, the observation of neutral current interactions that involve particles requires huge investments in particle accelerators and particle detectors, such as are available in only a few high-energy physics laboratories in the world (and then only after 1983). This is because  bosons behave in somewhat the same manner as photons, but do not become important until the energy of the interaction is comparable with the relatively huge mass of the  boson.

The discovery of the and  bosons was considered a major success for CERN. First, in 1973, came the observation of neutral current interactions as predicted by electroweak theory. The huge Gargamelle bubble chamber photographed the tracks produced by neutrino interactions and observed events where a neutrino interacted but did not produce a corresponding lepton. This is a hallmark of a neutral current interaction and is interpreted as a neutrino exchanging an unseen  boson with a proton or neutron in the bubble chamber. The neutrino is otherwise undetectable, so the only observable effect is the momentum imparted to the proton or neutron by the interaction.

The discovery of the and  bosons themselves had to wait for the construction of a particle accelerator powerful enough to produce them. The first such machine that became available was the Super Proton Synchrotron, where unambiguous signals of  bosons were seen in January 1983 during a series of experiments made possible by Carlo Rubbia and Simon van der Meer. The actual experiments were called UA1 (led by Rubbia) and UA2 (led by Pierre Darriulat), and were the collaborative effort of many people. Van der Meer was the driving force on the accelerator end (stochastic cooling). UA1 and UA2 found the  boson a few months later, in May 1983. Rubbia and van der Meer were promptly awarded the 1984 Nobel Prize in Physics, a most unusual step for the conservative Nobel Foundation.
The , , and  bosons, together with the photon (), comprise the four gauge bosons of the electroweak interaction.

==Measurements of W boson mass==
In May 2024, the Particle Data Group estimated the World Average mass for the W boson to be 80369.2 ± 13.3 MeV, based on experiments to date. 

As of 2021, experimental measurements of the W boson mass had been similarly assessed to converge around , all consistent with one another and with the Standard Model. 

In April 2022, a new analysis of historical data from the Fermilab Tevatron collider before its closure in 2011 determined the mass of the W boson to be , which was seven standard deviations above that predicted by the Standard Model. Besides being inconsistent with the Standard Model, the new measurement was also inconsistent with previous measurements such as ATLAS. This suggests that either the old or the new measurements had an unexpected systematic error, such as an undetected quirk in the equipment. This led to careful reevaluation of this data analysis and other historical measurement, as well as the planning of future measurements to confirm the potential new result. Fermilab Deputy Director Joseph Lykken reiterated that &quot;... the (new) measurement needs to be confirmed by another experiment before it can be interpreted fully.&quot; 

In 2023, an improved ATLAS experiment measured the W boson mass at , aligning with predictions from the Standard Model.

The Particle Data Group convened a working group on the Tevatron measurement of W boson mass, including W-mass experts from all hadron collider experiments to date, to understand the discrepancy. In May 2024 they concluded that the CDF measurement was an outlier, and the best estimate of the mass came from leaving out that measurement from the meta-analysis. &quot;The corresponding value of the W boson mass is mW = 80369.2 ± 13.3 MeV, which we quote as the World Average.&quot; 

In September 2024, the CMS experiment measured the W boson mass at 80 360.2 ± 9.9 MeV. This was the most precise measurement to date, obtained from observations of a large number of formula_5 decays.

==Decay==
The and  bosons decay to fermion pairs but neither the nor the  bosons have sufficient energy to decay into the highest-mass top quark. Neglecting phase space effects and higher order corrections, simple estimates of their branching fractions can be calculated from the coupling constants.

===W bosons===
 bosons can decay to a lepton and antilepton (one of them charged and another neutral) or to a quark and antiquark of complementary types (with opposite electric charges and ). The decay width of the W boson to a quark–antiquark pair is proportional to the corresponding squared CKM matrix element and the number of quark colours, The decay widths for the W boson are then proportional to:

Here, , , denote the three flavours of leptons (more exactly, the positive charged antileptons). , , denote the three flavours of neutrinos. The other particles, starting with and , all denote quarks and antiquarks (factor is applied). The various formula_6 denote the corresponding CKM matrix coefficients.

Unitarity of the CKM matrix implies that
formula_7
formula_8 thus each of two quark rows Therefore, the leptonic branching ratios of the  boson are approximately formula_9formula_10formula_11 . The hadronic branching ratio is dominated by the CKM-favored and final states. The sum of the hadronic branching ratios has been measured experimentally to be , with 

===Z0 boson===

 bosons decay into a fermion and its antiparticle. As the  boson is a mixture of the pre-symmetry-breaking and  bosons (see weak mixing angle), each vertex factor includes a factor formula_12 where formula_13 is the third component of the weak isospin of the fermion (the &quot;charge&quot; for the weak force), formula_14 is the electric charge of the fermion (in units of the elementary charge), and formula_15 is the weak mixing angle. Because the weak isospin formula_16 is different for fermions of different chirality, either left-handed or right-handed, the coupling is different as well.

The &quot;relative&quot; strengths of each coupling can be estimated by considering that the decay rates include the square of these factors, and all possible diagrams (e.g. sum over quark families, and left and right contributions). The results tabulated below are just estimates, since they only include tree-level interaction diagrams in the Fermi theory.
:: To keep the notation compact, the table uses formula_17
:: * The impossible decay into a top quark–antiquark pair is left out of the table.
:: Subheadings &#x27; and &#x27; denote the chirality or &quot;handedness&quot; of the fermions.

In 2018, the CMS collaboration observed the first exclusive decay of the  boson to a ψ meson and a lepton–antilepton pair.

==See also==
* List of particles
* Weak charge
* : analogous pair of bosons predicted by the Grand Unified Theory

==Footnotes==
==References==
==External links==
* The Review of Particle Physics, the ultimate source of information on particle properties.
* The W and Z particles: a personal recollection by Pierre Darriulat
* When CERN saw the end of the alphabet by Daniel Denegri
* W and Z particles at Hyperphysics</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="3" end="19" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q211922" start="25" end="39" title="W and Z bosons" label="W and Z bosons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563571" start="44" end="56" title="vector boson" label="vector boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q211922" start="89" end="100" title="W and Z bosons" label="weak bosons"/>
<link wikidata="Q211922" start="126" end="152" title="W and Z bosons" label="intermediate vector bosons"/>
<link wikidata="Q43116" start="160" end="179" title="elementary particle" label="elementary particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24364" start="181" end="188" title="force carrier" label="mediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11418" start="193" end="209" title="weak interaction" label="weak interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="295" end="310" title="electric charge" label="electric charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101" start="316" end="333" title="elementary charge" label="elementary charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q182717" start="360" end="372" title="antiparticle" label="antiparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990328" start="402" end="409" title="neutral particle" label="neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="471" end="475" title="spin (physics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="594" end="603" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338" start="695" end="709" title="Standard Model" label="Standard Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="713" end="729" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="792" end="801" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179282" start="802" end="817" title="Steven Weinberg" label="Steven Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="1119" end="1127" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q202651" start="1261" end="1282" title="nuclear transmutation" label="nuclear transmutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042929" start="1376" end="1387" title="elastic scattering" label="elastically"/>
<link wikidata="Q192970" start="1534" end="1548" title="bubble chamber" label="bubble chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="2238" end="2242" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="2322" end="2328" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="2358" end="2362" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="2363" end="2367" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="2454" end="2460" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24364" start="2468" end="2481" title="force carrier" label="force carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="2568" end="2584" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q103585" start="2603" end="2611" title="graviton" label="graviton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299" start="2658" end="2663" title="gluon" label="gluon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11415" start="2719" end="2739" title="strong nuclear force" label="strong nuclear force"/>
<link wikidata="Q505724" start="2784" end="2801" title="Color confinement" label="Color confinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="2833" end="2846" title="spin (physics)" label="particle spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763" start="3132" end="3145" title="strange quark" label="strange quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732" start="3154" end="3162" title="up quark" label="up quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q73792" start="3286" end="3293" title="charge (physics)" label="charges"/>
<link wikidata="Q736429" start="3309" end="3320" title="strangeness" label="strangeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q110346" start="3322" end="3335" title="baryon number" label="baryon number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639620" start="3337" end="3342" title="charm (quantum number)" label="charm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634552" start="3476" end="3496" title="Weak neutral current" label="Weak neutral current"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="3757" end="3770" title="nuclear decay" label="nuclear decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="3799" end="3809" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q932960" start="3813" end="3822" title="cobalt-60" label="cobalt-60"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="3876" end="3883" title="atomic nucleus" label="nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103531" start="4013" end="4026" title="beta particle" label="beta particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732" start="4146" end="4154" title="up quark" label="up quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745" start="4163" end="4173" title="down quark" label="down quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q874733" start="4348" end="4355" title="flavour (particle physics)" label="flavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204340" start="4460" end="4480" title="truly neutral particle" label="its own antiparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q874733" start="4499" end="4522" title="flavour quantum numbers" label="flavour quantum numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q73792" start="4527" end="4534" title="charge (physics)" label="charges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634552" start="4598" end="4613" title="neutral current" label="neutral current"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="4719" end="4727" title="momentum" label="momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="4760" end="4768" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042929" start="4838" end="4856" title="elastic scattering" label="elastic scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q675005" start="5122" end="5132" title="Gargamelle" label="Gargamelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192970" start="5133" end="5147" title="bubble chamber" label="bubble chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="5151" end="5155" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q234881" start="5225" end="5248" title="quantum electrodynamics" label="quantum electrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q107420" start="5438" end="5453" title="Sheldon Glashow" label="Sheldon Glashow"/>
<link wikidata="Q179282" start="5455" end="5470" title="Steven Weinberg" label="Steven Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q28189" start="5476" end="5487" title="Abdus Salam" label="Abdus Salam"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="5520" end="5542" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q466416" start="5550" end="5568" title="electroweak theory" label="electroweak theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5856" end="5861" title="special unitary group#The group SU(2)" label="SU(2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q214850" start="5862" end="5874" title="gauge theory" label="gauge theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="5951" end="5957" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500617" start="6013" end="6017" title="unitary group" label="U(1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q747702" start="6131" end="6146" title="Higgs mechanism" label="Higgs mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000726" start="6173" end="6206" title="1964 PRL symmetry breaking papers" label="1964 PRL symmetry breaking papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q402" start="6279" end="6290" title="Higgs boson" label="Higgs boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605" start="6326" end="6347" title="Large Hadron Collider" label="Large Hadron Collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153441" start="6377" end="6392" title="Goldstone boson" label="Goldstone boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q466416" start="6696" end="6724" title="Glashow–Weinberg–Salam model" label="Glashow–Weinberg–Salam model"/>
<link wikidata="Q659478" start="6883" end="6886" title="Compact Muon Solenoid" label="CMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q299002" start="6891" end="6896" title="ATLAS experiment" label="ATLAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137397" start="7096" end="7120" title="vacuum expectation value" label="vacuum expectation value"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="7257" end="7277" title="particle accelerator" label="particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q736634" start="7283" end="7300" title="particle detector" label="particle detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="7339" end="7358" title="high-energy physics" label="high-energy physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q547784" start="8463" end="8487" title="Super Proton Synchrotron" label="Super Proton Synchrotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q187199" start="8600" end="8612" title="Carlo Rubbia" label="Carlo Rubbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104779" start="8617" end="8635" title="Simon van der Meer" label="Simon van der Meer"/>
<link wikidata="Q674528" start="8672" end="8675" title="UA1 experiment" label="UA1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157111" start="8696" end="8699" title="UA2 experiment" label="UA2"/>
<link wikidata="Q29937615" start="8708" end="8724" title="Pierre Darriulat" label="Pierre Darriulat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536308" start="8836" end="8854" title="stochastic cooling" label="stochastic cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="9039" end="9055" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105580" start="9125" end="9136" title="gauge boson" label="gauge boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q466416" start="9145" end="9168" title="electroweak interaction" label="electroweak interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054540" start="9221" end="9240" title="Particle Data Group" label="Particle Data Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q337641" start="9576" end="9584" title="Fermilab" label="Fermilab"/>
<link wikidata="Q944533" start="9585" end="9593" title="Tevatron" label="Tevatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880301" start="10227" end="10240" title="Joseph Lykken" label="Joseph Lykken"/>
<link wikidata="Q44363" start="11218" end="11225" title="fermion" label="fermion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778" start="11318" end="11327" title="top quark" label="top quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q370559" start="11416" end="11434" title="branching fraction" label="branching fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193095" start="11463" end="11480" title="coupling constant" label="coupling constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q82586" start="11522" end="11528" title="lepton" label="lepton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718" start="11594" end="11599" title="quark" label="quark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11614" end="11636" title="quark#Electric charge" label="of complementary types"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870024" start="11680" end="11691" title="decay width" label="decay width"/>
<link wikidata="Q253728" start="11778" end="11788" title="Cabibbo–Kobayashi–Maskawa matrix" label="CKM matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q380528" start="11821" end="11828" title="color charge" label="colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q82586" start="11929" end="11935" title="lepton" label="lepton"/>
<link wikidata="Q182717" start="11973" end="11983" title="antiparticle" label="antilepton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718" start="12083" end="12088" title="quark" label="quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q253728" start="12173" end="12183" title="Cabibbo–Kobayashi–Maskawa matrix" label="CKM matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q727103" start="12199" end="12208" title="Unitary matrix" label="Unitarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q370559" start="12312" end="12327" title="branching ratio" label="branching ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q101667" start="12487" end="12493" title="hadron" label="hadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q736716" start="12666" end="12683" title="spontaneous symmetry breaking" label="symmetry-breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q452412" start="12701" end="12718" title="Weinberg angle" label="weak mixing angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q386272" start="12726" end="12739" title="Feynman diagram" label="vertex factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q678322" start="12816" end="12828" title="weak isospin" label="weak isospin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="12907" end="12922" title="electric charge" label="electric charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101" start="12955" end="12972" title="elementary charge" label="elementary charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q452412" start="12997" end="13014" title="Weinberg angle" label="weak mixing angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305173" start="13091" end="13100" title="chirality (physics)" label="chirality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13109" end="13136" title="Standard Model (mathematical formulation)#Right handed singlets, left handed doublets" label="left-handed or right-handed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="13267" end="13277" title="decay rate" label="decay rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406423" start="13519" end="13531" title="Fermi theory" label="Fermi theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778" start="13625" end="13634" title="top quark" label="top quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305173" start="13720" end="13729" title="chirality (physics)" label="chirality"/>
<link wikidata="Q876518" start="13859" end="13866" title="J/psi meson" label="ψ meson"/>
<link wikidata="Q82586" start="13873" end="13879" title="lepton" label="lepton"/>
<link wikidata="Q783766" start="13913" end="13930" title="List of particles" label="List of particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252660" start="13933" end="13944" title="Weak charge" label="Weak charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q382037" start="13991" end="14011" title="Grand Unified Theory" label="Grand Unified Theory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405533" wikidata="Q725733" url="?curid=405533" title="Wynkyn de Worde">
<text>Wynkyn de Worde (; died , London) was a printer and publisher in London known for his work with William Caxton, and is recognised as the first to popularise the products of the printing press in England.

==Name==
Wynkyn de Worde was a German immigrant to England. His name is given in the forms &quot;Wynkyn de Worde&quot;, &quot;Wynken de Worde&quot;, &quot;Wynkyn de Word&quot;, &quot;Wijnkijn de Worde&quot;, and &quot;Winandus van Worden&quot; (&quot;Wynkyn&quot; is a diminutive of &quot;Wynand&quot;).
 It is also given 15 times in the sacrist&#x27;s roll of Westminster Abbey and in city records as variants of &quot;John Wynkyn&quot;, including &quot;John Wynkyn&quot;, &quot;Johannes Wynkyn&quot;, &quot;Jan Wynkyn&quot;, and &quot;Jan van Wynkyn&quot;.
 He is also recorded as &quot;Willelmo Wynkyn&quot; (&quot;William Wynkyn&quot;) once and as &quot;Mr. Wylkyns&quot; eight times. His son Richard is recorded as &quot;Richard Wynkyn&quot; and &quot;Rycharde de Worde&quot;.

Some authors have therefore concluded that his real name was John Wynkyn (or Wynand) and that &quot;de Worde&quot; was &quot;merely a place name,&quot; while others have concluded that his real name was Wynkyn (or Wynand) de Worde and that &quot;John&quot; was an added name: &quot;It is… possible that John Wynkyn was an Anglicized alias devised by de Worde himself for occasional use—though why, and for what occasions, remains obscure.&quot;

== Life and work ==
De Worde was likely born in either Wörth an der Sauer in Alsace or Wörth am Rhein in the Palatinate. Traditionally, he was believed to have accompanied William Caxton to England in 1476; more recently, it has been argued that de Worde actually arrived around 1481, and that Caxton brought him to England to counter the competition of a second printer, John Lettou, who set up a press in London in 1480. Sometime while in England, de Worde married a woman named Elizabeth. De Worde improved the quality of Caxton&#x27;s product; he was, in this view, &quot;England&#x27;s first typographer&quot;. In 1495, following Caxton&#x27;s death in 1492 and a three-year litigation, de Worde took over Caxton&#x27;s print shop.

De Worde is generally credited for moving English printing away from its late-medieval beginnings and toward a &quot;modern&quot; model of functioning. Caxton had depended on noble patrons to sustain his enterprise; while de Worde enjoyed the support of patrons too (principally Margaret Beaufort, mother of King Henry VII), he shifted his emphasis to the creation of relatively inexpensive books for a commercial audience and the beginnings of a mass market. Where Caxton had used paper imported from the Low Countries, de Worde exploited the product of John Tate, the first English papermaker. Manuscripts that served as early printer&#x27;s copy, studied by Gavin Bone was the earliest attempt to identify and examine setting copy for an incunable edition of a Middle English work. De Worde published more than 400 books in over 800 editions (though some are extant only in single copies and many others are extremely rare). His greatest success, in terms of volume, was the Latin grammar of Robert Whittington, which he issued in 155 editions. Religious works dominated his output, in keeping with the tenor of the time; but de Worde also printed volumes ranging from romantic novels to poetry (he published the work of John Skelton and Stephen Hawes), and from children&#x27;s books to volumes on household practice and animal husbandry. He innovated in the use of illustrations: while only about 20 of Caxton&#x27;s editions contained woodcuts, 500 of Wynkyn de Worde&#x27;s editions were illustrated.

He moved his firm from Caxton&#x27;s location in Westminster to London; he was the first printer to set up a site on Fleet Street (1500), which for centuries became synonymous with printing. He was also the first person to build a book stall in St Paul&#x27;s Churchyard, which soon became a centre of the book trade in London. The site of Wynkyn de Worde&#x27;s press is marked by a plaque on the wall of the hall of the Worshipful Company of Stationers off Ludgate Hill and Ave Maria Lane, near St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral in London.

De Worde was the first to use italic type (1528) and Hebrew and Arabic characters (1524) in English books; and his 1495 version of &quot;Polychronicon&quot; by Ranulf Higden was the first English work to use movable type to print music. These musical notes, created using non-musical symbols, are often cited as the first instance of music printing in England. For a long time, De Worde was mistakenly attributed with a songbook from 1530 (frequently named after him), which is considered one of the greatest examples of music printing of that era.

His name lives on via the Wynkyn de Worde Society, founded in the United Kingdom in 1957 for &quot;people dedicated to excellence in all aspects of printing and the various stages of its creation, production, finishing and dissemination&quot;.

== Published works ==
Books printed by Wynkyn de Worde include:

* &quot;Treatise of Love&quot;
* &quot;Le Morte d&#x27;Arthur&quot;
* &quot;Vitae Sanctorum Patrum&quot;
* &quot;Bartholomaeus de Proprietatibus Rerum&quot; by John Trevisa
* &quot;The Chastising of God&#x27;s Children&quot;
* &quot;Dives and Pauper&quot;
* &quot;The Book of Saint Albans&quot;
* &quot;The Canterbury Tales&quot;
* &quot;Contemplacyon of sinners&quot; by William Touris
* &quot;Mandeville&#x27;s Travels&quot;
* &quot;Beves of Hamtoun&quot;
* &quot;Guy of Warwick&quot;
* &quot;The Squire of Low Degree&quot;
* &quot;Robin Hood&quot;
* &quot;The Miracles of Our Lady&quot;
* &quot;Golden Legend&quot;
* &quot;Ordynarye of Crysten Men&quot;
* &quot;The Rote or mirror of Consolation&quot;
* &quot;The Twelve profits of tribulation&quot;
* &quot;The Bowge of Court&quot; by John Skelton
* &quot;The History of the Three Kings of Cologne&quot;
* &quot;The Ship of Fools&quot;
* &quot;Mundus et Infans&quot; (1522)
* &quot;Gesta Romanorum&quot;
* &quot;Christmasse Carolles&quot;
* &quot;Richard Coer de Lyon&quot;

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q725733" start="0" end="15" title="Wynkyn de Worde" label="Wynkyn de Worde"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="26" end="32" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q94608" start="96" end="110" title="William Caxton" label="William Caxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="177" end="191" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="566" end="583" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q22762" start="1489" end="1507" title="Wœrth" label="Wörth an der Sauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="1511" end="1517" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q522165" start="1521" end="1535" title="Wörth am Rhein" label="Wörth am Rhein"/>
<link wikidata="Q326359" start="1543" end="1553" title="Palatinate (region)" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q94608" start="1606" end="1620" title="William Caxton" label="William Caxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486802" start="1806" end="1817" title="John Lettou" label="John Lettou"/>
<link wikidata="Q229202" start="2451" end="2468" title="Lady Margaret Beaufort" label="Margaret Beaufort"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="2485" end="2494" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q65079809" start="2727" end="2736" title="John Tate (papermaker)" label="John Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351029" start="3167" end="3185" title="Robert Whittington" label="Robert Whittington"/>
<link wikidata="Q638589" start="3396" end="3408" title="John Skelton (poet)" label="John Skelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919718" start="3413" end="3426" title="Stephen Hawes" label="Stephen Hawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q173242" start="3613" end="3620" title="woodcut" label="woodcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q846686" start="3798" end="3810" title="Fleet Street" label="Fleet Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576524" start="3926" end="3940" title="Old St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013382" start="4103" end="4135" title="Worshipful Company of Stationers" label="Worshipful Company of Stationers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339242" start="4140" end="4152" title="Ludgate Hill" label="Ludgate Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827940" start="4157" end="4171" title="Ave Maria Lane" label="Ave Maria Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q344098" start="4245" end="4256" title="italic type" label="italic type"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="4268" end="4274" title="Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="4279" end="4285" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q770348" start="4375" end="4388" title="Ranulf Higden" label="Ranulf Higden"/>
<link wikidata="Q426853" start="4423" end="4435" title="movable type" label="movable type"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836878" start="5083" end="5099" title="Treatise of Love" label="Treatise of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136104" start="5114" end="5136" title="Le Morte d&amp;#x27;Arthur" label="Le Morte d&amp;#x27;Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5151" end="5173" title="Vitae Sanctorum Patrum" label="Vitae Sanctorum Patrum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5188" end="5225" title="Bartholomaeus de Proprietatibus Rerum" label="Bartholomaeus de Proprietatibus Rerum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261232" start="5235" end="5247" title="John Trevisa" label="John Trevisa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5256" end="5293" title="The Chastising of God&amp;#x27;s Children" label="The Chastising of God&amp;#x27;s Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693739" start="5308" end="5324" title="Dives and Pauper" label="Dives and Pauper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057626" start="5339" end="5363" title="Book of St. Albans" label="The Book of Saint Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q191663" start="5378" end="5398" title="The Canterbury Tales" label="The Canterbury Tales"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5413" end="5437" title="Contemplacyon of sinners" label="Contemplacyon of sinners"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5447" end="5461" title="William Touris" label="William Touris"/>
<link wikidata="Q24766" start="5470" end="5495" title="John Mandeville" label="Mandeville&amp;#x27;s Travels"/>
<link wikidata="Q950368" start="5510" end="5526" title="Beves of Hamtoun (poem)" label="Beves of Hamtoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q502358" start="5541" end="5555" title="Guy of Warwick" label="Guy of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766124" start="5570" end="5594" title="The Squire of Low Degree" label="The Squire of Low Degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="5609" end="5619" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9033089" start="5634" end="5658" title="The Miracles of Our Lady" label="The Miracles of Our Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q129493" start="5673" end="5686" title="Golden Legend" label="Golden Legend"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5701" end="5725" title="Ordynarye of Crysten Men" label="Ordynarye of Crysten Men"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5740" end="5773" title="The Rote or mirror of Consolation" label="The Rote or mirror of Consolation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5788" end="5821" title="The Twelve profits of tribulation" label="The Twelve profits of tribulation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5836" end="5854" title="The Bowge of Court" label="The Bowge of Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q638589" start="5864" end="5876" title="John Skelton (poet)" label="John Skelton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5885" end="5926" title="The History of the Three Kings of Cologne" label="The History of the Three Kings of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169954" start="5941" end="5958" title="Ship of Fools (satire)" label="The Ship of Fools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776091" start="5973" end="5989" title="The World and the Child" label="Mundus et Infans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519433" start="6011" end="6026" title="Gesta Romanorum" label="Gesta Romanorum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6041" end="6061" title="Christmasse Carolles" label="Christmasse Carolles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324816" start="6076" end="6096" title="Richard Coer de Lyon" label="Richard Coer de Lyon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405540" wikidata="Q2741772" url="?curid=405540" title="P. A. Sangma">
<text>Purno Agitok Sangma (1 September 1947 – 4 March 2016) was an Indian politician who has served as the 4th Chief Minister of Meghalaya from 1988 to 1990 and the 11th Speaker of the Lok Sabha from 1996 to 1998. He served as a member of the Lok Sabha from Tura in Meghalaya from 2014 to 2016, 1991 to 2008 and from 1977 to 1989 and the minister of Information and Broadcasting in the Rao ministry from 1995 to 1996. He was the founder of National People&#x27;s Party and co-founder of Nationalist Congress Party.

Sangma contested the 2012 Indian presidential election, supported by the Bharatiya Janta Party and the AIADMK. However he lost to Pranab Mukherjee of the Indian National Congress. Sangma was awarded the Padma Vibhushan, India&#x27;s second highest civilian award, posthumously in 2017, in the field of Public Affairs and was the first recipient of the award from Meghalaya.

==Early and personal life==
Sangma was born on 1 September 1947 in Chapahati, a village in the erstwhile Garo Hills district of Assam (in present-day West Garo Hills, Meghalaya), to Dipchon Ch. Marak and Chimri A. Sangma as one of their seven children. He lost his father when he was 11 and had to quit studies due to poverty. He was helped to return to school by a Salesian Father Giovanni Battista Busolin. Later, Sangma obtained a Bachelor of Arts degree from St. Anthony&#x27;s College in Shillong before shifting to Dibrugarh in Assam, where he taught in the Don Bosco High School while pursuing Master of Arts in international politics from Dibrugarh University.

Sangma married Soradini K. Sangma in 1973. They have two sons and two daughters together. Son Conrad serves as the Chief Minister of Meghalaya and daughter Agatha is the Member of Parliament from the Tura constituency. Agatha was elected from Tura to the 15th Lok Sabha elections in 2009, and at 29, was the youngest minister in the UPA ministry.

Sangma called himself a devout Christian.

==Political Career==
In 1973, Sangma became Vice-President of the Pradesh Youth Congress in Meghalaya and became the General Secretary of the party in 1975. He served in that position from 1975 to 1980.

In 1977, he was elected to the 6th Lok Sabha from Tura constituency in Meghalaya and represented the same constituency multiple times, from 1977-1988, 1991-2008, 2014-2016. The breaks in 1988 and 2008 were caused by his return to Meghalaya state politics. He became Speaker of Lok Sabha in 1996.

==Chief Minister of Meghalaya==
He was the Chief Minister of Meghalaya from 1988 to 1990.

==Formation of Nationalist Congress Party==
Sangma was expelled from the Congress on 20 May 1999, along with Sharad Pawar and Tariq Anwar, for raising the banner of revolt against Sonia Gandhi over the fact that she was a foreign-born citizen. Sangma along with Pawar and Anwar wanted a native-born citizen to be projected as the Prime Ministerial candidate. After his departure from the Congress Party, he was one of the founders of the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) along with Sharad Pawar and Tariq Anwar in 1999. In January 2004, P.A. Sangma created a split in the NCP after Sharad Pawar became close to the NCP&#x27;s former rival, Sonia Gandhi. After losing a battle for the NCP election symbol, Sangma later merged his faction with Mamata Banerjee&#x27;s All India Trinamool Congress, forming the Nationalist Trinamool Congress .Sangma was one of two NTC MPs elected. He resigned from his Lok Sabha seat on 10 October 2005 as a member of AITC, and was re-elected as an NCP candidate in February 2006. He resigned from the 14th Lok Sabha for the second time in March 2008 to take part in the 2008 Meghalaya Legislative Assembly election.

On 5 January 2013, Sangma launched the National People&#x27;s Party at the national level. The National People&#x27;s Party managed to win two seats in the Meghalaya Legislative Assembly in the 2013 Meghalaya Legislative Assembly election. In 2014, Sangma was elected to Lok Sabha from Tura, and died mid-term in 2016. 

===Presidential election===
Sangma&#x27;s candidature for the 2012 presidential election was proposed by AIADMK and Biju Janta Dal, and later, supported by BJP as well. Sangma resigned from the NCP on 20 June 2012 after opposition from Sharad Pawar over his presidential candidature. Former Union Minister and a Congress tribal leader Arvind Netam also came out strongly in favour of the candidature of Sangma for the presidential post.

On 22 July, Pranab Mukherjee was declared the victor over Sangma, crossing the half-way mark of 525,140 votes after votes in half the states had been tallied. While securing the required quota, Mukherjee secured 558,194 votes to Sangma&#x27;s 239,966. After the final results were published, Mukherjee secured 7,13,424 value of votes, while Sangma secured 3,17,032 values of votes. The Returning Officer for the election, and the Secretary General of the Rajya Sabha, Vivek Agnihotri, then declared Mukherjee to be elected as President of India. Sangma subsequently accused the President-elect of graft.

==Death==

On the morning of 4 March 2016, Sangma died from cardiac arrest in New Delhi. He was aged 68.

==Positions held==

* 1974 - Vice President of Meghalaya Pradesh Youth Congress
* 1975 - The General Secretary of the Meghalaya Pradesh Congress Committee
* 1977 - Member of Parliament, Tura constituency (1977 to 1988, first stint)
* 1980 - Joint Secretary of the All India Congress Committee
* 1980 - Deputy Minister in charge of Industry
* 1982 - Deputy Minister, Ministry of Commerce
* 1984 - Minister of State holding charge of Commerce and Supply
* 1984 - Minister of State for Home Affairs
* 1986 - Minister of State for Labour with Independent Charge
* 1988 - Member, Meghalaya Legislative Assembly
* 1988 - Chief Minister of Meghalaya
* 1990 - Leader of Opposition, Meghalaya Legislative Assembly
* 1991 - Re-elected, Member of Parliament, Tura constituency (1991-2008, second stint) 
* 1991-93 - Union Minister of State, Coal (Independent Charge)
* 1993-95 - Union Minister of State, Labour (Independent Charge)
* February–September 1995 - Union Minister of State, Labour
* 1995-96 - Union Cabinet Minister of Information and Broadcasting
* 1996 - Re-elected, Member of Parliament, Tura constituency
* 1996-98 - Speaker of Lok Sabha -Chairman, (i) Business Advisory Committee; (ii) Rules Committee; (iii) General Purposes Committee; (iv) Standing Committee of the Conference of Presiding Officers of the Legislative Bodies in India; and (v) Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies;
President, (i) Indian Parliamentary Group, (ii) National Group of Inter-Parliamentary Union; and (iii) India Branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association
* 1998 - Re-elected, Member of Parliament, Tura constituency, as member of Congress
* 1998 - Member, Committee on External Affairs and its Sub-Committee-I
* 1998 - Vice-President, Indian Institute of Public Administration
* 1998 - Member, Consultative Committee, Ministry of External Affairs
* 1999 - Re-elected, Member of Parliament, Tura constituency, as member of NCP 
* 1999 - Member, Committee on Labour and Welfare
* 2000 - Member, National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution
* 2002 - Member, Committee on External Affairs
* 2003 - Member, Committee on Home Affairs
* 2004 - Re-elected, Member of Parliament, Tura constituency
* 2004 - Member, Committee on External Affairs, Member, Committee on Private Members Bills and Resolutions, Member, Consultative Committee, Ministry of Home Affairs
* 2006 - Re-elected to Lok Sabha as N.C.P. candidate on 23.2.2006, Tura constituency
* 2008 - Member, Meghalaya Legislative Assembly
* 2014 - Elected to Lok Sabha from Tura 

==See also==
* Politics of India
* Nuclear disarmament

==References==
==External links==
* Biography - From Lok Sabha Speakers&#x27; official site
* P. A. Sangma: Fourteenth Lok Sabha Members Bioprofile
* XII LOK SABHA DEBATES - Sangma&#x27;s famous debate against nuclear weapons
* Interview with Sangma by Rediff on NCP split up



|-




|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2741772" start="0" end="19" title="P. A. Sangma" label="Purno Agitok Sangma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837935" start="105" end="132" title="Chief Ministers of Meghalaya" label="Chief Minister of Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344881" start="164" end="188" title="Speaker of the Lok Sabha" label="Speaker of the Lok Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853631" start="252" end="256" title="Tura Lok Sabha constituency" label="Tura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195" start="260" end="269" title="Meghalaya" label="Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117590" start="380" end="392" title="Rao ministry" label="Rao ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974870" start="434" end="462" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Party (India)" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561861" start="481" end="507" title="Nationalist Congress Party" label="Nationalist Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085704" start="531" end="564" title="2012 Indian presidential election" label="2012 Indian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="583" end="604" title="Bharatiya Janta Party" label="Bharatiya Janta Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q651141" start="613" end="619" title="AIADMK" label="AIADMK"/>
<link wikidata="Q57446" start="640" end="656" title="Pranab Mukherjee" label="Pranab Mukherjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="664" end="688" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q672392" start="713" end="728" title="Padma Vibhushan" label="Padma Vibhushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="1013" end="1018" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329181" start="1035" end="1050" title="West Garo Hills" label="West Garo Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195" start="1052" end="1061" title="Meghalaya" label="Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q223659" start="1251" end="1259" title="Salesians of Don Bosco" label="Salesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="1260" end="1266" title="Church Fathers" label="Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="1319" end="1335" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1348" end="1374" title="St. Anthony&amp;#x27;s College, Shillong" label="St. Anthony&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q207752" start="1378" end="1386" title="Shillong" label="Shillong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266637" start="1406" end="1415" title="Dibrugarh" label="Dibrugarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="1486" end="1500" title="Master of Arts" label="Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="1504" end="1526" title="international politics" label="international politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272296" start="1532" end="1552" title="Dibrugarh University" label="Dibrugarh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162596" start="1649" end="1655" title="Conrad Sangma" label="Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600379" start="1711" end="1717" title="Agatha Sangma" label="Agatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617526" start="1810" end="1824" title="15th Lok Sabha" label="15th Lok Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933786" start="1888" end="1900" title="Second Manmohan Singh ministry" label="UPA ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351379" start="2012" end="2034" title="Indian Youth Congress" label="Pradesh Youth Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522682" start="2181" end="2194" title="6th Lok Sabha" label="6th Lok Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853631" start="2200" end="2204" title="Tura (Lok Sabha constituency)" label="Tura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195" start="2221" end="2230" title="Meghalaya" label="Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344881" start="2416" end="2436" title="Speaker of Lok Sabha" label="Speaker of Lok Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837935" start="2490" end="2517" title="Chief Minister of Meghalaya" label="Chief Minister of Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q982813" start="2647" end="2659" title="Sharad Pawar" label="Sharad Pawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686140" start="2664" end="2675" title="Tariq Anwar (politician)" label="Tariq Anwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q163225" start="2718" end="2730" title="Sonia Gandhi" label="Sonia Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561861" start="2976" end="3002" title="Nationalist Congress Party" label="Nationalist Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q465041" start="3280" end="3295" title="Mamata Banerjee" label="Mamata Banerjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q912899" start="3303" end="3331" title="All India Trinamool Congress" label="All India Trinamool Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q912899" start="3345" end="3375" title="Nationalist Trinamool Congress" label="Nationalist Trinamool Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q912899" start="3486" end="3490" title="All India Trinamool Congress" label="AITC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809009" start="3639" end="3683" title="2008 Meghalaya Legislative Assembly election" label="2008 Meghalaya Legislative Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974870" start="3725" end="3753" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Party (India)" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809008" start="3842" end="3872" title="Meghalaya Legislative Assembly" label="Meghalaya Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809011" start="3880" end="3924" title="2013 Meghalaya Legislative Assembly election" label="2013 Meghalaya Legislative Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q859993" start="4123" end="4137" title="Biju Janta Dal" label="Biju Janta Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16106031" start="4342" end="4354" title="Arvind Netam" label="Arvind Netam"/>
<link wikidata="Q57446" start="4457" end="4473" title="Pranab Mukherjee" label="Pranab Mukherjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q313383" start="4971" end="4989" title="President of India" label="President of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="5110" end="5124" title="cardiac arrest" label="cardiac arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="5320" end="5340" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837935" start="5771" end="5798" title="Chief Ministers of Meghalaya" label="Chief Minister of Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q620110" start="5808" end="5828" title="Leader of Opposition" label="Leader of Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809008" start="5830" end="5860" title="Meghalaya Legislative Assembly" label="Meghalaya Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="5882" end="5902" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525316" start="5967" end="5990" title="Ministry of Coal" label="Minister of State, Coal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5991" end="6011" title="Council of Ministers of the Republic of India#Minister of State .28Independent Charges.29" label="(Independent Charge)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294756" start="6030" end="6055" title="Ministry of Labour and Employment (India)" label="Minister of State, Labour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6056" end="6076" title="Council of Ministers of the Republic of India#Minister of State .28Independent Charges.29" label="(Independent Charge)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294756" start="6111" end="6136" title="Ministry of Labour and Employment (India)" label="Minister of State, Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294412" start="6163" end="6203" title="Minister of Information and Broadcasting" label="Minister of Information and Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="6225" end="6245" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344881" start="6277" end="6297" title="Speaker of Lok Sabha" label="Speaker of Lok Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="6744" end="6764" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="7036" end="7056" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="7334" end="7354" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123156" start="7729" end="7746" title="Politics of India" label="Politics of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200085" start="7749" end="7768" title="Nuclear disarmament" label="Nuclear disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q230003" start="7823" end="7832" title="Lok Sabha" label="Lok Sabha"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405544" wikidata="Q6047221" url="?curid=405544" title="Interlude of Youth">
<text>The Interlude of Youth is an English 16th-century morality play. It is one of the earliest printed morality plays to have survived. Only two or three copies of any edition are known to exist. Waley&#x27;s edition of the work appeared probably about the year 1554, and has a woodcut on the title-page of two figures, representing Charity and Youth, two of the characters in the interlude. Another edition was printed by William Copland, and has also a woodcut on the title-page, representing Youth between Charity, and another figure which has no name over its head. The colophon is: &quot;Imprinted at London, in Lothbury, over against Sainct Margarytes church, by me, Wyllyam Copland.&quot; A fragment of a black-letter copy of the interlude has survived at Lambeth Palace.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q929047" start="50" end="63" title="morality play" label="morality play"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808128" start="258" end="262" title="1554 in literature" label="1554"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534971" start="419" end="434" title="William Copland" label="William Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534971" start="669" end="684" title="Wyllyam Copland" label="Wyllyam Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q213686" start="708" end="720" title="black-letter" label="black-letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130266" start="759" end="773" title="Lambeth Palace" label="Lambeth Palace"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405548" wikidata="Q4758" url="?curid=405548" title="Caecilian">
<text>Caecilians (; ) are a group of limbless, vermiform (worm-shaped) or serpentine (snake-shaped) amphibians with small or sometimes nonexistent eyes. They mostly live hidden in soil or in streambeds, and this cryptic lifestyle renders caecilians among the least familiar amphibians. Modern caecilians live in the tropics of South and Central America, Africa, and southern Asia. Caecilians feed on small subterranean creatures such as earthworms. The body is cylindrical and often darkly coloured, and the skull is bullet-shaped and strongly built. Caecilian heads have several unique adaptations, including fused cranial and jaw bones, a two-part system of jaw muscles, and a chemosensory tentacle in front of the eye. The skin is slimy and bears ringlike markings or grooves and may contain scales.

Modern caecilians are a clade, the order Gymnophiona (or Apoda ), one of the three living amphibian groups alongside Anura (frogs) and Urodela (salamanders). Gymnophiona is a crown group, encompassing all modern caecilians and all descendants of their last common ancestor. There are more than 220 living species of caecilian classified in 10 families. Gymnophionomorpha is a recently coined name for the corresponding total group which includes Gymnophiona as well as a few extinct stem-group caecilians (extinct amphibians whose closest living relatives are caecilians but are not descended from any caecilian). Some palaeontologists have used the name Gymnophiona for the total group and the old name Apoda for the crown group. However, Apoda has other even older uses, including as the name of a genus of butterfly, making its use potentially confusing and best avoided. &#x27;Gymnophiona&#x27; derives from the Greek words / and / , as the caecilians were originally thought to be related to snakes and to lack scales.

The study of caecilian evolution is complicated by their poor fossil record and specialized anatomy. Genetic evidence and some anatomical details (such as pedicellate teeth) support the idea that frogs, salamanders, and caecilians (collectively known as lissamphibians) are each other&#x27;s closest relatives. Frogs and salamanders show many similarities to dissorophoids, a group of extinct amphibians in the order Temnospondyli. Caecilians are more controversial; many studies extend dissorophoid ancestry to caecilians. Some studies have instead argued that caecilians descend from extinct lepospondyl or stereospondyl amphibians, contradicting evidence for lissamphibian monophyly (common ancestry). Rare fossils of early gymnophionans such as &quot;Eocaecilia&quot; and &quot;Funcusvermis&quot; have helped to test the various conflicting hypotheses for the relationships between caecilians and other living and extinct amphibians.

== Description ==

Caecilians&#x27; anatomy is highly adapted for a burrowing lifestyle. In a couple of species belonging to the primitive genus &quot;Ichthyophis&quot; vestigial traces of limbs have been found, and in &quot;Typhlonectes compressicauda&quot; the presence of limb buds has been observed during embryonic development, remnants in an otherwise completely limbless body.
This makes the smaller species resemble worms, while the larger species like &quot;Caecilia thompsoni&quot;, with lengths up to , resemble snakes. Their tails are short or absent, and their cloacae are near the ends of their bodies.

Except for one lungless species, &quot;Atretochoana eiselti&quot;, all caecilians have lungs, but also use their skin or mouths for oxygen absorption. Often, the left lung is much smaller than the right one, an adaptation to body shape that is also found in snakes.

Their trunk muscles are adapted to pushing their way through the ground, with the vertebral column and its musculature acting as a piston inside the outer layer of the body wall musculature, which is closely attached to the skin. By contracting the outer layer of muscles it squeezes the coelom and generates a strong hydrostatic force that lengthens the body. This muscle system allows the animal to anchor its hind end in position, and force the head forwards, and then pull the rest of the body up to reach it in waves. In water or very loose mud, caecilians instead swim in an eel-like fashion. Caecilians in the family Typhlonectidae are aquatic, and the largest of their kind. The representatives of this family have a fleshy fin running along the rear section of their bodies, which enhances propulsion in water.

=== Skull and senses ===
Caecilians have small or absent eyes, with only a single known class of photoreceptors, and their vision is limited to dark-light perception. Unlike other modern amphibians (frogs and salamanders) the skull is compact and solid, with few large openings between plate-like cranial bones. The snout is pointed and bullet-shaped, used to force their way through soil or mud. In most species the mouth is recessed under the head, so that the snout overhangs the mouth.

The bones in the skull are reduced in number compared to prehistoric amphibian species. Many bones of the skull are fused together: the maxilla and palatine bones have fused into a maxillopalatine in all living caecilians, and the nasal and premaxilla bones fuse into a nasopremaxilla in some families. Some families can be differentiated by the presence or absence of certain skull bones, such as the septomaxillae, prefrontals, an/or a postfrontal-like bone surrounding the orbit (eye socket). The braincase is encased in a fully integrated compound bone called the os basale, which takes up most of the rear and lower parts of the skull. In skulls viewed from above, a mesethmoid bone may be visible in some species, wedging into the midline of the skull roof.

All caecilians have a pair of unique sensory structures, known as tentacles, located on either side of the head between the eyes and nostrils. These are probably used for a second olfactory capability, in addition to the normal sense of smell based in the nose.

The ringed caecilian (&quot;Siphonops annulatus&quot;) has dental glands that may be homologous to the venom glands of some snakes and lizards. The function of these glands is unknown.

The middle ear consists of only the stapes bone and the oval window, which transfer vibrations into the inner ear through a reentrant fluid circuit as seen in some reptiles. Adults of species within the family Scolecomorphidae lack both a stapes and an oval window, making them the only known amphibians missing all the components of a middle ear apparatus.

The lower jaw is specialized in caecilians. Gymnophionans, including extinct species, have only two components of the jaw: the pseudodentary (at the front, bearing teeth) and pseudoangular (at the back, bearing the jaw joint and muscle attachments). These two components are what remains following fusion between a larger set of bones. An additional inset tooth row with up to 20 teeth lies parallel to the main marginal tooth row of the jaw.

All but the most primitive caecilians have two sets of muscles for closing the jaw, compared with the single pair found in other amphibians. One set of muscles, the adductors, insert into the upper edge of the pseudoangular in front of the jaw joint. Adductor muscles are commonplace in vertebrates, and close the jaw by pulling upwards and forwards. A more unique set of muscles, the abductors, insert into the rear edge of the pseudoangular below and behind the jaw joint. They close the jaw by pulling backwards and downwards. Jaw muscles are more highly developed in the most efficient burrowers among the caecilians, and appear to help keep the skull and jaw rigid.

=== Skin ===
Their skin is smooth and usually dark, but some species have colourful skins. Inside the skin are calcite scales. Because of these scales, the caecilians were once thought to be related to the fossil Stegocephalia, but they are now believed to be a secondary development, and the two groups are most likely unrelated. Scales are absent in the families Scolecomorphidae and Typhlonectidae, except the species &quot;Typhlonectes compressicauda&quot; where minute scales have been found in the hinder region of the body. The skin also has numerous ring-shaped folds, or annuli, that partially encircle the body, giving them a segmented appearance. Like some other living amphibians, the skin contains glands that secrete a toxin to deter predators. The skin secretions of &quot;Siphonops paulensis&quot; have been shown to have hemolytic properties.

=== Milk provisioning===

Recent research, as documented in the journal &quot;Science&quot;, has shed light on the behavior of certain species of caecilians. These studies reveal that some caecilians exhibit a phenomenon wherein they provide their hatchlings with a nutrient-rich substance akin to milk, delivered through a maternal vent. Among the species investigated, the oviparous nonmammalian caecilian amphibian &quot;Siphonops annulatus&quot; stood out, indicating that the practice of lactation may be more widespread among these creatures than previously thought. As detailed in a 2024 study, researchers collected 16 mothers of the &quot;Siphonops annulatus&quot; species from cacao plantations in Brazil&#x27;s Atlantic Forest and filmed them with their altricial hatchlings in the lab. The mothers remained with their offspring, which suckled on a white, viscous liquid from their cloaca, experiencing rapid growth in their first week. This milk-like substance, rich in fats and carbohydrates, is produced in the mother&#x27;s oviduct epithelium&#x27;s hypertrophied glands, similar to mammal milk. The substance was released seemingly in response to tactile and acoustic stimulation by the babies. The researchers observed the hatchlings emitting high-pitched clicking sounds as they approached their mothers for milk, a behavior unique among amphibians. This milk-feeding behavior may contribute to the development of the hatchlings&#x27; microbiome and immune system, similar to mammalian young. The presence of milk production in caecilians that lay eggs suggests an evolutionary transition between egg-laying and live birth.

== Distribution ==

Caecilians are native to wet, tropical regions of Southeast Asia, India, Bangladesh, Nepal and Sri Lanka, parts of East and West Africa, the Seychelles Islands in the Indian Ocean, Central America, and in northern and eastern South America. In Africa, caecilians are found from Guinea-Bissau (&quot;Geotrypetes&quot;) to southern Malawi (&quot;Scolecomorphus&quot;), with an unconfirmed record from eastern Zimbabwe. They have not been recorded from the extensive areas of tropical forest in central Africa. In South America, they extend through subtropical eastern Brazil well into temperate northern Argentina. They can be seen as far south as Buenos Aires, when they are carried by the flood waters of the Paraná River coming from farther north. Their American range extends north to southern Mexico. The northernmost distribution is of the species &quot;Ichthyophis sikkimensis&quot; of northern India. &quot;Ichthyophis&quot; is also found in South China and Northern Vietnam. In Southeast Asia, they are found as far east as Java, Borneo, and the southern Philippines, but they have not crossed Wallace&#x27;s line and are not present in Australia or nearby islands. There are no known caecilians in Madagascar, but their presence in the Seychelles and India has led to speculation on the presence of undiscovered extinct or extant caecilians there.

In 2021, a live specimen of &quot;Typhlonectes natans&quot;, a caecilian native to Colombia and Venezuela, was collected from a drainage canal in South Florida. It was the only caecilian ever reported in the wild in the United States, and is considered to be an introduction, perhaps from the wildlife trade. Whether a breeding population has been established in the area is unknown.

== Taxonomy ==

The name &quot;caecilian&quot; derives from the Latin word &quot;&quot;, meaning &quot;blind&quot;, referring to the small or sometimes nonexistent eyes. The name dates back to the taxonomic name of the first species described by Carl Linnaeus, which he named &quot;Caecilia tentaculata&quot;.

There has historically been disagreement over the use of the two primary scientific names for caecilians, Apoda and Gymnophiona. Some palaeontologists prefer to use the name Apoda to refer to the &quot;crown group&quot;, that is, the group containing all modern caecilians and extinct members of these modern lineages and the name Gymnophiona to refer to the total group, that is, all caecilians and caecilian-like amphibians that are more closely related to modern groups than to frogs or salamanders. However, Apoda been used for groups of fishes and of sea cucumbers and is the name of a genus of moth, and its continued use in caecilian taxonomy is potentially confusing and unhelpful.

A classification of caecilians by Wilkinson et al. (2011) divided the living caecilians into 9 families containing nearly 200 species. In 2012, a tenth caecilian family was newly described, Chikilidae. This classification is based on a thorough definition of monophyly based on morphological and molecular evidence, and it solves the longstanding problems of paraphyly of the Caeciliidae in previous classifications without an exclusive reliance upon synonymy. There are 219 species of caecilian in 33 genera and 10 families.

The most recent phylogeny of caecilians is based on molecular mitogenomic evidence examined by San Mauro et al. (2014), and modified to include some more recently described genera such as &quot;Amazops&quot;.

== Evolution ==

Little is known of the evolutionary history of the caecilians, which have left a very sparse fossil record. The first fossil, a vertebra dated to the Paleocene, was not discovered until 1972. Other vertebrae, which have characteristic features unique to modern species, were later found in Paleocene and Late Cretaceous (Cenomanian) sediments.

Phylogenetic evidence suggests that the ancestors of caecilians and batrachians (including frogs and salamanders) diverged from one another during the Carboniferous. This leaves a gap of more than 70 million years between the presumed origins of caecilians and the earliest definitive fossils of stem-caecilians.

Prior to 2023, the earliest fossil attributed to a stem-caecilian (an amphibian closer to caecilians than to frogs or salamanders but not a member of the extant caecilian lineage) comes from the Jurassic period. This primitive genus, &quot;Eocaecilia&quot;, had small limbs and well-developed eyes. In their 2008 description of the Early Permian amphibian &quot;Gerobatrachus&quot;, Anderson and co-authors suggested that caecilians arose from the Lepospondyl group of ancestral tetrapods, and may be more closely related to amniotes than to frogs and salamanders, which arose from Temnospondyl ancestors. Numerous groups of lepospondyls evolved reduced limbs, elongated bodies, and burrowing behaviors, and morphological studies on Permian and Carboniferous lepospondyls have placed the early caecilian (&quot;Eocaecilia&quot;) among these groups. Divergent origins of caecilians and other extant amphibians may help explain the slight discrepancy between fossil dates for the origins of modern Amphibia, which suggest Permian origins, and the earlier dates, in the Carboniferous, predicted by some molecular clock studies of DNA sequences. Most morphological and molecular studies of extant amphibians, however, support monophyly for caecilians, frogs, and salamanders, and the most recent molecular study based on multi-locus data suggest a Late Carboniferous–Early Permian origin of extant amphibians.

&quot;Chinlestegophis&quot;, a stereospondyl temnospondyl from the Late Triassic Chinle Formation of Colorado, was proposed to be a stem-caecilian in a 2017 paper by Pardo and co-authors. If confirmed, this would bolster the proposed pre-Triassic origin of Lissamphibia suggested by molecular clocks. It would fill a gap in the fossil record of early caecilians and suggest that stereospondyls as a whole qualify as stem-group caecilians. However, affinities between &quot;Chinlestegophis&quot; and gymnophionans have been disputed along several lines of evidence. A 2020 study questioned the choice of characters supporting the relationship, and a 2019 reanalysis of the original data matrix found that other equally parsimonious positions were supported for the placement of &quot;Chinlestegophis&quot; and gymnophionans among tetrapods. In 2024, &quot;Chinlestegophis&quot; was consistently recovered as a sister taxon of &quot;Rileymillerus&quot; within various positions of Stereospondyli outside Lissamphibia based on phylogenetic analyses and revisions.

A 2023 paper by Kligman and co-authors described &quot;Funcusvermis&quot;, another amphibian from the Chinle Formation of Arizona. &quot;Funcusvermis&quot; was strongly supported as a stem group caecilian based on traits of its numerous skull and jaw fragments, the largest sample of caecilian fossils known. The paper discussed the various hypotheses for caecilian origins: the polyphyly hypothesis (caecilians as lepospondyls, and other lissamphibians as temnospondyls), the lepospondyl hypothesis (lissamphibians as lepospondyls), and the newer hypothesis supported by &quot;Chinlestegophis&quot;, where caecilians and other lissamphibians had separate origins within temnospondyls. Nevertheless, all of these ideas were refuted, and the most strongly supported hypothesis combined lissamphibians into a monophyletic group of dissorophoid temnospondyls closely related to &quot;Gerobatrachus&quot;.

== Behavior ==

=== Reproduction ===

Caecilians are the only order of amphibians to use internal insemination exclusively (although most salamanders have internal fertilization and the tailed frog in the US uses a tail-like appendage for internal insemination in its fast-flowing water environment). The male caecilians have a long tube-like intromittent organ, the phallodeum, which is inserted into the cloaca of the female for two to three hours. About 25% of the species are oviparous (egg-laying); the eggs are laid in terrestrial nests rather than in water and are guarded by the female. For some species, the young caecilians are already metamorphosed when they hatch; others hatch as larvae. The larvae are not fully aquatic, but spend the daytime in the soil near the water.

About 75% of caecilians are viviparous, meaning they give birth to already-developed offspring. The foetus is fed inside the female with cells lining the oviduct, which they eat with special scraping teeth. Some larvae, such as those of &quot;Typhlonectes&quot;, are born with enormous external gills which are shed almost immediately.

The egg-laying herpelid species &quot;Boulengerula taitana&quot; feeds its young by developing an outer layer of skin, high in fat and other nutrients, which the young peel off with modified teeth. This allows them to grow by up to 10 times their own weight in a week. The skin is consumed every three days, the time it takes for a new layer to grow, and the young have only been observed to eat it at night. It was formerly thought that the juveniles subsisted only on a liquid secretion from their mothers. This form of parental care, known as maternal dermatophagy, has also been reported in two species in the family Siphonopidae: &quot;Siphonops annulatus&quot; and &quot;Microcaecilia dermatophaga&quot;. Siphonopids and herpelids are not closely related to each other, having diverged in the Cretaceous Period. The presence of maternal dermatophagy in both families suggest that it may be more widespread among caecilians than previously considered.

&quot;Herpele squalostoma&quot; caecilians vertically transmit the mother&#x27;s microbiome to their offspring through maternal dermatophagy. In comparison to other amphibians, the extended parenting of caecilians can provide beneficial bacteria and fungi, but this transmission risks the spread of diseases like chytridiomycosis.

=== Diet ===
Caecilians are considered as generalist predators. While caecilians are generally carnivorous, their diet differs between taxa. The stomach contents of wild caecilians include primarily soil ecosystem engineers like
earthworms, termites, lizards, moth larvae, and shrimp. Some species of caecilians will opportunistically consume newborn rodents, salmon eggs, and veal in laboratory conditions, as well as vertebrates such as scolecophidian snakes, lizards, small fish, and frogs.

== Cultural significance ==
As caecilians are a reclusive group, they are only featured in a few human myths, and are generally considered repulsive in traditional customs.

In the folklore of certain regions of India, caecilians are feared and reviled, based on the belief that they are fatally venomous. Caecilians in the Eastern Himalayas are colloquially known as &quot;back ache snakes&quot;, while in the Western Ghats, &quot;Ichthyophis tricolor&quot; is considered to be more toxic than a king cobra. Despite deep cultural respect for the cobra and other dangerous animals, the caecilian is killed on sight by salt and kerosene. These myths have complicated conservation initiatives for Indian caecilians.

&quot;Crotaphatrema lamottei&quot;, a rare species native to Mount Oku in Cameroon, is classified as a Kefa-ntie (burrowing creature) by the Oku. Kefa-ntie, a term also encompassing native moles and blind snakes, are considered poisonous, causing painful sores if encountered, contacted, or killed. According to Oku tradition, the ceremony to cleanse the affliction involves a potion composed of ground herbs, palm oil, snail shells, and chicken blood applied to and licked off of the left thumb.

South American caecilians have a variable relationship to local cultures. The minhocão, a legendary worm-like beast in Brazilian folklore, may be inspired by caecilians. Colombian folklore states that the aquatic caecilian, &quot;Typhlonectes natans&quot;, can be manifested from a lock of hair sealed in a sunken bottle. In southern Mexico and Central America, &quot;Dermophis mexicanus&quot; is colloquially known as the &quot;tapalcua&quot;, a name referencing the belief that it emerges to embed itself in the rear end of any unsuspecting person who chooses to relieve themself over its home. This may be inspired by their tendency to nest in refuse heaps.

== See also ==

* Caecilians of the Western Ghats

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4758" start="0" end="10" title="Caecilian" label="Caecilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921546" start="41" end="50" title="vermiform" label="vermiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="94" end="103" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="321" end="326" title="South America" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="331" end="346" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="348" end="354" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="369" end="373" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q124378" start="431" end="440" title="earthworm" label="earthworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069641" start="673" end="685" title="Chemoreceptor" label="chemosensory"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="822" end="827" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="833" end="838" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758" start="839" end="850" title="Caecilian" label="Gymnophiona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758" start="855" end="860" title="Caecilian" label="Apoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="922" end="926" title="frog" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q53663" start="942" end="952" title="salamander" label="salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="973" end="984" title="crown group" label="crown group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="1103" end="1110" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="1141" end="1149" title="Family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758" start="1151" end="1168" title="Caecilian" label="Gymnophionomorpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="1217" end="1228" title="total group" label="total group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="1281" end="1291" title="stem-group" label="stem-group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="1473" end="1484" title="total group" label="total group"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="1607" end="1616" title="butterfly" label="butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159242" start="1978" end="1995" title="pedicellate teeth" label="pedicellate teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q134861" start="2077" end="2089" title="lissamphibia" label="lissamphibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q137426" start="2182" end="2195" title="Dissorophoidea" label="dissorophoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q131447" start="2240" end="2253" title="Temnospondyli" label="Temnospondyli"/>
<link wikidata="Q133023" start="2417" end="2428" title="Lepospondyli" label="lepospondyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495411" start="2432" end="2445" title="Stereospondyli" label="stereospondyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="2499" end="2508" title="monophyly" label="monophyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q140417" start="2578" end="2588" title="Eocaecilia" label="Eocaecilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q116446290" start="2605" end="2617" title="Funcusvermis" label="Funcusvermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759945" start="2987" end="3014" title="Typhlonectes compressicauda" label="Typhlonectes compressicauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236564" start="3229" end="3247" title="Caecilia thompsoni" label="Caecilia thompsoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q19035" start="3336" end="3342" title="cloaca" label="cloaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916885" start="3419" end="3439" title="Atretochoana eiselti" label="Atretochoana eiselti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="3467" end="3471" title="lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="3512" end="3518" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q247830" start="3935" end="3941" title="coelom" label="coelom"/>
<link wikidata="Q141997" start="4271" end="4285" title="Typhlonectidae" label="Typhlonectidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q748049" start="4565" end="4579" title="Photoreceptor cell" label="photoreceptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q182895" start="5095" end="5102" title="maxilla" label="maxilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q237632" start="5107" end="5115" title="Palatine bone" label="palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q38155" start="5190" end="5195" title="Nasal bone" label="nasal"/>
<link wikidata="Q244969" start="5200" end="5210" title="premaxilla" label="premaxilla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5361" end="5373" title="septomaxilla" label="septomaxilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125474" start="5376" end="5387" title="Prefrontal bone" label="prefrontals"/>
<link wikidata="Q121090725" start="5397" end="5408" title="Postfrontal bone" label="postfrontal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5631" end="5641" title="mesethmoid" label="mesethmoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q660059" start="5790" end="5798" title="tentacle" label="tentacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541064" start="5904" end="5924" title="olfaction" label="olfactory capability"/>
<link wikidata="Q608757" start="6015" end="6034" title="Siphonops annulatus" label="Siphonops annulatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q224180" start="6072" end="6082" title="Homology (biology)" label="homologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386847" start="6090" end="6102" title="Venom" label="venom glands"/>
<link wikidata="Q847312" start="6111" end="6117" title="Venomous snake" label="snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="6122" end="6128" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q499897" start="6209" end="6215" title="stapes" label="stapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301793" start="6229" end="6240" title="oval window" label="oval window"/>
<link wikidata="Q387119" start="6383" end="6399" title="Scolecomorphidae" label="Scolecomorphidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="7759" end="7766" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q188488" start="7767" end="7773" title="scale (zoology)" label="scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460384" start="7861" end="7874" title="Stegocephalia" label="Stegocephalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q387119" start="8013" end="8029" title="Scolecomorphidae" label="Scolecomorphidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q141997" start="8034" end="8048" title="Typhlonectidae" label="Typhlonectidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759945" start="8075" end="8102" title="Typhlonectes compressicauda" label="Typhlonectes compressicauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213091" start="8436" end="8455" title="Siphonops paulensis" label="Siphonops paulensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q471706" start="8486" end="8495" title="haemolysis" label="hemolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="8587" end="8594" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q477047" start="9231" end="9246" title="Atlantic Forest" label="Atlantic Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q110576835" start="9274" end="9283" title="Precociality and altriciality" label="altricial"/>
<link wikidata="Q19035" start="9402" end="9408" title="cloaca" label="cloaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="9491" end="9494" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="9500" end="9512" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36857" start="9548" end="9555" title="oviduct" label="oviduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="9556" end="9566" title="epithelium" label="epithelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="9607" end="9618" title="Milk" label="mammal milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330402" start="9962" end="9972" title="microbiome" label="microbiome"/>
<link wikidata="Q212306" start="10124" end="10134" title="Oviparity" label="egg-laying"/>
<link wikidata="Q120446" start="10139" end="10149" title="Viviparity" label="live birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="10222" end="10236" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="10238" end="10243" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="10245" end="10255" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="10257" end="10262" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="10267" end="10276" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="10296" end="10307" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="10313" end="10323" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="10339" end="10351" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="10353" end="10368" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="10398" end="10411" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007" start="10450" end="10463" title="Guinea-Bissau" label="Guinea-Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522784" start="10471" end="10482" title="Geotrypetes" label="Geotrypetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="10502" end="10508" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q387119" start="10516" end="10530" title="Scolecomorphus" label="Scolecomorphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="10579" end="10587" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="10738" end="10744" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="10774" end="10783" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="10818" end="10830" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q127892" start="10881" end="10893" title="Paraná River" label="Paraná River"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="10968" end="10974" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934939" start="11030" end="11053" title="Ichthyophis sikkimensis" label="Ichthyophis sikkimensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702505" start="11085" end="11096" title="Ichthyophis" label="Ichthyophis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038564" start="11120" end="11131" title="South China" label="South China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428694" start="11136" end="11152" title="Northern Vietnam" label="Northern Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="11203" end="11207" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="11209" end="11215" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="11234" end="11245" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q210746" start="11273" end="11292" title="Wallace&amp;#x27;s line" label="Wallace&amp;#x27;s line"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="11316" end="11325" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="11378" end="11388" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249158" start="11563" end="11582" title="Typhlonectes natans" label="Typhlonectes natans"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="11612" end="11620" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="11625" end="11634" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="11681" end="11688" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="11791" end="11803" title="Introduced species" label="introduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141338" start="11822" end="11836" title="wildlife trade" label="wildlife trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="12160" end="12173" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q751312" start="13106" end="13116" title="Chikilidae" label="Chikilidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="13275" end="13284" title="paraphyly" label="paraphyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q913066" start="13292" end="13303" title="Caeciliidae" label="Caeciliidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q105360294" start="13637" end="13644" title="Amazops" label="Amazops"/>
<link wikidata="Q76252" start="13820" end="13829" title="Paleocene" label="Paleocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q185567" start="13991" end="14001" title="Cenomanian" label="Cenomanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13514368" start="14083" end="14092" title="batrachia" label="batrachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="14166" end="14179" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="14524" end="14532" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q140417" start="14569" end="14579" title="Eocaecilia" label="Eocaecilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132803" start="14691" end="14704" title="Gerobatrachus" label="Gerobatrachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133023" start="14777" end="14788" title="Lepospondyl" label="Lepospondyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q19159" start="14808" end="14817" title="tetrapods" label="tetrapods"/>
<link wikidata="Q181537" start="14854" end="14862" title="amniotes" label="amniotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131447" start="14911" end="14923" title="Temnospondyl" label="Temnospondyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="15349" end="15356" title="Permian" label="Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="15396" end="15409" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="15551" end="15560" title="monophyly" label="monophyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="15678" end="15691" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q642169" start="15692" end="15705" title="Cisuralian" label="Early Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281135" start="15742" end="15757" title="Chinlestegophis" label="Chinlestegophis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495411" start="15767" end="15780" title="Stereospondyli" label="stereospondyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074382" start="15817" end="15833" title="Chinle Formation" label="Chinle Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q134861" start="15993" end="16005" title="Lissamphibia" label="Lissamphibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281135" start="16519" end="16534" title="Chinlestegophis" label="Chinlestegophis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334270" start="16667" end="16680" title="Rileymillerus" label="Rileymillerus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495411" start="16715" end="16729" title="Stereospondyli" label="Stereospondyli"/>
<link wikidata="Q134861" start="16738" end="16750" title="Lissamphibia" label="Lissamphibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q116446290" start="16853" end="16865" title="Funcusvermis" label="Funcusvermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925426" start="17887" end="17898" title="tailed frog" label="tailed frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q11789797" start="18044" end="18062" title="intromittent organ" label="intromittent organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q212306" start="18181" end="18190" title="oviparous" label="oviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q33753" start="18347" end="18360" title="metamorphosis (biology)" label="metamorphosed"/>
<link wikidata="Q120446" start="18515" end="18525" title="viviparous" label="viviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q36857" start="18641" end="18648" title="oviduct" label="oviduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992604" start="18730" end="18742" title="Typhlonectes" label="Typhlonectes"/>
<link wikidata="Q132390" start="18782" end="18787" title="gills" label="gills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086167" start="18839" end="18847" title="Herpelidae" label="herpelid"/>
<link wikidata="Q677689" start="18862" end="18882" title="Boulengerula taitana" label="Boulengerula taitana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542641" start="19445" end="19457" title="Siphonopidae" label="Siphonopidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q608757" start="19465" end="19484" title="Siphonops annulatus" label="Siphonops annulatus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19501" end="19527" title="Microcaecilia dermatophaga" label="Microcaecilia dermatophaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946267" start="19788" end="19807" title="Herpele squalostoma" label="Herpele squalostoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834381" start="19825" end="19844" title="Vertical transmission" label="vertically transmit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330402" start="19863" end="19873" title="microbiome" label="microbiome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090290" start="20095" end="20111" title="chytridiomycosis" label="chytridiomycosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="20209" end="20220" title="Carnivore" label="carnivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q124378" start="20343" end="20352" title="earthworm" label="earthworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="20355" end="20362" title="termite" label="termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="20365" end="20371" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725788" start="20374" end="20378" title="moth" label="moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517781" start="20391" end="20397" title="shrimp" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="20465" end="20471" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="20474" end="20480" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q957434" start="20491" end="20495" title="veal" label="veal"/>
<link wikidata="Q201636" start="20553" end="20574" title="Scolecophidia" label="scolecophidian snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="20576" end="20583" title="lizards" label="lizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="20591" end="20595" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="20601" end="20606" title="frogs" label="frogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="20712" end="20716" title="myth" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="20790" end="20798" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330191" start="20933" end="20950" title="Eastern Himalayas" label="Eastern Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4527" start="21020" end="21033" title="Western Ghats" label="Western Ghats"/>
<link wikidata="Q643401" start="21041" end="21061" title="Ichthyophis tricolor" label="Ichthyophis tricolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q48186" start="21106" end="21116" title="king cobra" label="king cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q608784" start="21330" end="21352" title="Crotaphatrema lamottei" label="Crotaphatrema lamottei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322001" start="21385" end="21394" title="Mount Oku" label="Mount Oku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="21398" end="21406" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017729" start="21465" end="21468" title="Oku, Cameroon" label="Oku"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295304" start="21900" end="21908" title="Minhocão (animal)" label="minhocão"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811118" start="21941" end="21959" title="Brazilian Folklore" label="Brazilian folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147954" start="21992" end="22010" title="Colombian folklore" label="Colombian folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249158" start="22052" end="22071" title="Typhlonectes natans" label="Typhlonectes natans"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="22156" end="22162" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="22167" end="22182" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759933" start="22190" end="22209" title="Dermophis mexicanus" label="Dermophis mexicanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972071" start="22502" end="22533" title="Caecilians of the Western Ghats" label="Caecilians of the Western Ghats"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405553" wikidata="None" url="?curid=405553" title="Mummers">
<text>Mummers were bands of men and women from the medieval to early modern era who (during public festivities) dressed in fantastic clothes and costumes and serenaded people outside their houses, or joined the party inside. Costumes were varied and might include bears, unicorns, deer (with deer hides and antlers) or rams (with rams&#x27; horns). The practice was widespread in Europe, present in England, Ireland and Scotland, with words for it in German and French. The practice dates back to the Romans and has survived in some areas (such as Scotland) and is used in the holiday tradition of Mummer&#x27;s plays. It has also been revived in the modern Mummer&#x27;s Parade. The practice may also be related to miming.

==History==
Mumming was preceded by the Roman holiday Saturnalia, in which partiers masqueraded. Feasts of Pallas Athena included &quot;visars and painted visages.&quot; The holiday was a time of &quot;frequent and luxurious feastings amongst friends, presents were mutually sent, and changes of dress made.&quot;

Some of these habits carried over to Christmas, including exchanging clothes and visiting neighbors &quot;in the manner which Germans call mummery,&quot; wassailing, and Saint Stephen&#x27;s Day celebrations. In 1377, citizens of London dressed in mummery to amuse the son of Edward the Black Prince. In England, the tradition became associated with obnoxious behavior and led King Henry VIII to declare the wearing of masks to be a misdemeanor. In Scotland, mummers are called &quot;guisards&quot; and traditionally put on a &quot;rude drama&quot; called &quot;Galatian&quot;.

Mumming was labeled part of &quot;the progeny of Father Christmas&quot; by Ben Jonson in his 1616 play &quot;Chrismas Masque&quot;. In the 18th into the 19th century, mummers were mimes, actors, largely specializing in Christmas. The idea of mumming in the 19th century was that it looked back to &quot;simpler times&quot; and mumming antics became part of a &quot;controlled expression of seasonal &#x27;misrule&#x27;&quot;.

==Etymology==
The word &quot;mummers&quot; appears in late Middle English. It derived from the Old French word &quot;momeur&quot;, itself from &quot;momer&quot; (&quot;to act in a mime&quot;).

Mummery ties to the similar Old French word &quot;mommerie&quot;.

The word is related to &quot;mum&quot;, (silence, mum&#x27;s the word), &quot;mum&quot; (to act in a dumb show), mumble (to speak indistinctly, silent utterance) and &quot;murmer&quot;.

==References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="None" start="0" end="7" title="Mummers" label="Mummers"/>
<link wikidata="Q350800" start="592" end="610" title="Mummer&amp;#x27;s play" label="Mummer&amp;#x27;s play"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935432" start="652" end="672" title="Mummer&amp;#x27;s Parade" label="Mummer&amp;#x27;s Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q674067" start="710" end="716" title="mime" label="miming"/>
<link wikidata="Q207213" start="773" end="783" title="Saturnalia" label="Saturnalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="826" end="839" title="Pallas Athena" label="Pallas Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972740" start="1188" end="1198" title="wassailing" label="wassailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366863" start="1204" end="1228" title="Saint Stephen&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Saint Stephen&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q184854" start="1310" end="1333" title="Edward the Black Prince" label="Edward the Black Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q193857" start="1688" end="1698" title="Ben Jonson" label="Ben Jonson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405556" wikidata="Q13514368" url="?curid=405556" title="Batrachia">
<text>The Batrachia are a clade of amphibians that includes frogs and salamanders, but not caecilians nor the extinct allocaudates. The name Batrachia was first used by French zoologist Pierre André Latreille in 1800 to refer to frogs, but has more recently been defined in a phylogenetic sense as a node-based taxon that includes the last common ancestor of frogs and salamanders and all of its descendants. The idea that frogs and salamanders are more closely related to each other than either is to caecilians is strongly supported by morphological and molecular evidence; they are, for instance, the only vertebrates able to raise and lower their eyes. However, an alternative hypothesis exists in which salamanders and caecilians are each other&#x27;s closest relatives as part of a clade called the Procera, with frogs positioned as the sister taxon of this group.

==Origins==
The earliest batrachians are the stem-frogs &quot;Triadobatrachus&quot; and &quot;Czatkobatrachus&quot; from the Early Triassic, about 250 million years ago. However, several molecular clock estimates place the first appearance of the Batrachia (the time at which frog and salamander lineages diverged from each other) before the Early Triassic. Most estimates place the divergence in the Permian but some put it as far back as 367 million years ago in the Late Devonian (which is when tetrapods are thought to have started to emerge from fishapods). However, there is no evidence of lissamphibians or lissamphibian-like animals in the fossil record at this time. The tetrapod groups that are hypothesized as ancestors of modern amphibians (lepospondyls and amphibamid temnospondyls) appear in the Late Carboniferous, roughly 300 million years ago. Large fossil tetrapod assemblages are known from the Artinskian stage of the Early Permian about 275 million years ago and contain no lissamphibians, suggesting that the Early Permian may be an upper bound for the age of Batrachia.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13514368" start="4" end="13" title="Batrachia" label="Batrachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="20" end="25" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="29" end="38" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="54" end="58" title="frog" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q53663" start="64" end="74" title="salamander" label="salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758" start="85" end="94" title="caecilian" label="caecilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q144257" start="112" end="124" title="allocaudates" label="allocaudates"/>
<link wikidata="Q312771" start="180" end="202" title="Pierre André Latreille" label="Pierre André Latreille"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="270" end="282" title="phylogenetic" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976606" start="294" end="310" title="node-based taxon" label="node-based taxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052390" start="329" end="349" title="last common ancestor" label="last common ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948447" start="799" end="806" title="Procera" label="Procera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="837" end="849" title="sister taxon" label="sister taxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="911" end="915" title="stem group" label="stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q134290" start="928" end="943" title="Triadobatrachus" label="Triadobatrachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149306" start="960" end="975" title="Czatkobatrachus" label="Czatkobatrachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q827541" start="1053" end="1068" title="molecular clock" label="molecular clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="1267" end="1274" title="Permian" label="Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="1335" end="1348" title="Late Devonian" label="Late Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19159" start="1364" end="1373" title="tetrapods" label="tetrapods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460384" start="1417" end="1425" title="stegocephalia" label="fishapod"/>
<link wikidata="Q133023" start="1619" end="1630" title="lepospondyl" label="lepospondyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844161" start="1636" end="1646" title="amphibamid" label="amphibamid"/>
<link wikidata="Q373772" start="1676" end="1694" title="Late Carboniferous" label="Late Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q713094" start="1780" end="1790" title="Artinskian" label="Artinskian"/>
<link wikidata="Q642169" start="1804" end="1817" title="Early Permian" label="Early Permian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405558" wikidata="Q7730346" url="?curid=405558" title="The Disobedient Child">
<text>The Disobedient Child is a theatrical comic interlude written c.1560 by Thomas Ingelend (an author who is known only as a &quot;late student of Cambridge&quot;, as described on the first edition&#x27;s title-page) and first performed in a Tudor hall.

This play contains the famous line: &quot;None is so deaf as who will not hear.&quot;

== Morality play ==
It deals with the subject of the proper disciplinary treatment of children, raising the threat of the evil of those raised without strict discipline. It portrays a young man who is eager to marry despite his father&#x27;s objections, and the unhappiness of his subsequent married life. The moral of its story is &quot;you&#x27;ve made your bed, now lie in it.&quot; It ends with a song to Queen Elizabeth.

The printed edition by Thomas Colwell is without date, but it was published about the year 1560. &quot;The source,&quot; writes Tucker Brooke, &quot;from which Ingelend derived the rough framework of his play is a prose dialogue of the French Latinist Ravisius Textor (Jean Tixier de Ravisi, 1480-1524); but Textor&#x27;s scant two hundred and thirty-five lines of question and answer between a colorless Pater Juvenis and Uxor are expanded, in the fifteen hundred lines of the English work, into a drama of much higher intensity and literary merit than the original in any way suggested.&quot;

== References ==
* Tucker Brooke, C. F. 1911. &quot;The Tudor Drama: A History of English National Drama to the Retirement of Shakespeare.&quot; Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
* Chambers, E. K. 1923. &quot;The Elizabethan Stage.&quot; 4 volumes. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
* Southern, Richard. 1973. &quot;The Staging of Plays Before Shakespeare.&quot; London: Faber. .

== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* &quot;The Interlude of the Disobedient Child by Thomas Ingelend&quot;, Percy Society, 1848, 60 Seiten. (Google Books)
* &quot;The Disobedient Child by Thomas Ingelend&quot;, The Tudor Facsimile Texts, T.C. &amp; E.C. Jack, London &amp; Edinburgh, 1908. (Internet Archive)

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5151421" start="38" end="43" title="Comedy (drama)" label="comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q929047" start="44" end="53" title="Morality play" label="interlude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750425" start="64" end="68" title="1560 in literature" label="1560"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72" end="87" title="Thomas Ingelend" label="Thomas Ingelend"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="144" end="153" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="748" end="763" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Queen Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595554" start="1018" end="1033" title="Ravisius Textor" label="Ravisius Textor"/>
<link wikidata="Q443908" start="1535" end="1550" title="Edmund Kerchever Chambers" label="Chambers, E. K."/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="1876" end="1888" title="Google Books" label="Google Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="2026" end="2042" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405559" wikidata="Q203934" url="?curid=405559" title="PASOK">
<text>The Panhellenic Socialist Movement (, ), known mostly by its acronym PASOK, (; , ) is a social-democratic political party in Greece. Until 2012 it was one of the two major parties in the country, along with New Democracy, its main political rival. After a decade of poor electoral outcomes, PASOK has retained its position as one of the main Greek political parties and is currently the second largest party in the Greek Parliament.

Following the collapse of the Greek military dictatorship of 1967–1974, PASOK was founded on 3 September 1974 as a socialist party.

Formerly the largest left-of-center party in Greece between 1977 and 2012, PASOK lost much of its popular support as a result of the Greek debt crisis. PASOK was the ruling party when the economic crisis began, and it negotiated the first Greek bailout package with the European troika, which necessitated harsh austerity measures. This caused a significant loss in the party&#x27;s popularity. It was part of two coalition governments from 2011 to 2015, during which further austerity measures were taken in response to the crisis. Due to these measures and the crisis, PASOK went from being the largest party in the Hellenic Parliament with 160 seats (43.92% of the popular vote) in the 2009 election to being the smallest party with 13 seats (4.68% of the popular vote) in the January 2015 election. This decline became known as Pasokification.

To halt the party&#x27;s decline, Fofi Gennimata was elected as the new president of the party and formed a political alliance known as the Democratic Alignment (DISY). In the September 2015 election, DISY was the fourth most voted-for party. In 2018, PASOK merged into a new political alliance of centre-left parties, again led by Gennimata, called the Movement for Change (KINAL), becoming the third largest party in the parliament in the 2019 election. After the death of Gennimata and the election of the new Party President Nikos Androulakis, PASOK (running under the new PASOK-KINAL umbrella) improved its electoral outcome, achieving a 11.84% share of the popular vote in the June 2023 election. In October 2024, Androulakis was re-elected as president of PASOK.

== History ==
=== Foundation ===
The first members of the party were the main organizers of the collapse of the Greek junta and the re-establishment of democracy on 3 September 1974. Its founder was Andreas Papandreou, son of the late Greek liberal leader and three-time Prime Minister of Greece Georgios Papandreou Sr, and its co-founder trade unionist Georgios Daskalakis. Its founding mottos were &quot;National Independence, Popular Sovereignty, Social Emancipation, Democratic Process.&quot; Andreas Papandreou was offered the leadership of the liberal political forces - what evolved into Centre Union – New Forces - immediately after the restoration of democracy, but in a risky move he declined, so the leadership was assumed by Georgios Mavros. Papandreou, a powerful orator and charismatic leader, explicitly rejected the Venizelist ideological heritage of his father, and stressed the fact that he was a socialist, not a liberal.

=== Early years ===
At the November 1974 elections the Party received only 13.5% of the vote and won 15 seats (out of 300), coming third behind the centre-right New Democracy of Konstantinos Karamanlis and the Centre Union – New Forces (EK-ND) of Giorgos Mavros. In the November 1977 elections, however, PASOK eclipsed the EK-ND, winning 93 seats by doubling its share of the vote and becoming the main opposition party in Greece at the time.

=== In government ===
In the October 1981 national elections PASOK won a landslide victory with 48.1% of the vote, capturing 172 seats; it forming the first socialist government in Greece since 1924. Although Papandreou had campaigned for withdrawal of Greece from NATO and the European Economic Community, after a strong request by the rest of the party members and its supporters, changed his policies towards both organizations. He proved to be an excellent negotiator when it came to securing benefits and subsidies for Greece from the EEC. For example, in 1985 he openly threatened Jacques Delors to veto the entry of Spain and Portugal in to the ECC to secure more monetary aid for Greece. In the June 1985 elections, PASOK received 46% of the vote, winning 161 seats, thus securing a stable parliamentary majority for its second term in power.

It continued to be popular for much of its second term, especially in March 1987 when Andreas Papandreou successfully handled a crisis in the Aegean with Turkey. By late 1988 however, both the government&#x27;s popularity and Papandreou&#x27;s health had declined. The former, because of the press’ reports of financial and corruption scandals that, implicated Ministers and, allegedly, Andreas Papandreou himself as well as because of fiscal austerity measures imposed after the Keynesian policies of the first term. Under Papandreou, total government expenditure rose in 1982 by 6.8%, by 1.4% in 1983, by 5.5% in 1984, and by 11.0% in 1985. As a result of austerity measures introduced in October 1985, however, total government expenditure fell by 4.6% in 1986, and by 1.9% in 1987. The middle of 1987, however, saw Costas Simitis (the minister who presided over the austerity program) being dismissed and the austerity policies abandoned, with expansionary economic policies were pursued once again.

Despite this u-turn, PASOK lost the June 1989 elections with 40% of the vote while the opposing New Democracy received 44.3%. PASOK had changed the electoral law before the elections, making it harder for the leading party to form a majority government, so the legislature was deadlocked.

Another election in November produced a very similar result. After a brief period of a grand coalition government, in which PASOK participated, a third election in April 1990 brought New Democracy back to power. Despite a 7% lead in popular vote over PASOK, New Democracy could only secure a marginal majority in the Hellenic Parliament, electing 152 MPs out of a total of 300; PASOK had secured a larger number of representatives on a lower percentage of votes, as well as having a small overall lead, in the elections of 1985, under the previous electoral system. Its representation in the Parliament shrunk to 121 MPs in 1990.

In opposition, PASOK underwent a leadership crisis when Andreas Papandreou was prosecuted over his supposed involvement in the Koskotas scandal. He was eventually acquitted and, in a dramatic twist of fate, in the October 1993 elections led the party to another landslide victory. Papandreou returned to office with 47% of the vote and his re-election was considered by many a vote of confidence of the public against his prosecution. In November 1995, however, Papandreou&#x27;s health began to deteriorate and the party was racked with leadership conflicts.

During his time in office, Papandreou presided over a wide range of social reforms. His governments carried through sweeping reforms of social policy by introducing a welfare state, significantly expanding welfare measures, expanding health care coverage (the &quot;National Health System&quot; was instituted, which made modern medical procedures available in rural areas for the first time,) promoting state-subsidized tourism (social tourism) for lower-income families, and index-linking pensions.

A number of other reforms were carried out in areas such as trade union rights, shop closing and reopening times, social security, education, health and safety, and work councils. A more progressive taxation scheme was introduced and budgetary support for artistic and cultural programmes was increased. Social aid became available to deaf and dumb adults as well as for persons with mental disabilities, minimum pensions were indexed to the minimum wage, a social assistance pension for those aged 68 and over was introduced, and (as noted by one study) &quot;All uninsured employed and self-employed individuals are covered by IKA (social insurance fund).&quot; Social security benefits were also adjusted to price increases, while social assistance disability benefits were extended to new categories. Special family allowances were established for certain groups. Wages and pensions became automatically adjusted in line with the consumer price index every 4 months on the basis of economic forecasts. In addition, all women with unmarried children under 21 could retire at 55, early retirement was extended to more occupations, and low-income households received housing allowances. The role of OAED in vocational guidance and training was strengthened, while subsidies for returning Greek migrants were introduced. Saturday working was also abolished for certain categories of workers.

Various reforms were carried out in education, such as the modernization of university curricula and the introduction of new procedures for selecting and promoting faculty which involved greater participation by students. Higher education was also made available on equal terms to all Greek citizens. New rights for women were also introduced, amongst which included the abolition of the dowry system, the legalization of civil marriage, the decriminalization of adultery for women, and the granting to female farmers their own pension together with the ability to receive (in their own name) loans from the Agricultural Bank. In addition, a New Family Code was established, which declared that wives and husbands were equal partners in their marriages. Agricultural policies of subsidization, cooperatives and price supports were also carried out that improved the overall positions of farmers.

In 1986, the PASOK government amended the Greek constitution to remove most powers from the President and giving wider authority to the Prime Minister and the Executive Government. However, the dubious methods by Papandreou triggered a constitutional crisis that ended after the elections of 1985. Civil marriages, not consecrated by religious ceremony, were recognized as equally valid with religious weddings. The left-wing Resistance movement against the Axis in World War II was finally formally recognized, and former leftist resistance fighters were given state pensions, while leftist political refugees of the Greek Civil War were finally given permission to return to Greece. Various repressive laws of the anti-communist postwar establishment were abolished, wages were boosted, an independent and multidimensional foreign policy was pursued, and the Greek Gendarmerie military police force abolished in 1984.

=== Modernization period ===
In January 1996 Andreas Papandreou retired after a protracted three-month-long hospitalization, during which he retained the role of Prime Minister; he died six months later. He was succeeded by Costas Simitis, the candidate of the modernising, pro-European wing of PASOK (the so-called &quot;modernizers&quot;, εκσυγχρονιστές &quot;eksynchronistes&quot;), who won an internal vote against Akis Tsochatzopoulos, a Papandreou confidant. In the first days following his election, Costas Simitis faced the biggest crisis in Greek politics for over 20 years, with the Imia crisis. He was criticized for his soft stance against Turkey and especially for praising in public the American intervention on the issue.

In a PASOK conference held in the summer of 1996, following Andreas Papandreou&#x27;s death, Costas Simitis was elected leader of the party and called early elections seeking a renewed public vote of confidence. Although the Imia crisis had somewhat tarnished his image, the country&#x27;s economic prosperity and his matter-of-fact administration won him the September 1996 general election with a 41.5% of the vote. Under Costas Simitis&#x27; leadership, PASOK had two major successes: In September 1997 Greece won the right to stage the 2004 Summer Olympic Games and in 2001 it was confirmed that the country would be included in the Eurozone, for which it had failed to meet the convergence criteria in 1998. Costas Simitis won another term in April 2000, narrowly winning with 43.8% of the vote and 158 seats: a substantial achievement for a Party which had been in power almost continuously for nearly 20 years.

In 2000, after the assassination of Brigadier Saunders by the terrorist group 17 November (17N), and especially with the forthcoming Athens Olympics being a major terrorist target, a significant international pressure was exerted on PASOK to recognise that Greece had a terrorist problem and do everything possible to bring the terrorist group to justice. Some among the western media had even falsely accusing the party of colluding with the terrorists, due to the fact that the authorities were unable to arrest the terrorists. Under the guidance of British and U.S. experts, the government intensified its efforts and finally, with a string of events starting at 29 June 2002, the 17N members were captured and put to trial.

=== Under the leadership of George Papandreou ===
Nevertheless, the party was losing its traditional appeal to the Greek lower and middle classes. To revitalize the party&#x27;s chances for the next elections, Costas Simitis announced his resignation as the leader of the party on 7 January 2004. He was succeeded by George Papandreou, son of Andreas Papandreou. The party members were expecting that Papandreou could reverse the slide in the opinion polls which saw the opposition New Democracy (ND), under Kostas Karamanlis, 7% ahead at the start of the year.

Although Papandreou reduced ND&#x27;s lead in the polls to 3%, he was unable to reverse the view of the majority of Greek voters that PASOK had been in power too long and had grown lazy, corrupt and had abandoned the inclusive and progressive principles of economic parity on which it was founded. ND had a comfortable win at the 2004 legislative elections held on 7 March 2004, placing the party in opposition after eleven years in office with 40.55% share of the vote and 117 seats.
On 16 September 2007, New Democracy headed by Costas Karamanlis won re-election with a marginal majority of 152 seats in the Parliament. Despite ND&#x27;s falling performance in the 2007 legislative election, PASOK suffered a crushing defeat, registering 38.1% of the vote, its lowest percentage in almost 30 years, and 102 seats in the Hellenic Parliament.
The dismal result led to activation of the procedure to select a new leadership, or to reaffirm the current one. The main candidates for the leadership were the incumbent George Papandreou and the Party&#x27;s informal second in command, Evangelos Venizelos. M.P. for Thessaloniki. M.P. Kostas Skandalidis also announced his candidacy in September. According to Party regulation, leaders are elected in a voting process open to all members. During the leadership election of 11 November 2007 George Papandreou was re-elected by the friends and members of the party as its leader.

In June 2009, the PASOK won the 2009 European Parliament election in Greece. Four months later, the Party enjoyed a resounding victory in the October 2009 general elections with 43.92% of the popular vote to ND&#x27;s 33.48%, and 160 parliament seats to 91. Due to a number of defections and expulsions after 2009, by November 2011 PASOK held a slim majority of 152 of the parliament&#x27;s 300 seats.

=== Decline (2009–2015) ===

A poll in October 2011 on behalf of the Greek TV channel Skai TV and the newspaper &quot;Kathimerini&quot; (after the austerity measures that were taken to tackle the financial crisis) revealed that of the people asked, 92% felt disappointed by the government while only 5% believed that a PASOK government would be best for the nation in the next elections. In the same survey, when asked about whether people have a positive or negative opinion of the various political parties in Greece, PASOK scored as the lowest, with 76% answering &quot;negative&quot;.

Because of the financial crisis and the measures that were taken by the party from 2009 to 2012, PASOK, having been the largest party in the outgoing coalition government, achieved only third place with a mere 13.18%, retaining just 41 seats.

After the elections of 6 May 2012, the President of Greece, Karolos Papoulias, mandated New Democracy leader Antonis Samaras to form a coalition government. On 7 May 2012, Samaras gave up the attempt and on the following day, President Papoulias mandated Alexis Tsipras, president of the Synaspismos political party and head of the Coalition of the Radical Left (SYRIZA) parliamentary group. After Tsipras was also unable to form a government, Evangelos Venizelos was mandated, but he too had no success. The legislative elections of June 2012 resulted in a further reduction in PASOK&#x27;s popular support, probably as a result of the unpopular memorandum signed by former Prime Minister George Papandreou with the IMF, European Commission and European Central Bank. PASOK&#x27;s share of the overall vote was its worst ever showing since the party was formed (12.28%). However PASOK decided to help the formation of a government by joining with New Democracy (ND) as well as the Democratic Left (DIMAR) of Fotis Kouvelis in a coalition under Prime Minister Samaras.

To contest the 2014 European election, PASOK founded the Olive Tree electoral alliance on 7 March 2014. In the May 2014 European elections, the Olive Tree list came in fourth place nationally, receiving 8.02% of the vote, electing 2 MEPs.

On 29 December 2014, following the failure of the government to elect a presidential candidate, a snap January 2015 legislative election was called by Prime Minister Samaras, scheduled for 25 January 2015.

=== 2015 legislative elections ===
On 2 January 2015, in the run-up to the legislative election, former Prime Minister and PASOK leader George Papandreou announced the formation of a breakaway party called Movement of Democratic Socialists (KIDISO), a move immediately condemned by PASOK officials. Five PASOK members of the Hellenic Parliament were expected to join the new party, including the former ministers Philippos Sachinidis and Dimitris Reppas.

In the 25 January 2015 legislative election, PASOK received 4.7% of the vote, with mandate for 13 seats in the Hellenic Parliament.

On 30 August 2015, ahead of the upcoming September snap election, PASOK announced an electoral alliance with DIMAR, dubbed the Democratic Alignment (DISY).

In the September 2015 legislative election on 20 September 2015, the Democratic Alignment (DISY) received 6.3% of the vote, and 17 seats.

=== Under KINAL (2017–2021) ===
On 12 November 2017, an open primary was used as the first round of elections to select the leader of a new, as yet unfounded centre-left party in which PASOK would be folded. Nine initial leadership candidates include PASOK leader Fofi Gennimata, The River leader Stavros Theodorakis and incumbent Athens mayor Giorgos Kaminis. Reaching the second-round election were Gennimata, with 44.5% of the vote, and PASOK MEP Nikos Androulakis with 25.4%. The run-off election on 19 November was won by Gennimata with 56% of the vote. On 28 November 2017, the name of the new party was announced as &quot;Movement for Change&quot; (), abbreviated to KINAL (ΚΙΝΑΛ).

On 2 July 2018, The River left KINAL. On 20 January 2019, DIMAR also left KINAL due to its position of supporting the Prespa agreement. On 1 June 2019 former PASOK leader Evangelos Venizelos left KINAL, accusing Gennimata of turning the Movement into &quot;SYRIZA&#x27;s tail&quot;.

KINAL increased its obtained seats in the 2019 Greek legislative election compared to Democratic Alignment, becoming Greece&#x27;s third-largest party or coalition and securing 22 seats in the Hellenic Parliament. Following the election, KINAL positioned itself into opposition to the new Mitsotakis Government.

Gennimata died on 25 October 2021 at the Evangelismos Hospital in Athens from cancer.

Elections for the new leader took place in December 2021, with the main candidates being Andreas Loverdos, Nikos Androulakis, and George Papandreou. Nikos Androulakis was elected to the leadership of both KINAL and PASOK on 12 December 2021.

=== Return of PASOK ===
On 9 May 2022, the alliance was rebranded back to &quot;PASOK – Movement for Change&quot; (PASOK–KINAL) after an internal party referendum, becoming a political party in its own right and absorbing the original party incarnation. The old PASOK emblem (the green sun) was restored soon after that.

In the May 2023 election, PASOK–KINAL managed to increase both its vote percentage by 3.36% and its share of seats in the Hellenic Parliament from 22 to 41. This increase, in combination with the electoral decline of Syriza, has raised hopes among members that the party would regain its former status as the largest opposition party.

In the 2024 European Parliament election, even though the party managed to come first in Lasithi and Heraklion, PASOK eventually came in third place, recording a 12,79% vote share. The failure to capitalize on SYRIZA&#x27;s further decline led a number of MPs and elected officials, including Haris Doukas and Pavlos Geroulanos to call for an election to replace Nikos Androulakis as party leader. The first round of the PASOK party election is planned to take place on 6 October 2024 while the second round is said to take place on 13.

In November 2024, the party became the official opposition following a series of defections from SYRIZA.

== Popular culture ==
According to several communication experts, the frequently heard phrases &quot;PASOK Era&quot; and &quot;PASOK Years&quot; have been identified and penetrated into the collective subconscious with times of prosperity and abundance of goods and money, mainly from European subsidies but also the increase of the living standards, before the economic and debt crisis of 2009. This has led to the creation of several memes comparing what a situation with PASOK would be like and how it is now.

== International and European links ==
PASOK is a member of the Socialist International, the Progressive Alliance and the Party of European Socialists. PASOK MEPs sit with the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats (S&amp;D) group in the European Parliament.

Pasokification refers to the decline and rightward political shift of centre-left parties across Europe.

== Election results ==
=== Hellenic Parliament ===
=== European Parliament ===
== Party leaders ==
== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Terrorism in Greece
* PASOKification
* History of Greece
* List of political parties in Greece
* Socialism in Greece
* Politics of Greece
* Party of European Socialists
* Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats
* Socialist International
* For our Crete

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==
* Dimitris Michalopoulos, &quot;PASOK and the Eastern Block&quot;, in &quot;Greece under Socialism&quot;, New Rochelle, New York: Orpheus Publishing Inc., 1988, pp. 339–337. 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q203934" start="4" end="34" title="PASOK" label="Panhellenic Socialist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q203934" start="69" end="74" title="PASOK" label="PASOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="88" end="105" title="social democracy" label="social-democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q659914" start="106" end="121" title="List of political parties in Greece" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q233008" start="151" end="179" title="Two-party system" label="one of the two major parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q223153" start="207" end="220" title="New Democracy (Greece)" label="New Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204796" start="448" end="456" title="Metapolitefsi" label="collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q504081" start="464" end="504" title="Greek junta" label="Greek military dictatorship of 1967–1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="549" end="558" title="Socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q956475" start="700" end="717" title="Greek government-debt crisis" label="Greek debt crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12875844" start="800" end="827" title="First Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece" label="first Greek bailout package"/>
<link wikidata="Q921671" start="837" end="852" title="Troika (European group)" label="European troika"/>
<link wikidata="Q477089" start="1185" end="1204" title="Hellenic Parliament" label="Hellenic Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q863595" start="1256" end="1269" title="2009 Greek legislative election" label="2009 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091742" start="1347" end="1368" title="January 2015 Greek legislative election" label="January 2015 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693644" start="1399" end="1413" title="Pasokification" label="Pasokification"/>
<link wikidata="Q12885954" start="1450" end="1464" title="Fofi Gennimata" label="Fofi Gennimata"/>
<link wikidata="Q21075797" start="1556" end="1576" title="Democratic Alignment (2015)" label="Democratic Alignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q20853340" start="1592" end="1615" title="September 2015 Greek legislative election" label="September 2015 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q46505372" start="1770" end="1789" title="PASOK – Movement for Change" label="Movement for Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q25053460" start="1857" end="1870" title="2019 Greek legislative election" label="2019 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116940" start="1945" end="1962" title="Nikos Androulakis" label="Nikos Androulakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46505372" start="1993" end="2004" title="PASOK – Movement for Change" label="PASOK-KINAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q118616507" start="2099" end="2117" title="June 2023 Greek legislative election" label="June 2023 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q130226717" start="2122" end="2134" title="2024 PASOK – KINAL leadership election" label="October 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q504081" start="2299" end="2310" title="Greek junta" label="Greek junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q219256" start="2386" end="2404" title="Andreas Papandreou" label="Andreas Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377230" start="2458" end="2482" title="Prime Minister of Greece" label="Prime Minister of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q311207" start="2483" end="2505" title="Georgios Papandreou" label="Georgios Papandreou Sr"/>
<link wikidata="Q18572849" start="2541" end="2560" title="Georgios Daskalakis" label="Georgios Daskalakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565847" start="2782" end="2807" title="Centre Union – New Forces" label="Centre Union – New Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q455293" start="2924" end="2939" title="Georgios Mavros" label="Georgios Mavros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063251" start="2975" end="2993" title="Charismatic authority" label="charismatic leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564160" start="3019" end="3029" title="Venizelism" label="Venizelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510840" start="3156" end="3179" title="1974 Greek legislative election" label="November 1974 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q223153" start="3290" end="3303" title="New Democracy (Greece)" label="New Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156806" start="3307" end="3330" title="Konstantinos Karamanlis" label="Konstantinos Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565847" start="3339" end="3364" title="Centre Union – New Forces" label="Centre Union – New Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q455293" start="3376" end="3390" title="Georgios Mavros" label="Giorgos Mavros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337928" start="3399" end="3422" title="1977 Greek legislative election" label="November 1977 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="3838" end="3842" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="3851" end="3878" title="European Union" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q153425" start="4160" end="4174" title="Jacques Delors" label="Jacques Delors"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="4206" end="4214" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q219256" start="4511" end="4529" title="Andreas Papandreou" label="Andreas Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530893" start="4551" end="4559" title="1987 Aegean crisis" label="a crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352880" start="4567" end="4585" title="Aegean dispute" label="Aegean with Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q83937" start="4905" end="4914" title="Keynesian economics" label="Keynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q155390" start="5244" end="5258" title="Costas Simitis" label="Costas Simitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184704" start="5807" end="5822" title="grand coalition" label="grand coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q477089" start="6037" end="6056" title="Hellenic Parliament" label="Hellenic Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q477089" start="6312" end="6322" title="Hellenic Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q219256" start="6407" end="6425" title="Andreas Papandreou" label="Andreas Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q20552390" start="6478" end="6494" title="Koskotas scandal" label="Koskotas scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="7342" end="7356" title="tourism" label="social tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601908" start="9734" end="9764" title="Greek constitutional amendment of 1986" label="amended the Greek constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q132775350" start="9940" end="9961" title="Greek constitutional crisis of 1985" label="constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q205572" start="10002" end="10016" title="Civil marriage" label="Civil marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q490035" start="10130" end="10149" title="Greek Resistance" label="Resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10170" end="10182" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188972" start="10322" end="10337" title="Greek Civil War" label="Greek Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="10381" end="10387" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="10420" end="10434" title="Anti-communism" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100396" start="10565" end="10582" title="Hellenic Gendarmerie" label="Greek Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q219256" start="10670" end="10688" title="Andreas Papandreou" label="Andreas Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q155390" start="10849" end="10863" title="Costas Simitis" label="Costas Simitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781399" start="10899" end="10911" title="pro-Europeanism" label="pro-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q620468" start="11044" end="11064" title="Akis Tsochatzopoulos" label="Akis Tsochatzopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q155390" start="11132" end="11146" title="Costas Simitis" label="Costas Simitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119012" start="11218" end="11229" title="Imia crisis" label="Imia crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="11277" end="11283" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q155390" start="11456" end="11470" title="Costas Simitis" label="Costas Simitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119012" start="11588" end="11599" title="Imia crisis" label="Imia crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="11903" end="11928" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="12000" end="12008" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41685" start="12318" end="12327" title="Brigadier" label="Brigadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610473" start="12328" end="12336" title="Stephen Saunders (British Army officer)" label="Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q197581" start="12360" end="12371" title="Revolutionary Organization 17 November" label="17 November"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="12415" end="12430" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="Athens Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="12539" end="12545" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="13149" end="13156" title="Social class" label="classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q155390" start="13221" end="13235" title="Costas Simitis" label="Costas Simitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q151917" start="13328" end="13345" title="George Papandreou" label="George Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q219256" start="13354" end="13372" title="Andreas Papandreou" label="Andreas Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q223153" start="13493" end="13506" title="New Democracy (Greece)" label="New Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188978" start="13519" end="13536" title="Kostas Karamanlis" label="Kostas Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518129" start="13904" end="13930" title="2004 Greek legislative election" label="2004 legislative elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q188978" start="14105" end="14122" title="Costas Karamanlis" label="Costas Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q477089" start="14184" end="14194" title="Hellenic Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204824" start="14241" end="14266" title="2007 Greek legislative election" label="2007 legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q477089" start="14396" end="14415" title="Hellenic Parliament" label="Hellenic Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q151917" start="14588" end="14605" title="George Papandreou (junior)" label="George Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q312994" start="14655" end="14674" title="Evangelos Venizelos" label="Evangelos Venizelos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14676" end="14680" title="Hellenic Parliament#Election and tenure" label="M.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="14685" end="14697" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337038" start="14704" end="14722" title="Kostas Skandalidis" label="Kostas Skandalidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131031" start="14869" end="14908" title="2007 Panhellenic Socialist Movement leadership election" label="leadership election of 11 November 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q611416" start="15030" end="15073" title="2009 European Parliament election in Greece" label="2009 European Parliament election in Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q863595" start="15140" end="15170" title="2009 Greek legislative election" label="October 2009 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q223153" start="15206" end="15208" title="New Democracy (Greece)" label="ND"/>
<link wikidata="Q477089" start="15371" end="15381" title="Hellenic Parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334737" start="15487" end="15494" title="Skai TV" label="Skai TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q144999" start="15519" end="15530" title="Kathimerini" label="Kathimerini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409203" start="16274" end="16293" title="President of Greece" label="President of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q57303" start="16295" end="16312" title="Karolos Papoulias" label="Karolos Papoulias"/>
<link wikidata="Q223153" start="16323" end="16336" title="New Democracy (Greece)" label="New Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q57806" start="16344" end="16359" title="Antonis Samaras" label="Antonis Samaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q312015" start="16490" end="16504" title="Alexis Tsipras" label="Alexis Tsipras"/>
<link wikidata="Q219573" start="16523" end="16534" title="Coalition of Left, of Movements and Ecology" label="Synaspismos"/>
<link wikidata="Q222897" start="16567" end="16596" title="Coalition of the Radical Left" label="Coalition of the Radical Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q312994" start="16679" end="16698" title="Evangelos Venizelos" label="Evangelos Venizelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q751553" start="16744" end="16778" title="June 2012 Greek legislative election" label="legislative elections of June 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q151917" start="16925" end="16942" title="George Papandreou (junior)" label="George Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q223153" start="17183" end="17196" title="New Democracy (Greece)" label="New Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128823" start="17217" end="17232" title="Democratic Left (Greece)" label="Democratic Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q970854" start="17244" end="17258" title="Fotis Kouvelis" label="Fotis Kouvelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15299258" start="17320" end="17342" title="2014 European Parliament election in Greece" label="2014 European election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15916934" start="17362" end="17372" title="Olive Tree (Greece)" label="Olive Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="17538" end="17541" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="MEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091742" start="17648" end="17681" title="January 2015 Greek legislative election" label="January 2015 legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q18707655" start="17958" end="17991" title="Movement of Democratic Socialists" label="Movement of Democratic Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q477089" start="18077" end="18096" title="Hellenic Parliament" label="Hellenic Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414062" start="18165" end="18185" title="Philippos Sachinidis" label="Philippos Sachinidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226051" start="18190" end="18205" title="Dimitris Reppas" label="Dimitris Reppas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091742" start="18215" end="18251" title="January 2015 Greek legislative election" label="25 January 2015 legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q21075797" start="18468" end="18488" title="Democratic Alignment (2015)" label="Democratic Alignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q20853340" start="18505" end="18540" title="September 2015 Greek legislative election" label="September 2015 legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q12885954" start="18901" end="18915" title="Fofi Gennimata" label="Fofi Gennimata"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920068" start="18917" end="18926" title="The River (Greece)" label="The River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16330478" start="18934" end="18953" title="Stavros Theodorakis" label="Stavros Theodorakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q719130" start="18981" end="18996" title="Giorgos Kaminis" label="Giorgos Kaminis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116940" start="19087" end="19104" title="Nikos Androulakis" label="Nikos Androulakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46505372" start="19266" end="19285" title="PASOK – Movement for Change" label="Movement for Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q55153903" start="19445" end="19461" title="Prespa agreement" label="Prespa agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q312994" start="19498" end="19517" title="Evangelos Venizelos" label="Evangelos Venizelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q25053460" start="19653" end="19684" title="2019 Greek legislative election" label="2019 Greek legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q477089" start="19804" end="19823" title="Hellenic Parliament" label="Hellenic Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q65184515" start="19900" end="19921" title="First Cabinet of Kyriakos Mitsotakis" label="Mitsotakis Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q14536091" start="19965" end="19986" title="Evangelismos Hospital" label="Evangelismos Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q499341" start="20100" end="20116" title="Andreas Loverdos" label="Andreas Loverdos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116940" start="20118" end="20135" title="Nikos Androulakis" label="Nikos Androulakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q151917" start="20141" end="20158" title="George Papandreou" label="George Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q46505372" start="20334" end="20361" title="PASOK – Movement for Change" label="PASOK – Movement for Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q84081612" start="20583" end="20600" title="May 2023 Greek legislative election" label="May 2023 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q477089" start="20698" end="20717" title="Hellenic Parliament" label="Hellenic Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q222897" start="20793" end="20799" title="Syriza" label="Syriza"/>
<link wikidata="Q124373831" start="20919" end="20952" title="2024 European Parliament election in Greece" label="2024 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q210450" start="21001" end="21008" title="Lasithi" label="Lasithi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896769" start="21013" end="21022" title="Heraklion (regional unit)" label="Heraklion"/>
<link wikidata="Q58350005" start="21205" end="21217" title="Haris Doukas" label="Haris Doukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853202" start="21222" end="21239" title="Pavlos Geroulanos" label="Pavlos Geroulanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116940" start="21275" end="21292" title="Nikos Androulakis" label="Nikos Androulakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q956475" start="21918" end="21950" title="Greek government-debt crisis" label="economic and debt crisis of 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q159454" start="22134" end="22157" title="Socialist International" label="Socialist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248622" start="22163" end="22183" title="Progressive Alliance (political international)" label="Progressive Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q220945" start="22192" end="22220" title="Party of European Socialists" label="Party of European Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="22228" end="22231" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="MEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q507343" start="22246" end="22294" title="Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats" label="Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="22318" end="22337" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693644" start="22340" end="22354" title="Pasokification" label="Pasokification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518869" start="22576" end="22595" title="Terrorism in Greece" label="Terrorism in Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693644" start="22598" end="22612" title="PASOKification" label="PASOKification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794" start="22615" end="22632" title="History of Greece" label="History of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q659914" start="22635" end="22670" title="List of political parties in Greece" label="List of political parties in Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q65071000" start="22673" end="22692" title="Socialism in Greece" label="Socialism in Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056647" start="22695" end="22713" title="Politics of Greece" label="Politics of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q220945" start="22716" end="22744" title="Party of European Socialists" label="Party of European Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q507343" start="22747" end="22795" title="Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats" label="Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q159454" start="22798" end="22821" title="Socialist International" label="Socialist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q130218616" start="22824" end="22837" title="For our Crete" label="For our Crete"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405560" wikidata="Q4164042" url="?curid=405560" title="Xiangshan County, Guangdong">
<text>Xiangshan County, also spelled Hsiangshan, Siangshan, Heungsan, and Heungshan, was a former county in Southern China. From 1912, it was a county in Guangdong Province, in the Republic of China. It was renamed Zhongshan (then usually romanized &quot;Chungshan&quot;) in April 1925, in honor of the founder of the Republic of China, Sun Yat Sen, a Xiangshan native.

The county covered the modern-day Zhuhai City, Zhongshan City and a part of Nansha District of Guangzhou City in the Guangdong Province of the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC), and the Macau Special Administrative Region of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, formerly known as Portuguese Macau until 1999.

== History==
The county consists of the entirety of Xiangshan Island, an island in a bay where three rivers emptied into the sea, part of the Pearl River Delta. It was originally separated from the continent by the distributaries in the delta, until it became a peninsula some time during the 17th century, but remained separated from the mainland by waterways.

Around the 8th century (during the Tang dynasty), a Xiangshan Township was carved out of the Bao&#x27;an County and Dongguan County, at the present-day Shanchang () of Zhuhai. Around the 12th century (during the Northern Song dynasty), this township became a separate county.

During the mid-16th century, in the Ming dynasty, the Portuguese settled in Macau. This was permitted by the Ming dynasty, but despite the Portuguese presence, Macau was still under the jurisdiction of Xiangshan.) Macau became a full Portuguese colony in 1847. This colony later expanded to include Ilha Verde, Taipa and Coloane.

In December 1952, Yumin County () was created out of islands from Hsiang-shan County, Pao-an County and Tung-kuan County. This county was renamed Chu-hai County () in April 1953, and was expanded. Chu-hai County was briefly merged with Hsiang-shan County in March 1959, and was reconstituted in April 1961.

From 1961 onwards, the territory of Chung-shan County was reduced by 43%, with areas ceded to the counties of Tou-men, Pan-yu, Shun-te and Hsin-huei. Its romanization was changed to Zhuhai following the introduction of the Pinyin orthography for romanizing Chinese characters.

In 1979, Zhuhai County () became Zhuhai City (). In December 1983, Zhongshan County () became Zhongshan City (). Originally a county-level city, Zhongshan was elevated to prefecture level in January 1988.

A 6.81-square kilometer special economic zone was established within Zhuhai City in August 1980. The special economic zone was expanded to 15.16 square kilometers in June 1983, and 121 square kilometers in April 1989. In May 1983, Doumen County () became administrated under Zhuhai City.

==See also==
* Hong Kong, another city of China what was named after 

== References ==
== External links ==
*&quot;Nanfang Wang&quot;
*&quot;Zhuhai Special Zone Daily&quot;
*Zhuhai City People&#x27;s Government</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4164042" start="0" end="16" title="Xiangshan County, Guangdong" label="Xiangshan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164042" start="31" end="41" title="Xiangshan County, Guangdong" label="Hsiangshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164042" start="43" end="52" title="Xiangshan County, Guangdong" label="Siangshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164042" start="54" end="62" title="Xiangshan County, Guangdong" label="Heungsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164042" start="68" end="77" title="Xiangshan County, Guangdong" label="Heungshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="148" end="166" title="Guangdong Province" label="Guangdong Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="175" end="192" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q59223" start="209" end="218" title="Zhongshan" label="Zhongshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="331" end="342" title="Sun Yat Sen" label="Sun Yat Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q59095" start="399" end="410" title="Zhuhai" label="Zhuhai City"/>
<link wikidata="Q59223" start="412" end="426" title="Zhongshan City" label="Zhongshan City"/>
<link wikidata="Q199422" start="441" end="456" title="Nansha, Guangzhou" label="Nansha District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="460" end="474" title="Guangzhou City" label="Guangzhou City"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="482" end="500" title="Guangdong Province" label="Guangdong Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="508" end="539" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="555" end="629" title="Macau" label="Macau Special Administrative Region of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916279" start="649" end="665" title="Portuguese Macau" label="Portuguese Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495395" start="731" end="747" title="Xiangshan Island" label="Xiangshan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144286" start="821" end="838" title="Pearl River Delta" label="Pearl River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q591942" start="894" end="908" title="distributary" label="distributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="1077" end="1089" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q735428" start="1104" end="1112" title="town (China)" label="Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q59218" start="1158" end="1173" title="Dongguan County" label="Dongguan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q59095" start="1210" end="1216" title="Zhuhai" label="Zhuhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="1254" end="1275" title="Northern Song dynasty" label="Northern Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="1355" end="1367" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="1395" end="1400" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319473" start="1618" end="1628" title="Ilha Verde" label="Ilha Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073822" start="1630" end="1635" title="Taipa" label="Taipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022920" start="1640" end="1647" title="Coloane" label="Coloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q839909" start="1736" end="1749" title="Bao&amp;#x27;an County" label="Pao-an County"/>
<link wikidata="Q59218" start="1754" end="1770" title="Dongguan" label="Tung-kuan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q59223" start="1994" end="2011" title="Zhongshan" label="Chung-shan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252689" start="2068" end="2075" title="Doumen District" label="Tou-men"/>
<link wikidata="Q948245" start="2077" end="2083" title="Panyu" label="Pan-yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q945428" start="2085" end="2092" title="Shunde" label="Shun-te"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023903" start="2097" end="2106" title="Xinhui" label="Hsin-huei"/>
<link wikidata="Q59095" start="2269" end="2275" title="Zhuhai" label="Zhuhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070990" start="2362" end="2379" title="county-level city" label="county-level city"/>
<link wikidata="Q748149" start="2407" end="2423" title="prefecture-level city" label="prefecture level"/>
<link wikidata="Q494978" start="2466" end="2487" title="special economic zone" label="special economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="2746" end="2755" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405562" wikidata="Q14947941" url="?curid=405562" title="Solomonoff's theory of inductive inference">
<text>Solomonoff&#x27;s theory of inductive inference proposes that all problems of logical induction can be interpreted as finding a model that predicts what comes next given some sequence, and that the theoretically most likely model for what comes next should be the smallest possible computer program that outputs the sequence so far. It formalizes the philosophical notion of Occam&#x27;s razor using Bayesian probability theory by defining a prior probability distribution over all possible programs (models), where the prior probability of a program being the best model should be precisely formula_1 where formula_2 is the &quot;minimum length description&quot;, a.k.a. Kolmogorov complexity of that program.

Solomonoff proved that this induction is incomputable (or more precisely, lower semi-computable), but noted that &quot;this incomputability is of a very benign kind&quot;, and that it &quot;in no way inhibits its use for practical prediction&quot; (as it can be approximated from below more accurately with more computational resources). It is only &quot;incomputable&quot; in the benign sense that no scientific consensus is able to prove that the best current scientific theory is the best of all possible theories. However, Solomonoff&#x27;s theory does provide an objective criterion for deciding among the current scientific theories explaining a given set of observations.

==Origin==

===Philosophical===
The theory is based in philosophical foundations, and was founded by Ray Solomonoff around 1960. It is a mathematically formalized combination of Occam&#x27;s razor and the Principle of Multiple Explanations. All computable theories which perfectly describe previous observations are used to calculate the probability of the next observation, with more weight put on the shorter computable theories. Marcus Hutter&#x27;s universal artificial intelligence builds upon this to calculate the expected value of an action.

===Principle===
Solomonoff&#x27;s induction has been argued to be the computational formalization of pure Bayesianism. To understand, recall that Bayesianism derives the posterior probability formula_3 of a theory formula_4 given data formula_5 by applying Bayes rule, which yields

:formula_6

where theories formula_7 are alternatives to theory formula_4. For this equation to make sense, the quantities formula_9 and formula_10 must be well-defined for all theories formula_4 and formula_7. In other words, any theory must define a probability distribution over observable data formula_5. Solomonoff&#x27;s induction essentially boils down to demanding that all such probability distributions be computable.

Interestingly, the set of computable probability distributions is a subset of the set of all programs, which is countable. Similarly, the sets of observable data considered by Solomonoff were finite. Without loss of generality, we can thus consider that any observable data is a finite bit string. As a result, Solomonoff&#x27;s induction can be defined by only invoking discrete probability distributions.

Solomonoff&#x27;s induction then allows to make probabilistic predictions of future data formula_14, by simply obeying the laws of probability. Namely, we have formula_15. This quantity can be interpreted as the average predictions formula_16 of all theories formula_4 given past data formula_5, weighted by their posterior credences formula_3.

===Mathematical===
The proof of the &quot;razor&quot; is based on the known mathematical properties of a probability distribution over a countable set. These properties are relevant because the infinite set of all programs is a denumerable set. The sum S of the probabilities of all programs must be exactly equal to one (as per the definition of probability) thus the probabilities must roughly decrease as we enumerate the infinite set of all programs, otherwise S will be strictly greater than one. To be more precise, for every formula_20 &gt; 0, there is some length &quot;l&quot; such that the probability of all programs longer than &quot;l&quot; is at most formula_20. This does not, however, preclude very long programs from having very high probability.

Fundamental ingredients of the theory are the concepts of algorithmic probability and Kolmogorov complexity. The universal prior probability of any prefix &quot;p&quot; of a computable sequence &quot;x&quot; is the sum of the probabilities of all programs (for a universal computer) that compute something starting with &quot;p&quot;. Given some &quot;p&quot; and any computable but unknown probability distribution from which &quot;x&quot; is sampled, the universal prior and Bayes&#x27; theorem can be used to predict the yet unseen parts of &quot;x&quot; in optimal fashion.

==Mathematical guarantees==

===Solomonoff&#x27;s completeness===

The remarkable property of Solomonoff&#x27;s induction is its completeness. In essence, the completeness theorem guarantees that the expected cumulative errors made by the predictions based on Solomonoff&#x27;s induction are upper-bounded by the Kolmogorov complexity of the (stochastic) data generating process. The errors can be measured using the Kullback–Leibler divergence or the square of the difference between the induction&#x27;s prediction and the probability assigned by the (stochastic) data generating process.

===Solomonoff&#x27;s uncomputability===

Unfortunately, Solomonoff also proved that Solomonoff&#x27;s induction is uncomputable. In fact, he showed that computability and completeness are mutually exclusive: any complete theory must be uncomputable. The proof of this is derived from a game between the induction and the environment. Essentially, any computable induction can be tricked by a computable environment, by choosing the computable environment that negates the computable induction&#x27;s prediction. This fact can be regarded as an instance of the &quot;no free lunch theorem&quot;.

==Modern applications==

===Artificial intelligence===
Though Solomonoff&#x27;s inductive inference is not computable, several AIXI-derived algorithms approximate it in order to make it run on a modern computer. The more computing power they are given, the closer their predictions are to the predictions of inductive inference (their mathematical limit is Solomonoff&#x27;s inductive inference).

Another direction of inductive inference is based on E. Mark Gold&#x27;s model of learning in the limit from 1967 and has developed since then more and more models of learning. The general scenario is the following: Given a class &quot;S&quot; of computable functions, is there a learner (that is, recursive functional) which for any input of the form (&quot;f&quot;(0),&quot;f&quot;(1)...,&quot;f&quot;(&quot;n&quot;)) outputs a hypothesis (an index &quot;e&quot; with respect to a previously agreed on acceptable numbering of all computable functions; the indexed function may be required consistent with the given values of &quot;f&quot;). A learner &quot;M&quot; learns a function &quot;f&quot; if almost all its hypotheses are the same index &quot;e&quot;, which generates the function &quot;f&quot;; &quot;M&quot; learns &quot;S&quot; if &quot;M&quot; learns every &quot;f&quot; in &quot;S&quot;. Basic results are that all recursively enumerable classes of functions are learnable while the class REC of all computable functions is not learnable.
Many related models have been considered and also the learning of classes of recursively enumerable sets from positive data is a topic studied from Gold&#x27;s pioneering paper in 1967 onwards. A far reaching extension of the Gold’s approach is developed by Schmidhuber&#x27;s theory of generalized Kolmogorov complexities, which are kinds of super-recursive algorithms.

==See also==
* Algorithmic information theory
* Bayesian inference
* Inductive inference
* Inductive probability
* Mill&#x27;s methods
* Minimum description length
* Minimum message length
* For a philosophical viewpoint, see: Problem of induction and New riddle of induction

==References==
==Sources==
* Burgin, M. (2005), &quot;Super-recursive Algorithms&quot;, Monographs in computer science, Springer. 
* Burgin, M., &quot;How We Know What Technology Can Do&quot;, &quot;Communications of the ACM&quot;, v. 44, No. 11, 2001, pp. 82–88.
* Burgin, M.; Eberbach, E., &quot;Universality for Turing Machines, Inductive Turing Machines and Evolutionary Algorithms&quot;, &quot;Fundamenta Informaticae&quot;, v. 91, No. 1, 2009, 53–77.
* Burgin, M.; Eberbach, E., &quot;On Foundations of Evolutionary Computation: An Evolutionary Automata Approach&quot;, in &quot;Handbook of Research on Artificial Immune Systems and Natural Computing: Applying Complex Adaptive Technologies&quot; (Hongwei Mo, Ed.), IGI Global, Hershey, Pennsylvania, 2009, 342–360.
* Burgin, M.; Eberbach, E., &quot;Evolutionary Automata: Expressiveness and Convergence of Evolutionary Computation&quot;, &quot;Computer Journal&quot;, v. 55, No. 9, 2012, pp. 1023–1029.
* Burgin, M.; Klinger, A. Experience, Generations, and Limits in Machine Learning, &quot;Theoretical Computer Science&quot;, v. 317, No. 1/3, 2004, pp. 71–91
* Davis, Martin (2006) &quot;The Church–Turing Thesis: Consensus and opposition]&quot;. Proceedings, Computability in Europe 2006. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 3988 pp. 125–132.
* Gasarch, W.; Smith, C. H. (1997) &quot;A survey of inductive inference with an emphasis on queries&quot;. &quot;Complexity, logic, and recursion theory&quot;, Lecture Notes in Pure and Appl. Math., 187, Dekker, New York, pp. 225–260.
* Hay, Nick. &quot;Universal Semimeasures: An Introduction,&quot; CDMTCS Research Report Series, University of Auckland, Feb. 2007.
* Jain, Sanjay; Osherson, Daniel; Royer, James; Sharma, Arun, &quot;Systems that Learn: An Introduction to Learning Theory&quot; (second edition), MIT Press, 1999.
* Li Ming; Vitanyi, Paul, &quot;An Introduction to Kolmogorov Complexity and Its Applications&quot;, 2nd Edition, Springer Verlag, 1997.
* Osherson, Daniel; Stob, Michael; Weinstein, Scott, &quot;Systems That Learn, An Introduction to Learning Theory for Cognitive and Computer Scientists&quot;, MIT Press, 1986.
* 

==External links==
*Algorithmic probability – Scholarpedia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14947941" start="0" end="47" title="Solomonoff&amp;#x27;s theory of inductive inference" label="Solomonoff&amp;#x27;s theory of inductive inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="78" end="95" title="Induction (logic)" label="logical induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q131012" start="375" end="393" title="Occam&amp;#x27;s razor" label="Occam&amp;#x27;s razor"/>
<link wikidata="Q812534" start="400" end="427" title="Bayesian probability theory" label="Bayesian probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q278090" start="442" end="472" title="Prior probability" label="prior probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456811" start="672" end="693" title="Kolmogorov complexity" label="Kolmogorov complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148456" start="753" end="765" title="incomputable" label="incomputable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123640" start="1493" end="1507" title="Ray Solomonoff" label="Ray Solomonoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q131012" start="1570" end="1588" title="Occam&amp;#x27;s razor" label="Occam&amp;#x27;s razor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43216" start="1597" end="1631" title="Principle of Multiple Explanations" label="Principle of Multiple Explanations"/>
<link wikidata="Q818888" start="1637" end="1647" title="computable" label="computable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758241" start="1824" end="1837" title="Marcus Hutter" label="Marcus Hutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18204908" start="1845" end="1878" title="universal artificial intelligence" label="universal artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="1913" end="1927" title="expected value" label="expected value"/>
<link wikidata="Q812534" start="2049" end="2060" title="Bayesian probability" label="Bayesianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q818888" start="2642" end="2652" title="computable" label="computable"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="2767" end="2776" title="Countable set" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992074" start="2941" end="2951" title="bit array" label="bit string"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="3546" end="3559" title="countable set" label="countable set"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="3756" end="3767" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724365" start="4232" end="4255" title="algorithmic probability" label="algorithmic probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456811" start="4260" end="4281" title="Kolmogorov complexity" label="Kolmogorov complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q278090" start="4297" end="4314" title="prior probability" label="prior probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="4437" end="4455" title="universal computer" label="universal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456811" start="5066" end="5087" title="Kolmogorov complexity" label="Kolmogorov complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q255166" start="5170" end="5197" title="Kullback–Leibler divergence" label="Kullback–Leibler divergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q818888" start="5498" end="5511" title="computability" label="computability"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045226" start="5911" end="5932" title="no free lunch theorem" label="no free lunch theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q818888" start="6048" end="6058" title="computable" label="computable"/>
<link wikidata="Q18204908" start="6068" end="6072" title="AIXI" label="AIXI"/>
<link wikidata="Q177239" start="6289" end="6294" title="limit (math)" label="limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q71332631" start="6392" end="6404" title="E. Mark Gold" label="E. Mark Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248789" start="6421" end="6442" title="Language identification in the limit" label="learning in the limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295939" start="7736" end="7761" title="super-recursive algorithm" label="super-recursive algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757543" start="7780" end="7810" title="Algorithmic information theory" label="Algorithmic information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q812535" start="7813" end="7831" title="Bayesian inference" label="Bayesian inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="7834" end="7853" title="Inductive inference" label="Inductive inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050471" start="7856" end="7877" title="Inductive probability" label="Inductive probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q301935" start="7880" end="7899" title="Mill&amp;#x27;s methods" label="Mill&amp;#x27;s methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417790" start="7902" end="7928" title="Minimum description length" label="Minimum description length"/>
<link wikidata="Q4428882" start="7931" end="7953" title="Minimum message length" label="Minimum message length"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570367" start="7992" end="8012" title="Problem of induction" label="Problem of induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469453" start="8017" end="8040" title="New riddle of induction" label="New riddle of induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239172" start="9162" end="9175" title="Martin Davis (mathematician)" label="Davis, Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21825565" start="9346" end="9357" title="William Gasarch" label="Gasarch, W."/>
<link wikidata="Q5040312" start="9359" end="9371" title="Carl Herbert Smith" label="Smith, C. H."/>
<link wikidata="Q73820" start="9859" end="9868" title="MIT Press" label="MIT Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q73820" start="10172" end="10181" title="MIT Press" label="MIT Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405564" wikidata="Q10283" url="?curid=405564" title="Kumbh Mela">
<text>Kumbh Mela (; ) is an important Hindu pilgrimage, celebrated approximately every 6 or 12 years, correlated with the partial or full revolution of Jupiter.

A ritual dip in the waters marks the festival. It is also a celebration of community commerce with numerous fairs, education, religious discourses by saints, mass gatherings of monks, and entertainment. The seekers believe that bathing in these rivers is a means to prāyaścitta (atonement, penance, restorative action) for past mistakes, and that it cleanses them of their sins.

In many parts of India, similar but smaller community pilgrimage and bathing festivals are called the Magha Mela, Makar Mela or equivalent. For example, in Tamil Nadu, the Magha Mela with water-dip ritual is a festival of antiquity. This festival is held at the Mahamaham tank (near Kaveri river) every 12 years at Kumbakonam, attracts millions of South Indian Hindus and has been described as the Tamil Kumbh Mela. Other places where the Magha-Mela or Makar-Mela bathing pilgrimage and fairs have been called Kumbh Mela include Kurukshetra, Rajim, Sonipat, and Panauti (Nepal).

Before 1858, the name &quot;Kumbh&quot; was applied only to the 12th occurrence of an annual mela in Haridwar during April or May. In Allahabad (now Prayagraj), there was an annual &quot;Magh Mela&quot; in January or February that had found mention in Hindu texts, including Tulsidas&#x27;s &quot;Ramcharitmanas&quot;. The Haridwar mela had been riven by violence, especially by armed Akhara groups. In 1796, during East India Company rule in India, the violence in Haridwar&#x27;s kumbh had taken 500 lives and a British armed unit with cannon had to be called in to stem it. In 1858, after the Indian Rebellion of 1857 had been suppressed and the British Raj instituted, Allahabad had become the capital of North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Uncertain about their place in the new political order, the &quot;Pragwal&quot;s, or members of the traditional priest castes at Allahabad&#x27;s &quot;sangam&quot; sought to have some latitude for their profession and proposed the idea of an organised pilgrimage with British surveillance. The British came to accept this in part because of lingering pre-1857 notions of their patronising an idealised Hinduism. The first Kumbh Mela in Allahabad was organised in 1870 with British supervision. By 1870, an adequate beginning had been made in laying a train network in India, which made travel over longer distances easier. 

The weeks over which the festival is observed cycle at each site approximately once every 12 years based on the Hindu luni-solar calendar and the relative astrological positions of Jupiter, the sun and the moon. The difference between Prayag and Haridwar festivals is about 6 years, and both feature a Maha (major) and Ardha (half) Kumbh Melas. The exact years – particularly for the Kumbh Melas at Ujjain and Nashik – have been a subject of dispute in the 20th century. The Nashik and Ujjain festivals have been celebrated in the same year or one year apart, typically about 3 years after the Prayagraj Kumbh Mela.

The Kumbh Melas have three dates around which the significant majority of pilgrims participate, while the festival itself lasts between one and three months around these dates. Each festival attracts millions, with the largest gathering at the Prayag Kumbh Mela and the second largest at Haridwar. According to the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; and Indian authorities, more than 200 million Hindus gathered for the Kumbh Mela in 2019, including 50 million on the festival&#x27;s most crowded day. The festival is one of the largest peaceful gatherings in the world, and considered as the &quot;world&#x27;s largest congregation of religious pilgrims&quot;. It has been inscribed on the UNESCO&#x27;s Representative List of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity. The festival is observed over many days, with the day of Amavasya attracting the largest number on a single day. According to official figures, the largest one-day attendance at the Kumbh Mela was 30 million on 10 February 2013, and 50 million on 4 February 2019.

== Etymology and nomenclature ==
The &quot;Kumbha&quot; in Kumbha Mela literally means &quot;pitcher, jar, pot&quot; in Sanskrit. It is found in the Vedic texts, in this sense, often in the context of holding water or in mythical legends about the nectar of immortality. The word Kumbha or its derivatives are found in the &quot;Rigveda&quot; (1500–1200 BCE), for example, in verse 10.89.7; verse 19.16 of the &quot;Yajurveda&quot;, verse 6.3 of &quot;Samaveda&quot;, verse 19.53.3 of the &quot;Atharvaveda&quot;, and other Vedic and post-Vedic ancient Sanskrit literature. In astrological texts, the term also refers to the zodiac sign of Aquarius. The astrological etymology dates to late 1st-millennium CE.

The word &quot;mela&quot; means &quot;unite, join, meet, move together, assembly, junction&quot; in Sanskrit, particularly in the context of fairs, and community celebrations. This word too is found in the &quot;Rigveda&quot; and other ancient Hindu texts. Thus, Kumbh Mela means an &quot;assembly, meet, union&quot; around &quot;water or nectar of immortality&quot;.

===Historical origins===

Many Hindus believe that the Kumbh Mela originated in times immemorial and is attested in the Hindu Puranas about Samudra Manthana (&quot;lit.&quot; churning of the ocean) found in the Puranas. Historians, in contrast, reject these claims as none of the ancient or medieval era texts that mention the Samudra Manthana legend ever link it to a &quot;mela&quot; or festival. According to Giorgio Bonazzoli, a scholar of Sanskrit Puranas, these are anachronistic explanations, an adaptation of early legends to a later practice by a &quot;small circle of adherents&quot; who have sought the roots of a highly popular pilgrimage and festival.
Hindu mythology describes the creation of a &quot;pot of amrita (nectar of immortality)&quot; after the forces of good and evil churn the ocean of creation. The gods and demons fight over this pot, the &quot;kumbha&quot;, of nectar in order to gain immortality. In a later day extension to the legend, the pot is spilt at four places, and that is the origin of the four Kumbha Melas. The story varies, with some stating Vishnu as Mohini avatar, others stating Dhanavantari or Garuda or Indra spilling the pot. This &quot;spilling&quot; and associated Kumbh Mela story is not found in the earliest mentions of the original legend of Samudra Manthana (churning of the ocean) such as the Vedic era texts (pre-500 BCE), or the earliest of the &quot;Puranas&quot; (3rd to 10th-century CE).

While the &quot;Kumbha Mela&quot; phrase is not found in the ancient or medieval era texts, numerous chapters and verses in Hindu texts are found about a bathing festival, the sacred junction of rivers Ganga, Yamuna and sacred Saraswati at Prayag, and pilgrimage to Prayag. These are in the form of &quot;Snana&quot; (bathe) ritual and in the form of &quot;Prayag Mahatmya&quot; (greatness of Prayag, historical tour guides in Sanskrit).

==History==
The first Kumbh Mela event was organised in 1870, under British supervision. Some observers have found similarities between Kumbh Mela and other events that took place in the earlier times.

A mention of Prayaga and the bathing pilgrimage is found in &quot;Rigveda Pariśiṣṭa&quot; (supplement to the &quot;Rigveda&quot;). It is also mentioned in the Pali canons of Buddhism, such as in section 1.7 of &quot;Majjhima Nikaya&quot;, wherein the Buddha states that bathing in &quot;Payaga&quot; (Skt: Prayaga) cannot wash away cruel and evil deeds, rather the virtuous one should be pure in heart and fair in action. The &quot;Mahabharata&quot; mentions a bathing pilgrimage at Prayag as a means of &quot;prāyaścitta&quot; (atonement, penance) for past mistakes and guilt. In &quot;Tirthayatra Parva&quot;, before the great war, the epic states &quot;the one who observes firm [ethical] vows, having bathed at Prayaga during Magha, O best of the Bharatas, becomes spotless and reaches heaven.&quot; In &quot;Anushasana Parva&quot;, after the war, the epic elaborates this bathing pilgrimage as &quot;geographical tirtha&quot; that must be combined with &quot;Manasa-tirtha&quot; (tirtha of the heart) whereby one lives by values such as truth, charity, self-control, patience and others.

There are other references to Prayaga and river-side festivals in ancient Indian texts, including at the places where present-day Kumbh Melas are held, but the exact age of the Kumbh Mela is uncertain. The 7th-century Buddhist Chinese traveller Xuanzang (Hiuen Tsang) mentions king Harsha and his capital of Prayag, which he states to be a sacred Hindu city with hundreds of &quot;deva temples&quot; and two Buddhist institutions. He also mentions the Hindu bathing rituals at the junction of the rivers. According to some scholars, this is the earliest surviving historical account of the Kumbh Mela, which took place in present-day Prayag in 644 CE.

Some traditions ascribe Kumbha Mela&#x27;s origins to the 8th CE philosopher Shankara as a part of his efforts to start major Hindu gatherings for philosophical discussions and debates along with Hindu monasteries across the Indian subcontinent.

Kama MacLean – an Indologist who has published articles on the Kumbh Mela predominantly based on the colonial archives and English-language media, states based on emails from other scholars and a more recent interpretation of the 7th-century Xuanzang memoir, the Prayag event happened every 5 years (and not 12 years), featured a Buddha statue, involved alms giving and it might have been a Buddhist festival. In contrast, Ariel Glucklich – a scholar of Hinduism and Anthropology of Religion, the Xuanzang memoir includes, somewhat derisively, the reputation of Prayag as a place where people (Hindus) once committed superstitious devotional suicide to liberate their souls, and how a Brahmin of an earlier era successfully put an end to this practice. This and other details such as the names of temples and bathing pools suggest that Xuanzang presented Hindu practices at Prayag in the 7th century, from his Buddhist perspective and perhaps to &quot;amuse his audience back in China&quot;, states Glucklich.

Other early accounts of the significance of Prayag to Hinduism are found in the various versions of the &quot;Prayaga Mahatmya&quot;, dated to the late 1st millennium CE. These Purana-genre Hindu texts describe it as a place &quot;bustling with pilgrims, priests, vendors, beggars, guides&quot; and local citizens busy along the confluence of the rivers (&quot;Sangam&quot;). These Sanskrit guide books of the medieval era India were updated over its editions, likely by priests and guides who had a mutual stake in the economic returns from the visiting pilgrims. One of the longest sections about Prayag rivers and their significance to Hindu pilgrimage is found in chapters 103–112 of the &quot;Matsya Purana&quot;.

=== Evolution of earlier melas to Kumbh Melas ===

Some observers have found similarities between Kumbh Mela and other events that took place in the earlier times.

According to James Lochtefeld – a scholar of Indian religions, the phrase Kumbh Mela and historical data about it is missing in early Indian texts. However, states Lochtefeld, these historical texts &quot;clearly reveal large, well-established bathing festivals&quot; that were either annual or based on the twelve-year cycle of planet Jupiter. Manuscripts related to Hindu ascetics and warrior-monks – &quot;akharas&quot; fighting the Islamic Sultanates and Mughal Empire era – mention bathing pilgrimage and a large periodic assembly of Hindus at religious festivals associated with bathing, gift-giving, commerce and organisation. An early account of the Haridwar Kumbh Mela was published by Captain Thomas Hardwicke in 1796 CE.
According to James Mallinson – a scholar of Hindu yoga manuscripts and monastic institutions, bathing festivals at Prayag with large gatherings of pilgrims are attested since &quot;at least the middle of the first millennium CE&quot;, while textual evidence exists for similar pilgrimage at other major sacred rivers since the medieval period. Four of these morphed under the Kumbh Mela brand during the East India Company rule (British colonial era) when it sought to control the war-prone monks and the lucrative tax and trade revenues at these Hindu pilgrimage festivals. Additionally, the priests sought the British administration to recognise the festival and protect their religious rights.

The 16th-century &quot;Ramcharitmanas&quot; of Tulsidas mentions an annual &quot;Mela&quot; in Prayag, as does a Muslim historian&#x27;s &quot;Ain-i-Akbari&quot; (c. 1590 CE). The latter Akbar-era Persian text calls Prayag (spells it &quot;Priyag&quot;) the &quot;king of shrines&quot; for the Hindus, and mentions that it is considered particularly holy in the Hindu month of &quot;Magha&quot;. The late 16th-century &quot;Tabaqat-i-Akbari&quot; also records of an annual bathing festival at Prayag Sangam where &quot;various classes of Hindus came from all sides of the country to bathe, in such numbers, that the jungles and plains [around it] were unable to hold them&quot;.

The Kumbh Mela of Haridwar appears to be the original Kumbh Mela, since it is held according to the astrological sign &quot;Kumbha&quot; (Aquarius), and because there are several references to a 12-year cycle for it. The later Mughal Empire era texts that contain the term &quot;Kumbha Mela&quot; in Haridwar&#x27;s context include &quot;Khulasat-ut-Tawarikh&quot; (1695–1699 CE), and &quot;Chahar Gulshan&quot; (1759 CE). The &quot;Khulasat-ut-Tawarikh&quot; also mentions an annual bathing pilgrimage festival in Prayag, but it does not call it Kumbh. Both these Mughal era texts use the term &quot;Kumbh Mela&quot; to describe only Haridwar&#x27;s fair, mentioning a similar fair held in Prayag and Nashik. The &quot;Khulasat-ut-Tawarikh&quot; lists the following melas: an annual mela and a Kumbh Mela every 12 years at Haridwar; a mela held at Trimbak when Jupiter enters Leo (that is, once in 12 years); and an annual mela held at Prayag (in modern Prayagraj) in Magh.

Like the Prayag mela, the bathing pilgrimage mela at Nasik and Ujjain are of considerable antiquity. However, these were referred to as &quot;Singhasth mela&quot;, and the phrase &quot;Kumbh mela&quot; is yet to be found in literature prior to the 19th century. The phrases such as &quot;Maha Kumbh&quot; and &quot;Ardh Kumbh&quot; in the context of the ancient religious pilgrimage festivals with different names at Prayag, Nasik and Ujjain are evidently of a more modern era.
The Magh Mela of Prayag is probably the oldest among the four modern-day Kumbh Melas. It dates from the early centuries CE, given it has been mentioned in several early Puranas. However, the name Kumbh for these more ancient bathing pilgrimages probably dates to the mid-19th century. D. P. Dubey states that none of the ancient Hindu texts call the Prayag fair a &quot;Kumbh Mela&quot;. Kama Maclean states that the early British records do not mention the name &quot;Kumbh Mela&quot; or the 12-year cycle for the Prayag fair. The first British reference to the Kumbh Mela in Prayag occurs only in an 1868 report, which mentions the need for increased pilgrimage and sanitation controls at the &quot;Coomb fair&quot; to be held in January 1870. According to Maclean, the Prayagwal Brahmin priests of Prayag coopted the Kumbh legend and brand to the annual Prayag Magh Mela given the socio-political circumstances in the 19th century.

The Kumbh Mela at Ujjain began in the 18th century when the Maratha ruler Ranoji Shinde invited ascetics from Nashik to Ujjain for a local festival. Like the priests at Prayag, those at Nashik and Ujjain, competing with other places for a sacred status, may have adopted the Kumbh tradition for their pre-existing Magha melas.

===Akharas: Warrior monks, recruitment drive and logistics===
One of the key features of the Kumbh Mela has been the camps and processions of the &quot;sadhus&quot; (monks). By the 18th century, many of these had organised into one of thirteen &quot;akharas&quot; (warrior ascetic bands, monastic militia), of which ten were related to Hinduism and three related to Sikhism. Seven have belonged to the Shaivism tradition, three to Vaishnavism, two to Udasis (founded by Guru Nanak&#x27;s son) and one to Nirmalas. These soldier-monk traditions have been a well-established feature of the Indian society, and they are prominent feature of the Kumbh melas.
Until the East India Company rule, the Kumbh Melas (Magha Melas) were managed by these akharas. They provided logistical arrangements, and policing, intervened and judged any disputes and collected taxes. They also have been a central attraction and a stop for mainstream Hindus who seek their &quot;darsana&quot; (meeting, view) as well as spiritual guidance and blessings. The Kumbh Melas have been one of their recruitment and initiation venues, as well as the place to trade. These &quot;akharas&quot; have roots in the Hindu &quot;Naga&quot; (naked) monks tradition, who went to war without clothes. These monastic groups traditionally credit the Kumbh mela to the 8th-century Hindu philosopher Adi Shankara, as a part of his efforts to start monastic institutions (&quot;matha&quot;), and major Hindu gatherings for philosophical discussions and debates. However, there is no historical literary evidence that he actually did start the Kumbh melas.

During the 17th century, the &quot;akharas&quot; competed for ritual primacy, priority rights to who bathes first or at the most auspicious time, and prominence leading to violent conflicts. The records from the East India Company rule era report of violence between the &quot;akharas&quot; and numerous deaths. At the 1760 Kumbh Mela in Haridwar, a clash broke out between Shaivite Gosains and Vaishnavite Bairagis (ascetics), resulting in hundreds of deaths. A copper plate inscription of the Maratha Peshwa claims that 12,000 ascetics died in a clash between Shaivite &quot;sanyasi&quot;s and Vaishnavite &quot;bairagi&quot;s at the 1789 Nashik Kumbh Mela. The dispute started over the bathing order, which then indicated the status of the &quot;akhara&quot;s. At the 1796 Kumbh Mela in Haridwar, violence broke out between the Shaivites and the Udasis on logistics and camping rights.

The repetitive clashes, battle-ready nature of the warrior monks, and the lucrative tax and trading opportunities at Kumbh melas in the 18th century attracted the attention of the East India Company officials. They intervened, laid out the camps, trading spaces, and established a bathing order for each akhara. After 1947, the state governments have taken over this role and provide the infrastructure for the Kumbh Mela in their respective states. The first Kumbh Mela event under British supervision was organised in 1870.

The Kumbh Melas attract many loner &quot;sadhus&quot; (monks) who do not belong to any akharas. Of those who do belong to a group, the thirteen active akharas have been,
*7 Shaiva akharas: Mahanirvani, Atal, Niranjani, Anand, Juna, Avahan, and Agni
*3 Vaishnava akharas: Nirvani, Digamb

== Significance and impact ==
The Kumbh Melas of the past, albeit with different regional names, attracted large attendance and have been religiously significant to the Hindus for centuries. They have included initiation of followers to the &quot;akharas&quot;, discourses of religious leaders, and religious music. The 1834 Islamic encyclopaedia &quot;Yadgar-i-Bahaduri&quot; written in Lucknow described the Prayag festival and its sanctity to the Hindus. It is also financially significant.

Officials of the East India Company saw the Hindu pilgrimage as a means to collect large sums of revenue through a &quot;pilgrim tax&quot; and taxes on the trade that occurred during the festival. The British officials raised the tax to amount greater than average monthly income and the attendance fell drastically. The Prayagwal pandas resisted as the impact of the religious tax on the pilgrims became clear. According to colonial records, they had originally supported the tax; since the records of the Prayag Mela during this period were written by colonialists and missionaries, Macclean argues that they present a biased materialistic view. 

Baptist missionary John Chamberlain, who visited the 1824 Ardh Kumbh Mela at Haridwar, stated that a large number of visitors came there for trade. He also includes a 1814 letter from his missionary friend who distributed copies of the Gospel to the pilgrims and tried to convert some to Christianity. According to an 1858 account of the Haridwar Kumbh Mela by the British civil servant Robert Montgomery Martin, the visitors at the fair included people from a number of races and clime. Along with priests, soldiers, and religious mendicants, the fair had horse traders from Bukhara, Kabul, Turkistan as well as Arabs and Persians. The festival had roadside merchants of food grains, confectioners, clothes, toys and other items. Thousands of pilgrims in every form of transport as well as on foot marched to the pilgrimage site, dressed in colourful costumes, some without clothes, occasionally shouting &quot;Mahadeo Bol&quot; and &quot;Bol, Bol&quot; together. At night the river banks and camps illuminated with oil lamps, fireworks burst over the river, and innumerable floating lamps set by the pilgrims drifted downstream of the river. Several Hindu rajas, Sikh rulers and Muslim Nawabs visited the fair. Europeans watched the crowds and few Christian missionaries distributed their religious literature at the Hardwar Mela, wrote Martin.
Prior to 1838, British officials collected taxes but provided no infrastructure or services to the pilgrims. This changed particularly after 1857. According to Amna Khalid, the Kumbh Melas emerged as one of the social and political mobilisation venues and the colonial government became keen on monitoring these developments after the Indian rebellion of 1857. The government deployed police to gain this intelligence at the grassroots level of Kumbh Mela. The British officials in co-operation with the native police also made attempts to improve the infrastructure, and movement of pilgrims to avoid a stampede, detect sickness, and the sanitary conditions at the Melas. Reports of cholera led the officials to cancel the pilgrimage, but the pilgrims went on &quot;passive resistance&quot; and stated they preferred to die rather than obey the official orders.Mark Twain also visited Kumbh Mela of Prayagraj in 1895 for which he wrote:

The positive impact of kumbh mela is this festival helps preserve cultural traditions and promotes the values of spirituality, unity, and devotion.It is wonderful, the power of a faith like that, that can make multitudes upon multitudes of the old and weak and the young and frail enter without hesitation or complaint upon incredible journeys and endure the resultant miseries without repining.

In 1938, Lord Auckland abolished the pilgrim tax, after which the number of pilgrims increased. 

===1857 rebellion and the Independence movement===
According to the colonial archives, the Prayagwal community associated with the Kumbh Mela were one of those who seeded and perpetuated the resistance and 1857 rebellion against the colonial rule. Prayagwals objected to and campaigned against the colonial government-supported Christian missionaries and officials who treated them and the pilgrims as &quot;ignorant co-religionists&quot; and those who aggressively tried to convert the Hindu pilgrims to a Christian sect. During the 1857 rebellion, Colonel Neill targeted the Kumbh Mela site and shelled the region where the Prayagwals lived, destroying it in what Maclean describes as a &quot;notoriously brutal pacification of Allahabad&quot;. In response, the Prayagwals targeted and destroyed the local mission press and churches. Once the British had regained control of the region, the Prayagwals were persecuted by colonial officials. Some were convicted and hanged, while others for whom the government did not have proof enough to convict were persecuted. Large tracts of Kumbh Mela lands near the Ganga-Yamuna confluence were confiscated and annexed into the government cantonment. In the years after 1857, the Prayagwals and the Kumbh Mela pilgrim crowds carried flags with images alluding to the rebellion and the racial persecution. The British media reported these pilgrim assemblies and protests at the later Kumbh Mela as strangely &quot;hostile&quot; and with &quot;disbelief.&quot;
The Kumbh Mela continued to play an important role in the independence movement through 1947, as a place where the native people and politicians periodically gathered in large numbers. In 1906, the Sanatan Dharm Sabha met at the Prayag Kumbh Mela and resolved to start the Banaras Hindu University in Madan Mohan Malaviya&#x27;s leadership. Kumbh Melas have also been one of the hubs for the Hindutva movement and politics. In 1964, the Vishva Hindu Parishad was founded at the Haridwar Kumbh Mela.

===Rising attendance and scale===

The historical and modern estimates of attendance vary greatly between sources. For example, the colonial era &quot;Imperial Gazetteer of India&quot; reported that between 2 and 2.5 million pilgrims attended the Kumbh Mela in 1796 and 1808, then added these numbers may be exaggerations. Between 1892 and 1908, in an era of major famines, cholera and plague epidemics in British India, the pilgrimage dropped to between 300,000 and 400,000.

During World War II, the colonial government banned the Kumbh Mela to conserve scarce supplies of fuel. The ban, coupled with false rumours that Japan planned to bomb and commit genocide at the Kumbh Mela site, led to sharply lower attendance at the 1942 Kumbh Mela than in prior decades when an estimated 2 to 4 million pilgrims gathered at each Kumbh mela. After India&#x27;s independence, the attendance rose sharply. On &quot;amavasya&quot; – one of the three key bathing dates, over 5 million attended the 1954 Kumbh, about 10 million attended the 1977 Kumbh while the 1989 Kumbh attracted about 15 million.

On 14 April 1998, 10 million pilgrims attended the Kumbh Mela at Haridwar on the busiest single day, according to the Himalayan Academy editors. In 2001, IKONOS satellite images confirmed a very large human gathering, with officials estimating 70 million people over the festival, including more than 40 million on the busiest single day according to BBC News. Another estimate states that about 30 million attended the 2001 Kumbh mela on the busiest &quot;mauni amavasya&quot; day alone.
In 2007, as many as 70 million pilgrims attended the 45-day-long Ardha Kumbh Mela at Prayagraj. In 2013, 120 million pilgrims attended the Kumbh Mela at Prayagraj. Nasik has registered maximum visitors to 75 million.

Maha Kumbh at Prayagraj is the largest in the world, the attendance and scale of preparation of which keeps rising with each successive celebration. For the 2019 Ardh Kumbh at Prayagraj, the preparations included the construction of a temporary city over 2,500 hectares with 122,000 temporary toilets and range of accommodation from simple dormitory tents to 5-star tents, 800 special trains by the Indian Railways, artificially intelligent video surveillance and analytics by IBM, disease surveillance, river transport management by Inland Waterways Authority of India, and an app to help the visitors.

The Kumbh Mela is &quot;widely regarded as the world&#x27;s largest religious gathering&quot;, states James Lochtefeld. According to Kama Maclean, the coordinators and attendees themselves state that a part of the glory of the Kumbh festival is in that &quot;feeling of brotherhood and love&quot; where millions peacefully gather on the river banks in harmony and a sense of shared heritage.

In modern religious and psychological theory, the Kumbh Mela exemplifies Émile Durkheim&#x27;s concept of collective effervescence. This phenomenon occurs when individuals gather in shared rituals, fostering a profound sense of unity and belonging. The collective energy generated during the Mela strengthens social bonds and elevates individual and communal consciousness, illustrating the power of such gatherings to create shared identity and purpose.

==Stampedes and scandals==
Several stampedes have occurred at the sites related to the Kumbh Melas. After an 1820 stampede at Haridwar killed 485 people, the Company government took extensive infrastructure projects, including the construction of new ghats and road widening, to prevent further stampedes. The various Kumbh melas, in the 19th- and 20th century witnessed sporadic stampedes, each tragedy leading to changes in how the flow of pilgrims to and from the river and ghats was managed. In a major crowd crush, over 500 people died in the 1954 Kumbh Mela stampede, although the real figure varies according to different sources. In 1986, 50 people were killed in a stampede.

The Prayag Kumbh Mela in 1885 became a source of scandal when a Muslim named Husain was appointed as the Kumbh Mela manager, and Indian newspaper reports stated that Husain had &quot;organised a flotilla of festooned boats for the pleasure of European ladies and gentlemen, and entertained them with dancing girls, liquor and beef&quot; as they watched the pilgrims bathing.

The Kumbh Mela held in Haridwar in 2021 was considered a Covid-19 super spreader, contributing to increased cases in Uttarakhand and India, as the growing number of pilgrims visiting the area and numerous health guidelines being violated. As the second wave was increasing infections in India, calls to cancel the festival were rejected by the state and central government that assured the festival clean and safe.

In January 2025, at least 50 people died and 100 others were injured in the stampede at the Maha Kumbh venue in Prayagraj, and Amrit Snan was temporarily suspended. It was announced that a judicial enquiry by a three-member committee would be conducted, led by Justice Harsh Kumar. Media investigations have suggested a higher number of fatalities and a potential coverup.

==Calendar, locations and preparation==

===Types===
The Kumbh Mela is classified as:
* The Purna Kumbh Mela (sometimes just called &quot;Kumbh&quot; or &quot;full Kumbha&quot;), occurs every 12 years at a given site. 
* The Ardh Kumbh Mela (&quot;half Kumbh&quot;) occurs approximately every 6 years between the two Purna Kumbha Melas at Prayagraj and Haridwar. 
* The Maha Kumbh, which occurs every 12 Purna Kumbh Melas i.e. after every 144 years.

For the 2019 Prayagraj Kumbh Mela, the Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath announced that the Ardh Kumbh Mela (organised every 6 years) will simply be known as &quot;Kumbh Mela&quot;, and the Kumbh Mela (organised every 12 years) will be known as &quot;Maha Kumbh Mela&quot; (&quot;Great Kumbh Mela&quot;).

=== Locations ===

The fairs held at four sites are broadly recognised as the Kumbh Melas: Prayagraj, Haridwar, Nashik and Ujjain. Priests at other places have also attempted to boost the status of their &quot;tirtha&quot; by adapting the Kumbh legends. The places whose festivals have been claimed as &quot;Kumbh Mela&quot; include Thirumakudalu Narasipura in Karnataka, Varanasi and Vrindavan in Uttar Pradesh, Kumbhakonam (Mahamaham) in Tamil Nadu, Rajim (Rajim Kumbh Mela) in Chhattisgarh, Bansberia (Bansberia Kumbh Mela) in West Bengal, Kurukshetra and Sonipat in Haryana; and Panauti in Nepal. In 2022, the Bansberia Kumbh Mela (Hooghly) was claimed to have been organised after a 700-year old break. Even Tibet has hosted a festival claimed to be a Kumbh Mela.

=== Dates ===
Each site&#x27;s celebration dates are calculated in advance according to a special combination of zodiacal positions of Bṛhaspati (Jupiter), Surya (the Sun) and Chandra (the Moon). The relative years vary between the four sites, but the cycle repeats about every 12 years. Since Jupiter&#x27;s orbit completes in 11.86 years, a calendar year adjustment appears in approximately 8 cycles. Therefore, approximately once a century, the Kumbh Mela returns to a site after 11 years.

=== Past and future years ===
Kumbh Mela at Prayagraj is celebrated approximately 3 years after Kumbh at Haridwar and 3 years before Kumbh at Nashik and Ujjain (both of which are celebrated in the same year or one year apart - with Ujjain Mela occurring after Nashik).

===Festival management===
The Kumbh Mela attracts tens of millions of pilgrims. Providing for a safe and pleasant temporary stay at the festival site is a complex and challenging task. The camping (santhas/akharas), food, water, sanitation, emergency health care, fire services, policing, disaster management preparations, and the movement of people require significant prior planning. Further, assistance to those with special needs and lost family members through &quot;Bhule-Bhatke Kendra&quot; demands extensive onsite communication and coordination. In the case of Prayag in particular, the festival site is predominantly submerged during the monsoon months. The festival management workers have only two and a half months to start and complete the construction of all temporary infrastructure necessary for the pilgrims, making the task even more challenging.

In 2013, the Indian government authorities, in co-operation with &quot;seva&quot; volunteers, monks and Indian companies, set up 11 sectors with 55 camp clusters, providing round-the-clock first aid, ambulance, pharmacy, sector cleaning, sanitation, food and water distribution (setting up of pipelines operated by 42 pumps), cooking fuel, and other services. According to Baranwal et al., their 13-day field study of the 2013 Kumbh Mela found that &quot;the Mela committee and all other agencies involved in Mela management successfully supervised the event and made it convenient, efficient and safe,&quot; an assessment shared by the US-based Center for Disease Control for the Nasik Kumbh mela.

== Rituals ==
=== Bathing and processions ===
Bathing, or a dip in the river waters, with a prayer, is the central ritual of the Kumbh Melas for all pilgrims. Traditionally, on &quot;amavasya&quot; – the most cherished day for bathing – the Hindu pilgrims welcome and wait for the thirteen sadhu akharas to bathe first. This event – called &quot;shahi snan&quot; or &quot;rajyogi snan&quot; – is marked by a celebratory processional march, with banners, flags, elephants, horses and musicians along with the naked or scantily clad monks, some smeared with &quot;bhasma&quot; (ashes). These monastic institutions come from different parts of India, and have a particular emblem symbol and deity (Ganesha, Dattatreya, Hanuman, etc.). The largest contingent is the Juna akhara, traced to Adi Shankara, representing a diverse mix from the four of the largest Hindu monasteries in India with their headquarters at Sringeri, Dvarka, Jyotirmatha and Govardhana. The Mahanirbani and Niranjani are the other large contingents, and each akhara has their own lineage of saints and teachers. Large crowds gather in reverence and cheer for this procession of monks. Once these monks have taken the dip, the festival day opens for bathing by the pilgrims from far and near the site.

The bathing ritual by the pilgrims may be aided by a Prayagwal priest or maybe a simple dip that is private. When aided, the rituals may begin with &quot;mundan&quot; (shaving of head), prayers with offerings such as flowers, &quot;sindur&quot; (vermilion), milk or coconut, along with the recitation of hymns with &quot;shradha&quot; (prayers in the honour of one&#x27;s ancestors). More elaborate ceremonies include a &quot;yajna&quot; (homa) led by a priest. After these river-side rituals, the pilgrim then takes a dip in the water, stands up, prays for a short while, then exits the river waters. Many then proceed to visit old Hindu temples near the site.

The motivations for the bathing ritual are several. The most significant is the belief that the &quot;tirtha&quot; (pilgrimage) to the Kumbh Mela sites and then bathing in these holy rivers has a salvific value, &quot;moksha&quot; – a means to liberation from the cycle of rebirths (&quot;samsara&quot;). The pilgrimage is also recommended in Hindu texts to those who have made mistakes or sinned, to repent for their errors and as a means of prāyaścitta (atonement, penance) for these mistakes. Pilgrimage and bathing in holy rivers with a motivation to do penance and as a means to self-purify has Vedic precedents and is discussed in the early &quot;dharma&quot; literature of Hinduism. For example, in the epic &quot;Mahabharata&quot;, the king Yudhisthira is described to be in a state full of sorrow and despair after participating in the violence of the great war that killed many. He goes to a saint, who advises him to go on a pilgrimage to Prayag and bathe in the river Ganges as a means of penance.

=== Feasts, festivities and discussions ===

Some pilgrims walk considerable distances and arrive barefoot, as a part of their religious tradition. Most pilgrims stay for a day or two, but some stay the entire month of &quot;Magh&quot; during the festival and live an austere life during the stay. They attend spiritual discourses, fast and pray over the month, and these Kumbh pilgrims are called &quot;kalpavasis&quot;.

The festival site is strictly vegetarian by tradition, as violence against animals is considered unacceptable. Many pilgrims practice partial (one meal a day) or full &quot;vrata&quot; (day-long fasting), and some abstain from elaborate meals. These ritual practices are punctuated by celebratory feasts where the vast number of people sit in rows and share a community meal – &quot;mahaprasada&quot; – prepared by volunteers from charitable donations. By tradition, families and companies sponsor these &quot;anna dana&quot; (food charity) events, particularly for the monks and the poor pilgrims. The management has established multiple food stalls, offering delicacies from different states of India.

Other activities at the mela include religious discussions (&quot;pravachan&quot;), devotional singing (&quot;kirtan&quot;), and religious assemblies where doctrines are debated and standardised (&quot;shastrartha&quot;). The festival grounds also feature a wide range of cultural spectacles over the month of celebrations. These include &quot;kalagram&quot; (venues of &quot;kala&quot;, Indian arts), laser light shows, classical dance and musical performances from different parts of India, thematic gates reflecting the historic regional architectural diversity, boat rides, tourist walks to historic sites near the river, as well opportunities to visit the monastic camps to watch yoga adepts and spiritual discourses.

===Darshan===

Darshan, or the act of sacred viewing, holds immense significance at the Kumbh Mela. Pilgrims undertake this journey to experience the profound religious and cultural essence of the event. Two key groups central to the Kumbh Mela are the Sadhus (Hindu ascetics) and the pilgrims. Through their dedicated yogic practices, Sadhus embody the transient nature of life and play a vital role in connecting the spiritual and the mundane.

Sadhus attend the Kumbh Mela to engage with the broader Hindu community, offering the opportunity for devotees to partake in darshan. This interaction allows pilgrims to seek spiritual guidance and advice. Darshan emphasises a visual exchange—a divine connection where worshippers symbolically &quot;drink&quot; the deity&#x27;s power through sight.

The Kumbh Mela is structured into camps, facilitating access to Sadhus for Hindu worshippers. The darshan experience is integral to the Kumbh Mela, and worshippers approach it with great reverence, ensuring they do not inadvertently offend the religious sanctity of the moment. Interactions with Sadhus are highly respectful, with devotees often leaving offerings at their feet as tokens of devotion and gratitude.

== In culture ==
Kumbh Mela has been a theme for many documentaries, including &quot;Kings with Straw Mats&quot; (1998) directed by Ira Cohen, &quot;Kumbh Mela: The Greatest Show on Earth&quot; (2001) directed by Graham Day, &quot;Short Cut to Nirvana: Kumbh Mela&quot; (2004) directed by Nick Day and produced by Maurizio Benazzo, &quot;Kumbh Mela: Songs of the River&quot; (2004) by Nadeem Uddin, &quot;Invocation, Kumbh Mela&quot; (2008), &quot;Kumbh Mela 2013: Living with Mahatiagi&quot; (2013) by the Ukrainian Religious Studies Project Ahamot, and &quot;Kumbh Mela: Walking with the Nagas&quot; (2011), &quot;Amrit: Nectar of Immortality&quot; (2012) directed by Jonas Scheu and Philipp Eyer.

In 2007, National Geographic filmed and broadcast a documentary of the Prayag Kumbh Mela, named &quot;Inside Nirvana&quot;, under the direction of Karina Holden with the scholar Kama Maclean as a consultant. In 2013, National Geographic returned and filmed the documentary &quot;Inside the Mahakumbh&quot;. Indian and foreign news media have covered the Kumbh Mela regularly. On 18 April 2010, a popular American morning show, &quot;CBS News Sunday Morning&quot;, extensively covered Haridwar&#x27;s Kumbh Mela, calling it &quot;The Largest Pilgrimage on Earth&quot;. On 28 April 2010, the BBC released an audio and a video report on Kumbh Mela, titled &quot;Kumbh Mela: &#x27;greatest show on earth&#x27;. On 30 September 2010, the Kumbh Mela featured in the second episode of the Sky One TV series &quot;An Idiot Abroad&quot; with Karl Pilkington visiting the festival.

Young siblings getting separated at the Kumbh Mela was once a recurring theme in Hindi movies. &quot;Amrita Kumbher Sandhane&quot;, a 1982 Bengali feature film directed by Dilip Roy, also documents the Kumbh Mela.

Ashish Avikunthak&#x27;s Bengali-language feature length fiction film &quot;Kalkimanthakatha&quot; (2015) was shot in the Prayag Kumbh Mela in 2013. In this film, two characters search for the tenth and final avatar of Lord Vishnu – Kalki, in the lines of Samuel Beckett&#x27;s &quot;Waiting for Godot&quot;.

== See also ==

* Barahakshetra – A semi-Kumbh Mela in Sunsari Nepal 
* Mahamaham – the Tamil Kumbh Mela 
* Pushkaram – the river festivals of Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana
* Pushkar Fair – the springtime fair in Rajasthan, includes the tradition of a dip in the Pushkar lake 
* List of largest gatherings in history
==Notes==

==References==
=== Bibliography ===
* 
*
*
* Harvard University, South Asia Institute (2015) &quot;Kumbh Mela: Mapping the Ephemeral Megacity&quot; New Delhi: Niyogi Books. 
* Kumbh Mela and The Sadhus, (English, Paperback, Badri Narain and Kedar Narain) Pilgrims Publishings, India, , 8177698052
* Kumbh : Sarvjan – Sahbhagita ka Vishalatam Amritparva with 1 Disc (Hindi, Paperback, Ramanand) Pilgrims Publishings, India, 8177696718

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10283" start="0" end="10" title="Kumbh Mela" label="Kumbh Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="32" end="37" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="38" end="48" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q37640" start="132" end="142" title="orbital period" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="146" end="153" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253853" start="422" end="433" title="prāyaścitta" label="prāyaścitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q58081623" start="605" end="622" title="Bathing Festival (disambiguation)" label="bathing festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="692" end="702" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q21099719" start="798" end="807" title="Mahamaham" label="Mahamaham"/>
<link wikidata="Q216239" start="819" end="825" title="Kaveri" label="Kaveri"/>
<link wikidata="Q913399" start="851" end="861" title="Kumbakonam" label="Kumbakonam"/>
<link wikidata="Q593256" start="1065" end="1076" title="Kurukshetra" label="Kurukshetra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286151" start="1078" end="1083" title="Rajim Kumbh Mela" label="Rajim"/>
<link wikidata="Q41561" start="1085" end="1092" title="Sonipat" label="Sonipat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049147" start="1098" end="1105" title="Panauti" label="Panauti"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262625" start="1209" end="1213" title="mela" label="mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q85783115" start="1303" end="1312" title="Magh Mela" label="Magh Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q312976" start="1391" end="1399" title="Tulsidas" label="Tulsidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q250594" start="1501" end="1507" title="Akhara" label="Akhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001966" start="1532" end="1555" title="Company rule in India" label="East India Company rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="1712" end="1736" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Indian Rebellion of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="1765" end="1776" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q138521" start="1825" end="1857" title="North-Western Provinces and Oudh" label="North-Western Provinces and Oudh"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2411" end="2433" title="Rail_transport_in_India#1853–1924:_Passenger_railways_and_expansion" label="train network in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q190552" start="2597" end="2622" title="Hindu calendar" label="Hindu luni-solar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="2666" end="2673" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q273030" start="2731" end="2739" title="Haridwar" label="Haridwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200235" start="2895" end="2901" title="Nashik" label="Nashik"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="3423" end="3446" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q973670" start="3632" end="3659" title="List of largest peaceful gatherings" label="largest peaceful gatherings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3794" end="3871" title="UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists#Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity" label="UNESCO&amp;#x27;s Representative List of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641660" start="3930" end="3938" title="Amavasya" label="Amavasya"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="4258" end="4266" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="4467" end="4474" title="Rigveda" label="Rigveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q47142" start="4554" end="4563" title="Yajurveda" label="Yajurveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q236226" start="4590" end="4598" title="Samaveda" label="Samaveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q236092" start="4633" end="4644" title="Atharvaveda" label="Atharvaveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q162119" start="4778" end="4786" title="Aquarius (astrology)" label="Aquarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q606110" start="5358" end="5374" title="Samudra Manthana" label="Samudra Manthana"/>
<link wikidata="Q188602" start="5429" end="5436" title="Puranas" label="Puranas"/>
<link wikidata="Q878062" start="5883" end="5898" title="Hindu mythology" label="Hindu mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q258267" start="5940" end="5946" title="amrita" label="amrita"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200366" start="6091" end="6097" title="kumbha" label="kumbha"/>
<link wikidata="Q57417205" start="6313" end="6319" title="Mohini" label="Mohini"/>
<link wikidata="Q202011" start="6343" end="6355" title="Dhanavantari" label="Dhanavantari"/>
<link wikidata="Q188676" start="6359" end="6365" title="Garuda" label="Garuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q128335" start="6369" end="6374" title="Indra" label="Indra"/>
<link wikidata="Q188602" start="6628" end="6635" title="Puranas" label="Puranas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="6871" end="6876" title="Ganga" label="Ganga"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="6878" end="6884" title="Yamuna" label="Yamuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q58838" start="6896" end="6905" title="Saraswati" label="Saraswati"/>
<link wikidata="Q162442" start="7324" end="7331" title="Prayaga" label="Prayaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="7377" end="7384" title="Rigveda" label="Rigveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="7485" end="7493" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q609445" start="7527" end="7542" title="Majjhima Nikaya" label="Majjhima Nikaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q42063" start="8650" end="8658" title="Xuanzang" label="Xuanzang"/>
<link wikidata="Q211258" start="8786" end="8790" title="Deva (Hinduism)" label="deva"/>
<link wikidata="Q180967" start="9135" end="9143" title="Adi Shankara" label="Shankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q625510" start="9323" end="9333" title="Indologist" label="Indologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355918" start="11014" end="11027" title="Matsya Purana" label="Matsya Purana"/>
<link wikidata="Q25189544" start="11946" end="11961" title="James Mallinson (author)" label="James Mallinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="12337" end="12355" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724561" start="12654" end="12668" title="Ramcharitmanas" label="Ramcharitmanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344867" start="12774" end="12786" title="Ain-i-Akbari" label="Ain-i-Akbari"/>
<link wikidata="Q8597" start="12818" end="12823" title="Akbar" label="Akbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12828638" start="13055" end="13071" title="Tabaqat-i-Akbari" label="Tabaqat-i-Akbari"/>
<link wikidata="Q162119" start="13449" end="13457" title="Aquarius (astrology)" label="Aquarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308021" start="13649" end="13669" title="Khulasat-ut-Tawarikh" label="Khulasat-ut-Tawarikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308001" start="13702" end="13716" title="Chahar Gulshan" label="Chahar Gulshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308021" start="13744" end="13764" title="Khulasat-ut-Tawarikh" label="Khulasat-ut-Tawarikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719283" start="14160" end="14167" title="Trimbak" label="Trimbak"/>
<link wikidata="Q162442" start="14248" end="14276" title="Allahabad" label="Prayag (in modern Prayagraj)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474033" start="14280" end="14284" title="Magha (month)" label="Magh"/>
<link wikidata="Q200235" start="14340" end="14345" title="Nashik" label="Nasik"/>
<link wikidata="Q200119" start="14350" end="14356" title="Ujjain" label="Ujjain"/>
<link wikidata="Q188602" start="14934" end="14940" title="Purana" label="Purana"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="15547" end="15554" title="Brahmin" label="Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="15761" end="15768" title="Maratha Confederacy" label="Maratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293420" start="15775" end="15788" title="Ranoji Shinde" label="Ranoji Shinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="16395" end="16402" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q234953" start="16431" end="16439" title="Shaivism" label="Shaivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45584" start="16460" end="16471" title="Vaishnavism" label="Vaishnavism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876941" start="16480" end="16485" title="Udasi" label="Udasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666619" start="16533" end="16540" title="Nirmala (sect)" label="Nirmala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001966" start="16694" end="16717" title="Company rule in India" label="East India Company rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q250594" start="16771" end="16777" title="akhara" label="akhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q180967" start="17384" end="17396" title="Adi Shankara" label="Adi Shankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069741" start="17461" end="17466" title="matha" label="matha"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="17852" end="17870" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q234953" start="18014" end="18022" title="Shaivite" label="Shaivite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911573" start="18023" end="18030" title="Gosains" label="Gosains"/>
<link wikidata="Q45584" start="18035" end="18046" title="Vaishnavite" label="Vaishnavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056043" start="18103" end="18127" title="Indian copper plate inscriptions" label="copper plate inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="18135" end="18142" title="Maratha Confederacy" label="Maratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816155" start="18143" end="18149" title="Peshwa" label="Peshwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307985" start="19698" end="19715" title="Yadgar-i-Bahaduri" label="Yadgar-i-Bahaduri"/>
<link wikidata="Q47916" start="19733" end="19740" title="Lucknow" label="Lucknow"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="19857" end="19875" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="20726" end="20732" title="Gospel" label="Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q24942482" start="20828" end="20847" title="Haridwar Kumbh Mela" label="Haridwar Kumbh Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q6874906" start="20877" end="20901" title="Robert Montgomery Martin" label="Robert Montgomery Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905705" start="21047" end="21060" title="horse trading" label="horse traders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764" start="21066" end="21073" title="Bukhara" label="Bukhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="21075" end="21080" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q848638" start="21082" end="21091" title="Turkistan (city)" label="Turkistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q684172" start="21648" end="21652" title="raja" label="raja"/>
<link wikidata="Q23017648" start="21678" end="21683" title="Nawab" label="Nawab"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="22699" end="22709" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q162442" start="22737" end="22746" title="Prayagraj" label="Prayagraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q335224" start="23182" end="23195" title="George Eden, 1st Earl of Auckland" label="Lord Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668292" start="23821" end="23834" title="James George Smith Neill" label="Colonel Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q806116" start="25045" end="25069" title="Banaras Hindu University" label="Banaras Hindu University"/>
<link wikidata="Q281347" start="25164" end="25172" title="Hindutva" label="Hindutva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528383" start="25209" end="25230" title="Vishva Hindu Parishad" label="Vishva Hindu Parishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533201" start="25646" end="25653" title="1899–1923 cholera pandemic" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="25756" end="25768" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q162442" start="26937" end="26946" title="Prayagraj" label="Prayagraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q55388025" start="27227" end="27255" title="Prayagraj Kumbh 2019" label="2019 Ardh Kumbh at Prayagraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="27410" end="27419" title="dormitory" label="dormitory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27429" end="27435" title="Hotel rating#United Kingdom" label="5-star"/>
<link wikidata="Q819425" start="27469" end="27484" title="Indian Railways" label="Indian Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906484" start="27486" end="27529" title="artificially intelligent video surveillance" label="artificially intelligent video surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407599" start="27534" end="27543" title="Video content analysis" label="analytics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="27547" end="27550" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555250" start="27552" end="27572" title="disease surveillance" label="disease surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q65294797" start="27574" end="27600" title="Water transport in India" label="river transport management"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659630" start="27604" end="27639" title="Inland Waterways Authority of India" label="Inland Waterways Authority of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="27648" end="27651" title="Application software" label="app"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948" start="28141" end="28155" title="Émile Durkheim" label="Émile Durkheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146157" start="28174" end="28198" title="collective effervescence" label="collective effervescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165983" start="28559" end="28567" title="stampede" label="stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010155" start="28775" end="28779" title="ghat" label="ghat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568077" start="29072" end="29096" title="1954 Kumbh Mela stampede" label="1954 Kumbh Mela stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q131933867" start="30073" end="30085" title="2025 Prayag Maha Kumbh Mela crowd crush" label="the stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q131378543" start="30745" end="30755" title="Maha Kumbh 2025 Mela" label="Maha Kumbh"/>
<link wikidata="Q24943353" start="30839" end="30859" title="Prayagraj Kumbh Mela" label="Prayagraj Kumbh Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683097" start="30894" end="30909" title="Yogi Adityanath" label="Yogi Adityanath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4458114" start="31353" end="31359" title="Tirtha and Kshetra" label="tirtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248455" start="31476" end="31500" title="Thirumakudalu Narasipura" label="Thirumakudalu Narasipura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="31504" end="31513" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="31515" end="31523" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q688281" start="31528" end="31537" title="Vrindavan" label="Vrindavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="31541" end="31554" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q913399" start="31556" end="31567" title="Kumbhakonam" label="Kumbhakonam"/>
<link wikidata="Q21099719" start="31569" end="31578" title="Mahamaham" label="Mahamaham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="31583" end="31593" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286150" start="31595" end="31600" title="Rajim" label="Rajim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286151" start="31602" end="31618" title="Rajim Kumbh Mela" label="Rajim Kumbh Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168" start="31623" end="31635" title="Chhattisgarh" label="Chhattisgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q622607" start="31637" end="31646" title="Bansberia" label="Bansberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131632435" start="31648" end="31668" title="Bansberia Kumbh Mela" label="Bansberia Kumbh Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="31673" end="31684" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q593256" start="31686" end="31697" title="Kurukshetra" label="Kurukshetra"/>
<link wikidata="Q41561" start="31702" end="31709" title="Sonipat" label="Sonipat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="31713" end="31720" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049147" start="31726" end="31733" title="Panauti" label="Panauti"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="31737" end="31742" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131632435" start="31757" end="31777" title="Bansberia Kumbh Mela" label="Bansberia Kumbh Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q739687" start="31779" end="31786" title="Hooghly River" label="Hooghly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="31856" end="31861" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q916959" start="32048" end="32057" title="Bṛhaspati" label="Bṛhaspati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460138" start="32059" end="32066" title="Jupiter (astrology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q204418" start="32069" end="32074" title="Surya" label="Surya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460138" start="32080" end="32083" title="Sun (astrology)" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061795" start="32089" end="32096" title="Chandra" label="Chandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460138" start="32102" end="32106" title="Moon (astrology)" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="34190" end="34216" title="Center for Disease Control" label="Center for Disease Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764567" start="35940" end="35945" title="yajna" label="yajna"/>
<link wikidata="Q192054" start="36373" end="36381" title="salvation" label="salvific"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253853" start="36620" end="36631" title="prāyaścitta" label="prāyaścitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="36898" end="36909" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238827" start="38353" end="38374" title="Pravachan" label="religious discussions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238827" start="38382" end="38391" title="pravachan" label="pravachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q947155" start="38400" end="38418" title="Kirtan" label="devotional singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q947155" start="38426" end="38432" title="kirtan" label="kirtan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490614" start="38472" end="38510" title="shastrartha" label="doctrines are debated and standardised"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490614" start="38518" end="38529" title="shastrartha" label="shastrartha"/>
<link wikidata="Q847416" start="39055" end="39062" title="Darshan (Indian religions)" label="Darshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097790" start="40386" end="40395" title="Ira Cohen" label="Ira Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="40485" end="40517" title="Short Cut to Nirvana: Kumbh Mela" label="Short Cut to Nirvana: Kumbh Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207486" start="40543" end="40551" title="Nick Day (film director)" label="Nick Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="40964" end="40983" title="National Geographic" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009252" start="41388" end="41411" title="CBS News Sunday Morning" label="CBS News Sunday Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="41545" end="41548" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q909662" start="41737" end="41744" title="Sky One" label="Sky One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374761" start="41761" end="41776" title="An Idiot Abroad" label="An Idiot Abroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q23811" start="41788" end="41803" title="Karl Pilkington" label="Karl Pilkington"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="41909" end="41921" title="Hindi cinema" label="Hindi movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748673" start="41929" end="41952" title="Amrita Kumbher Sandhane" label="Amrita Kumbher Sandhane"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="41967" end="41974" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q30604191" start="42000" end="42009" title="Dilip Roy (actor)" label="Dilip Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q125179307" start="42043" end="42060" title="Ashish Avikunthak" label="Ashish Avikunthak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="42068" end="42075" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q24943353" start="42165" end="42182" title="Allahabad Kumbh Mela" label="Prayag Kumbh Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q83090" start="42252" end="42258" title="avatar" label="avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="42267" end="42273" title="Vishnu" label="Vishnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q476824" start="42276" end="42281" title="Kalki" label="Kalki"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="42299" end="42313" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871" start="42327" end="42344" title="Waiting for Godot" label="Waiting for Godot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858196" start="42371" end="42384" title="Barahakshetra" label="Barahakshetra"/>
<link wikidata="Q28157" start="42408" end="42415" title="Sunsari" label="Sunsari"/>
<link wikidata="Q21099719" start="42425" end="42434" title="Mahamaham" label="Mahamaham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764031" start="42461" end="42470" title="Pushkaram" label="Pushkaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261803" start="42538" end="42550" title="Pushkar Fair" label="Pushkar Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q973670" start="42642" end="42679" title="List of largest gatherings in history" label="List of largest gatherings in history"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405568" wikidata="Q1768288" url="?curid=405568" title="Structuration theory">
<text>The theory of structuration is a social theory of the creation and reproduction of social systems that is based on the analysis of both &quot;structure&quot; and &quot;agents&quot; (see structure and agency), without giving primacy to either. Furthermore, in structuration theory, neither micro- nor macro-focused analysis alone is sufficient. The theory was proposed by sociologist Anthony Giddens, most significantly in &quot;The Constitution of Society&quot;, which examines phenomenology, hermeneutics, and social practices at the inseparable intersection of structures and agents. Its proponents have adopted and expanded this balanced position. Though the theory has received much criticism, it remains a pillar of contemporary sociological theory.

==Premises and origins==
Sociologist Anthony Giddens adopted a post-empiricist frame for his theory, as he was concerned with the abstract characteristics of social relations. This leaves each level more accessible to analysis via the ontologies which constitute the human social experience: space and time (&quot;and thus, in one sense, &#x27;history&#x27;&quot;). His aim was to build a broad social theory which viewed &quot;[t]he basic domain of study of the social sciences... [as] neither the experience of the individual actor, nor the existence of any form of societal totality, but social practices ordered across space and time.&quot; His focus on abstract ontology accompanied a general and purposeful neglect of epistemology or detailed research methodology, consistent with other types of pragmatism.

Giddens used concepts from objectivist and subjectivist social theories, discarding objectivism&#x27;s focus on detached structures, which lacked regard for humanist elements and subjectivism&#x27;s exclusive attention to individual or group agency without consideration for socio-structural context. He critically engaged classical nineteenth and early twentieth century social theorists such as Auguste Comte, Karl Marx, Max Weber, Émile Durkheim, Alfred Schutz, Robert K. Merton, Erving Goffman, and Jürgen Habermas. Thus, in many ways, structuration was &quot;an exercise in clarification of logical issues.&quot; Structuration drew on other fields, as well: &quot;He also wanted to bring in from other disciplines novel aspects of ontology that he felt had been neglected by social theorists working in the domains that most interested him. Thus, for example, he enlisted the aid of geographers, historians and philosophers in bringing notions of time and space into the central heartlands of social theory.&quot; Giddens hoped that a subject-wide &quot;coming together&quot; might occur which would involve greater cross-disciplinary dialogue and cooperation, especially between anthropologists, social scientists and sociologists of all types, historians, geographers, and even novelists. Believing that &quot;literary style matters&quot;, he held that social scientists are communicators who share frames of meaning across cultural contexts through their work by utilising &quot;the same sources of description (mutual knowledge) as novelists or others who write fictional accounts of social life.&quot;

Structuration differs from its historical sources. Unlike structuralism it sees the reproduction of social systems not &quot;as a mechanical outcome, [but] rather ... as an active constituting process, accomplished by, and consisting in, the doings of active subjects.&quot; Unlike Althusser&#x27;s concept of agents as &quot;bearers&quot; of structures, structuration theory sees them as active participants. Unlike the philosophy of action and other forms of interpretative sociology, structuration focuses on structure rather than production exclusively. Unlike Saussure&#x27;s production of an utterance, structuration sees language as a tool from which to view society, not as the constitution of society—parting with structural linguists such as Claude Lévi-Strauss and generative grammar theorists such as Noam Chomsky. Unlike post-structuralist theory, which put similar focus on the effects of time and space, structuration does not recognise movement, change and transition. Unlike functionalism, in which structures and their virtual synonyms, &quot;systems&quot;, comprise organisations, structuration sees structures and systems as separate concepts. Unlike Marxism, structuration avoids an overly restrictive concept of &quot;society&quot; and Marxism&#x27;s reliance on a universal &quot;motor of history&quot; (i.e. class conflict), its theories of societal &quot;adaptation&quot;, and its insistence on the working class as universal class and socialism as the ultimate form of modern society. Finally, &quot;structuration theory cannot be expected to furnish the moral guarantees that critical theorists sometimes purport to offer.&quot;

== Main ideas ==

=== Duality of structure ===
Giddens observed that in social analysis, the term &quot;structure&quot; referred generally to &quot;rules and resources&quot; and more specifically to &quot;the structuring properties allowing the &#x27;binding&#x27; of time-space in social systems&quot;. These properties make it possible for similar social practices to exist across time and space and that lend them &quot;systemic&quot; form. Agents—groups or individuals—draw upon these structures to perform social actions through embedded memory, called &quot;memory traces&quot;. Memory traces are thus the vehicle through which social actions are carried out. Structure is also, however, the result of these social practices. Thus, Giddens conceives of the &quot;duality of structure&quot; as being:
Giddens uses &quot;the duality of structure&quot; (i.e. material/ideational, micro/macro) to emphasize structure&#x27;s nature as both medium and outcome. Structures exist both internally within agents as memory traces that are the product of phenomenological and hermeneutic inheritance and externally as the manifestation of social actions. Similarly, social structures contain agents and/or are the product of past actions of agents. Giddens holds this duality, alongside &quot;structure&quot; and &quot;system,&quot; in addition to the concept of recursiveness, as the core of structuration theory. His theory has been adopted by those with structuralist inclinations, but who wish to situate such structures in human practice rather than to reify them as an ideal type or material property. (This is different, for example, from actor–network theory which appears to grant a certain autonomy to technical artifacts.)

Social systems have patterns of social relation that change over time; the changing nature of space and time determines the interaction of social relations and therefore structure. Hitherto, social structures or models were either taken to be beyond the realm of human control—the positivistic approach—or posit that action creates them—the interpretivist approach. The duality of structure emphasizes that they are different sides to the same central question of how social order is created.

Gregor McLennan suggested renaming this process &quot;the duality of structure &quot;, since both aspects are involved in using and producing social actions.

=== Cycle of structuration ===
The duality of structure is essentially a feedback–feedforward process whereby agents and structures mutually enact social systems, and social systems in turn become part of that duality. Structuration thus recognizes a social cycle. In examining social systems, structuration theory examines &quot;structure&quot;, &quot;modality&quot;, and &quot;interaction&quot;. The &quot;modality&quot; (discussed below) of a structural system is the means by which structures are translated into actions.

==== Interaction ====
Interaction is the agent&#x27;s activity within the social system, space and time. &quot;It can be understood as the fitful yet routinized occurrence of encounters, fading away in time and space, yet constantly reconstituted within different areas of time-space.&quot; Rules can affect interaction, as originally suggested by Goffman. &quot;Frames&quot; are &quot;clusters of rules which help to constitute and regulate activities, defining them as activities of a certain sort and as subject to a given range of sanctions.&quot; Frames are necessary for agents to feel &quot;ontological security, the trust that everyday actions have some degree of predictability. Whenever individuals interact in a specific context they address—without any difficulty and in many cases without conscious acknowledgement—the question: &quot;What is going on here?&quot; Framing is the practice by which agents make sense of what they are doing.

==== Routinization ====
Structuration theory is centrally concerned with &quot;order&quot; as &quot;the transcending of time and space in human social relationships&quot;. &quot;Institutionalized action&quot; and &quot;routinization&quot; are foundational in the establishment of social order and the reproduction of social systems. Routine persists in society, even during social and political revolutions, where daily life is greatly deformed, &quot;as Bettelheim demonstrates so well, routines, including those of an obnoxious sort, are re-established.&quot; Routine interactions become institutionalized features of social systems via tradition, custom and/or habit, but this is no easy societal task and it &quot;is a major error to suppose that these phenomena need no explanation. On the contrary, as Goffman (together with ethnomethodology) has helped to demonstrate, the routinized character of most social activity is something that has to be &#x27;worked at&#x27; continually by those who sustain it in their day-to-day conduct.&quot; Therefore, routinized social practices do not stem from coincidence, &quot;but the skilled accomplishments of knowledgeable agents.&quot;

&quot;Trust&quot; and &quot;tact&quot; are essential for the existence of a &quot;basic security system, the sustaining (in &quot;praxis&quot;) of a sense of ontological security, and [thus] the routine nature of social reproduction which agents skilfully organize. The monitoring of the body, the control and use of face in &#x27;face work&#x27;—these are fundamental to social integration in time and space.&quot;

==== Explanation ====

Thus, even the smallest social actions contribute to the alteration or reproduction of social systems. Social stability and order is not permanent; agents always possess a &quot;dialectic of control&quot; (discussed below) which allows them to break away from normative actions. Depending on the social factors present, agents may cause shifts in social structure.

The cycle of structuration is not a defined sequence; it is rarely a direct succession of causal events. Structures and agents are both internal and external to each other, mingling, interrupting, and continually changing each other as feedbacks and feedforwards occur. Giddens stated, &quot;The degree of &quot;systemness&quot; is very variable. ...I take it to be one of the main features of structuration theory that the extension and &#x27;closure&#x27; of societies across space and time is regarded as problematic.&quot;

The use of &quot;patriot&quot; in political speech reflects this mingling, borrowing from and contributing to nationalistic norms and supports structures such as a police state, from which it in turn gains impact.

===Structure and society===
Structures are the &quot;rules and resources&quot; embedded in agents&#x27; memory traces. Agents call upon their memory traces of which they are &quot;knowledgeable&quot; to perform social actions. &quot;Knowledgeability&quot; refers to &quot;what agents know about what they do, and why they do it.&quot; Giddens divides memory traces (&quot;structures-within-knowledgeability&quot;) into three types:
* Domination (power): Giddens also uses &quot;resources&quot; to refer to this type. &quot;Authoritative resources&quot; allow agents to control persons, whereas &quot;allocative resources&quot; allow agents to control material objects.
* Signification (meaning): Giddens suggests that meaning is inferred through structures. Agents use existing experience to infer meaning. For example, the meaning of living with mental illness comes from contextualized experiences. 
* Legitimation (norms): Giddens sometimes uses &quot;rules&quot; to refer to either signification or legitimation. An agent draws upon these &quot;stocks of knowledge&quot; via memory to inform him or herself about the external context, conditions, and potential results of an action.

When an agent uses these structures for social interactions, they are called &quot;modalities&quot; and present themselves in the forms of facility (domination), interpretive scheme/communication (signification) and norms/sanctions (legitimation).

Thus, he distinguishes between overall &quot;structures-within-knowledgeability&quot; and the more limited and task-specific &quot;modalities&quot; on which these agents subsequently draw when they interact.

The duality of structures means that structures enter &quot;simultaneously into the constitution of the agent and social practices, and &#x27;exists&#x27; in the generating moments of this constitution.&quot; &quot;Structures exist paradigmatically, as an absent set of differences, temporally &quot;present&quot; only in their instantiation, in the constituting moments of social systems.&quot; Giddens draws upon structuralism and post-structuralism in theorizing that structures and their meaning are understood by their differences.

===Agents and society===
Giddens&#x27; agents follow previous psychoanalysis work done by Sigmund Freud and others. Agency, as Giddens calls it, is human action. To be human is to be an agent (not all agents are human). Agency is critical to both the reproduction and the transformation of society. Another way to explain this concept is by what Giddens calls the &quot;reflexive monitoring of actions.&quot; &quot;Reflexive monitoring&quot; refers to agents&#x27; ability to monitor their actions and those actions&#x27; settings and contexts. Monitoring is an essential characteristic of agency. Agents subsequently &quot;rationalize,&quot; or evaluate, the success of those efforts. All humans engage in this process, and expect the same from others. Through action, agents produce structures; through reflexive monitoring and rationalization, they transform them. To act, agents must be motivated, must be knowledgeable must be able to rationalize the action; and must reflexively monitor the action.

Agents, while bounded in structure, draw upon their knowledge of that structural context when they act. However, actions are constrained by agents&#x27; inherent capabilities and their understandings of available actions and external limitations. &quot;Practical consciousness&quot; and &quot;discursive consciousness&quot; inform these abilities. Practical consciousness is the knowledgeability that an agent brings to the tasks required by everyday life, which is so integrated as to be hardly noticed. Reflexive monitoring occurs at the level of practical consciousness. Discursive consciousness is the ability to verbally express knowledge. Alongside practical and discursive consciousness, Giddens recognizes actors as having reflexive, contextual knowledge, and that habitual, widespread use of knowledgeability makes structures become institutionalized.

Agents rationalize, and in doing so, link the agent and the agent&#x27;s knowledgeability. Agents must coordinate ongoing projects, goals, and contexts while performing actions. This coordination is called reflexive monitoring and is connected to ethnomethodology&#x27;s emphasis on agents&#x27; intrinsic sense of accountability.

The factors that can enable or constrain an agent, as well as how an agent uses structures, are known as &quot;capability constraints&quot; include age, cognitive/physical limits on performing multiple tasks at once and the physical impossibility of being in multiple places at once, available time and the relationship between movement in space and movement in time.

Location offers are a particular type of capability constraint. Examples include:
* Locale
* Regionalization: political or geographical zones, or rooms in a building
* Presence: Do other actors participate in the action? (see co-presence); and more specifically
* Physical presence: Are other actors physically nearby?

Agents are always able to engage in a &quot;dialectic of control&quot;, able to &quot;intervene in the world or to refrain from such intervention, with the effect of influencing a specific process or state of affairs.&quot; In essence, agents experience inherent and contrasting amounts of autonomy and dependence; agents can always either act or not.

===Methodology===
Structuration theory is relevant to research, but does not prescribe a methodology and its use in research has been problematic. Giddens intended his theory to be abstract and theoretical, informing the hermeneutic aspects of research rather than guiding practice. Giddens wrote that structuration theory &quot;establishes the internal logical coherence of concepts within a theoretical network.&quot; Giddens criticized many researchers who used structuration theory for empirical research, critiquing their &quot;en bloc&quot; use of the theory&#x27;s abstract concepts in a burdensome way. &quot;The works applying concepts from the logical framework of structuration theory that Giddens approved of were those that used them more selectively, &#x27;in a spare and critical fashion.&#x27;&quot; Giddens and followers used structuration theory more as &quot;a sensitizing device&quot;.

Structuration theory allows researchers to focus on any structure or concept individually or in combination. In this way, structuration theory prioritizes ontology over epistemology. In his own work, Giddens focuses on production and reproduction of social practices in some context. He looked for stasis and change, agent expectations, relative degrees of routine, tradition, behavior, and creative, skillful, and strategic thought simultaneously. He examined spatial organization, intended and unintended consequences, skilled and knowledgeable agents, discursive and tacit knowledge, dialectic of control, actions with motivational content, and constraints. Structuration theorists conduct analytical research of social relations, rather than organically discovering them, since they use structuration theory to reveal specific research questions, though that technique has been criticized as cherry-picking.

Giddens preferred &quot;strategic conduct analysis&quot;, which focuses on contextually situated actions. It employs detailed accounts of agents&#x27; knowledgeability, motivation, and the dialectic of control.

==Criticisms and additions==
Though structuration theory has received critical expansion since its origination, Giddens&#x27; concepts remained pivotal for later extension of the theory, especially the duality of structure.

===Strong structuration===
Rob Stones argued that many aspects of Giddens&#x27; original theory had little place in its modern manifestation. Stones focused on clarifying its scope, reconfiguring some concepts and inserting new ones, and refining methodology and research orientations. Strong structuration:
#Places its ontology more &quot;in situ&quot; than abstractly.
#Introduces the &quot;quadripartite cycle&quot;, which details the elements in the duality of structure. These are:
#* &quot;external structures&quot; as conditions of action;
#* &quot;internal structures&quot; within the agent;
#* &quot;active agency&quot;, &quot;including a range of aspects involved when agents draw upon internal structures in producing practical action&quot;; and
#* &quot;outcomes&quot; (as both structures and events).
#Increases attention to epistemology and methodology. Ontology supports epistemology and methodology by prioritising:
#* the question-at-hand;
#* appropriate forms of methodological bracketing;
#* distinct methodological steps in research; and
#* &quot;[t]he specific combinations of all the above in composite forms of research.&quot;
#Discovers the &quot;meso-level of ontology between the abstract, philosophical level of ontology and the &quot;in-situ&quot;, ontic level.&quot; Strong structuration allows varied abstract ontological concepts in experiential conditions.
#Focuses on the meso-level at the temporal and spatial scale.
#Conceptualises &quot;independent causal forces&quot; and &quot;irresistible causal forces&quot;, which take into account how external structures, internal structures, and active agency affect agent choices (or lack of them). &quot;Irresistible forces&quot; are the connected concepts of a horizon of action with a set of &quot;actions-in-hand&quot; and a hierarchical ordering of purposes and concerns. An agent is affected by external influences. This aspect of strong structuration helps reconcile an agent&#x27;s dialectic of control and his/her more constrained set of &quot;real choices.&quot;

===Post-structuration and dualism===
Margaret Archer objected to the inseparability of structure and agency in structuration theory. She proposed a notion of &quot;dualism&quot; rather than &quot;duality of structure&quot;. She primarily examined structural frameworks and the action within the limits allowed by those conditions. She combined realist ontology and called her methodology &quot;analytical dualism&quot;. Archer maintained that structure precedes agency in social structure reproduction and analytical importance, and that they should be analysed separately. She emphasised the importance of temporality in social analysis, dividing it into four stages: structural conditioning, social interaction, its immediate outcome and structural elaboration. Thus her analysis considered embedded &quot;structural conditions, emergent causal powers and properties, social interactions between agents, and subsequent structural changes or reproductions arising from the latter.&quot; Archer criticised structuration theory for denying time and place because of the inseparability between structure and agency.

Nicos Mouzelis reconstructed Giddens&#x27; original theories. Mouzelis kept Giddens&#x27; original formulation of structure as &quot;rules and resources.&quot; However, he was considered a dualist, because he argued for dualism to be as important in social analysis as the duality of structure. Mouzelis reexamined human social action at the &quot;syntagmatic&quot; (syntactic) level. He claimed that the duality of structure does not account for all types of social relationships. Duality of structure works when agents do not question or disrupt rules, and interaction resembles &quot;natural/performative&quot; actions with a practical orientation. However, in other contexts, the relationship between structure and agency can resemble dualism more than duality, such as systems that are the result of powerful agents. In these situations, rules are not viewed as resources, but are in states of transition or redefinition, where actions are seen from a &quot;strategic/monitoring orientation.&quot; In this orientation, dualism shows the distance between agents and structures. He called these situations &quot;syntagmatic duality&quot;. For example, a professor can change the class he or she teaches, but has little capability to change the larger university structure. &quot;In that case, syntagmatic duality gives way to syntagmatic dualism.&quot; This implies that systems are the outcome, but not the medium, of social actions. Mouzelis also criticised Giddens&#x27; lack of consideration for social hierarchies.

John Parker built on Archer and Mouzelis&#x27;s support for dualism to propose a theoretical reclamation of historical sociology and macro-structures using concrete historical cases, claiming that dualism better explained the dynamics of social structures. Equally, Robert Archer developed and applied analytical dualism in his critical analysis of the impact of New Managerialism on education policy in England and Wales during the 1990s and organization theory.

===John B. Thompson===
Though he agreed with the soundness and overall purposes of Giddens&#x27; most expansive structuration concepts (i.e., against dualism and for the study of structure in concert with agency), John B. Thompson (&quot;a close friend and colleague of Giddens at Cambridge University&quot;) wrote one of the most widely cited critiques of structuration theory. His central argument was that it needed to be more specific and more consistent both internally and with conventional social structure theory. Thompson focused on problematic aspects of Giddens&#x27; concept of structure as &quot;rules and resources,&quot; focusing on &quot;rules&quot;. He argued that Giddens&#x27; concept of rule was too broad.

Thompson claimed that Giddens presupposed a &quot;criterion of importance&quot; in contending that rules are a generalizable enough tool to apply to every aspect of human action and interaction; &quot;on the other hand, Giddens is well aware that rules, or some kinds or aspects of rules, are much more important than others for the analysis of, for example, the social structure of capitalist societies.&quot; He found the term to be imprecise and to not designate which rules are more relevant for which social structures.

Thompson used the example of linguistic analysis to point out that the need for a prior framework which to enable analysis of, for example, the social structure of an entire nation. While semantic rules may be relevant to social structure, to study them &quot;presupposes some structural points of reference which are not themselves , with regard to which [of] these semantic rules are differentiated&quot; according to class, sex, region and so on. He called this &quot;structural differentiation.&quot;

Rules differently affect variously situated individuals. Thompson gave the example of a private school which restricts enrollment and thus participation. Thus rules—in this case, restrictions—&quot;operate , affecting unevenly various groups of individuals whose categorization depends on certain assumptions about social structures.&quot; The isolated analysis of rules does not incorporate differences among agents.

Thompson claimed that Giddens offered no way of formulating &quot;structural identity&quot;. Some &quot;rules&quot; are better conceived of as broad inherent elements that define a structure&#x27;s identity (e.g., Henry Ford and Harold Macmillan are &quot;capitalistic&quot;). These agents may differ, but have important traits in common due to their &quot;capitalistic&quot; identity. Thompson theorized that these traits were not rules in the sense that a manager could draw upon a &quot;rule&quot; to fire a tardy employee; rather, they were which &quot; the kinds of rules which are possible and which thereby the scope for institutional variation.&quot; It is necessary to outline the broader social system to be able to analyze agents, actors, and rules within that system.

Thus Thompson concluded that Giddens&#x27; use of the term &quot;rules&quot; is problematic. &quot;Structure&quot; is similarly objectionable: &quot;But to adhere to this conception of structure, while at the same time acknowledging the need for the study of &#x27;structural principles,&#x27; &#x27;structural sets&#x27; and &#x27;axes of structuration,&#x27; is simply a recipe for conceptual confusion.&quot;

Thompson proposed several amendments. He requested sharper differentiation between the reproduction of institutions and the reproduction of social structure. He proposed an altered version of the structuration cycle. He defined &quot;institutions&quot; as &quot;characterized by rules, regulations and conventions of various sorts, by differing kinds and quantities of resources and by hierarchical power relations between the occupants of institutional positions.&quot; Agents acting within institutions and conforming to institutional rules and regulations or using institutionally endowed power reproduce the institution. &quot;If, in so doing, the institutions continue to satisfy certain structural conditions, both in the sense of conditions which delimit the scope for &quot;institutional variation&quot; and the conditions which underlie the operation of &quot;structural differentiation&quot;, then the agents may be said to reproduce social structure.&quot;

Thompson also proposed adding a &quot;range of alternatives&quot; to Giddens&#x27; conception of constraints on human action. He pointed out the paradoxical relationship between Giddens&#x27; &quot;dialectic of control&quot; and his acknowledgement that constraints may leave an agent with no choice. He demanded that Giddens better show how wants and desires relate to choice.

Giddens replied that a structural principle is not equivalent with rules, and pointed to his definition from &quot;A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism&quot;: &quot;Structural principles are principles of organisation implicated in those practices most &quot;deeply&quot; (in time) and &quot;pervasively&quot; (in space) sedimented in society&quot;, and described structuration as a &quot;mode of institutional articulation&quot; with emphasis on the relationship between time and space and a host of institutional orderings including, but not limited to, rules.

Ultimately, Thompson concluded that the concept of structure as &quot;rules and resources&quot; in an elemental and ontological way resulted in conceptual confusion. Many theorists supported Thompson&#x27;s argument that an analysis &quot;based on structuration&#x27;s ontology of structures as norms, interpretative schemes and power resources radically limits itself if it does not frame and locate itself within a more broadly conceived notion of social structures.&quot;

===Change===
Sewell provided a useful summary that included one of the theory&#x27;s less specified aspects: the question &quot;Why are structural transformations possible?&quot; He claimed that Giddens&#x27; overrelied on rules and modified Giddens&#x27; argument by re-defining &quot;resources&quot; as the embodiment of cultural schemas. He argued that change arises from the multiplicity of structures, the &quot;transposable&quot; nature of schemas, the unpredictability of resource accumulation, the polysemy of resources and the intersection of structures.

The existence of multiple structures implies that the knowledgeable agents whose actions produce systems are capable of applying different schemas to contexts with differing resources, contrary to the conception of a universal habitus (learned dispositions, skills and ways of acting). He wrote that &quot;Societies are based on practices that derived from many distinct structures, which exist at different levels, operate in different modalities, and are themselves based on widely varying types and quantities of resources. ...It is never true that all of them are homologous.&quot;

Originally from Bourdieu, &quot;transposable&quot; schemas can be &quot;applied to a wide and not fully predictable range of cases outside the context in which they were initially learned.&quot; That capacity &quot;is inherent in the knowledge of cultural schemas that characterizes all minimally competent members of society.&quot;

Agents may modify schemas even though their use does not predictably accumulate resources. For example, the effect of a joke is never quite certain, but a comedian may alter it based on the amount of laughter it garners regardless of this variability.

Agents may interpret a particular resource according to different schemas. E.g., a commander could attribute his wealth to military prowess, while others could see it as a blessing from the gods or a coincidental initial advantage.

Structures often overlap, confusing interpretation (e.g., the structure of capitalist society includes production from both private property and worker solidarity).

===Technology===

This theory was adapted and augmented by researchers interested in the relationship between technology and social structures, such as information technology in organizations. DeSanctis and Poole proposed an &quot;adaptive structuration theory&quot; with respect to the emergence and use of group decision support systems. In particular, they chose Giddens&#x27; notion of modalities to consider how technology is used with respect to its &quot;spirit&quot;. &quot;Appropriations&quot; are the immediate, visible actions that reveal deeper structuration processes and are enacted with &quot;moves&quot;. Appropriations may be faithful or unfaithful, be instrumental and be used with various attitudes.

Wanda Orlikowski applied the duality of structure to technology: &quot;The duality of technology identifies prior views of technology as either objective force or as socially constructed product–as a false dichotomy.&quot; She compared this to previous models (the technological imperative, strategic choice, and technology as a trigger) and considered the importance of meaning, power, norms, and interpretive flexibility. Orlikowski later replaced the notion of embedded properties for enactment (use). The &quot;practice lens&quot; shows how people enact structures which shape their use of technology that they employ in their practices. While Orlikowski&#x27;s work focused on corporations, it is equally applicable to the technology cultures that have emerged in smaller community-based organizations, and can be adapted through the &quot;gender sensitivity lens&quot; in approaches to technology governance.

Workman, Ford and Allen rearticulated structuration theory as &quot;structuration agency theory&quot; for modeling socio-biologically inspired structuration in security software. Software agents join humans to engage in social actions of information exchange, giving and receiving instructions, responding to other agents, and pursuing goals individually or jointly.

=== Four-flows-model ===
The four flows model of organizing is grounded in structuration theory. McPhee and Pamela Zaug (2001) identify four communication flows that collectively perform key organizational functions and distinguish organizations from less formal social groups:

* Membership negotiation—socialization, but also identification and self-positioning;
* Organizational self-structuring—reflexive, especially managerial, structuring and control activities;
* Activity coordination—Interacting to align or adjust local work activities;
* Institutional positioning in the social order of institutions—mostly external communication to gain recognition and inclusion in the web of social transactions.

===Group communication===
Poole, Seibold, and McPhee wrote that &quot;group structuration theory,&quot; provides &quot;a theory of group interaction commensurate with the complexities of the phenomenon.&quot;

The theory attempts to integrate macrosocial theories and individuals or small groups, as well as how to avoid the binary categorization of either &quot;stable&quot; or &quot;emergent&quot; groups.

Waldeck et al. concluded that the theory needs to better predict outcomes, rather than merely explaining them. &quot;Decision rules&quot; support decision-making, which produces a communication pattern that can be directly observable. Research has not yet examined the &quot;rational&quot; function of group communication and decision-making (i.e., how well it achieves goals), nor structural production or constraints. Researchers must empirically demonstrate the recursivity of action and structure, examine how structures stabilize and change over time due to group communication, and may want to integrate argumentation research.

===Public relations===
Falkheimer claimed that integrating structuration theory into public relations (PR) strategies could result in a less agency-driven business, return theoretical focus to the role of power structures in PR, and reject massive PR campaigns in favor of a more &quot;holistic understanding of how PR may be used in local contexts both as a reproductive and [transformational] social instrument.&quot; Falkheimer portrayed PR as a method of communication and action whereby social systems emerge and reproduce. Structuration theory reinvigorates the study of space and time in PR theory. Applied structuration theory may emphasize community-based approaches, storytelling, rituals, and informal communication systems. Moreover, structuration theory integrates all organizational members in PR actions, integrating PR into all organizational levels rather than a separate office. Finally, structuration reveals interesting ethical considerations relating to whether a social system transform.

=== COVID-19 and structure ===
the COVID-19 pandemic had huge impact on society since the beginning. When investigating those impacts, many researchers found helpful using structuration theory to explain the change in society. Oliver (2021) used &quot;a theoretical framework derived from Giddens&#x27; structuration theory to analyze societal information cultures, concentrating on information and health literacy perspectives.&quot; And this framework focused on &quot;the three modalities of structuration, i.e., interpretive schemes, resources, and norms.&quot; And in Oliver&#x27;s research, those three modalities are &quot;resources&quot;, &quot;information freedom&quot; and &quot;formal and informal concepts and rules of behavior&quot;. After analyzing four countries framework, Oliver and his research team concluded &quot;All our case studies show a number of competing information sources – from traditional media and official websites to various social media platforms used by both the government and the general public – that complicate the information landscape in which we all try to navigate what we know, and what we do not yet know, about the pandemic.&quot;

In the research of interpreting how remote work environment change during COVID-19 in South Africa, Walter (2020) applied structuration theory because &quot;it addresses the relationship between actors (or persons) and social structures and how these social structures ultimately realign and conform to the actions of actors&quot; Plus, &quot;these social structures from Giddens&#x27;s structuration theory assist people to navigate through everyday life.&quot;

Zvokuomba (2021) also used Giddens&#x27; theory of structuration &quot;to reflect at the various levels of fragilities within the context of COVID-19 lockdown measures.&quot; One example in the research is that &quot;theory of structuration and agency point to situations when individuals and groups of people either in compliance or defiance of community norms and rules of survival adopt certain practices.&quot; And during pandemic, researched pointed out &quot;reverting to the traditional midwifery became a pragmatic approach to a problem.&quot; One example to support this point is that &quot;As medical centers were partly closed, with no basic medication and health staff, the only alternative was seek traditional medical services. &quot;

=== Business and structure ===
Structuration theory can also be used in explaining business related issues including operating, managing and marketing.

Clifton Scott and Karen Myers (2010)studied how the duality of structure can explain the shifts of members&#x27; actions during the membership negotiations in an organization by This is an example of how structure evolves with the interaction of a group of people.

Another case study done by Dutta (2016) and his research team shows how the models shift because of the action of individuals. The article examines the relationship between CEO&#x27;s behavior and a company&#x27;s cross-border acquisition. This case can also demonstrate one of the major dimensions in the duality of structure, the sense of power from the CEO. Authors found out that the process follows the theory of duality of structure: under the circumstances of CEO is overconfident, and the company is the limitation of resources, the process of cross-border acquisition is likely to be different than before.

Yuan ElaineJ (2011)&#x27;s research focused on a certain demographic of people under the structure. Authors studied Chinese TV shows and audiences&#x27; flavor of the show. The author concludes in the relationship between the audience and the TV shows producers, audiences&#x27; behavior has higher-order patterns.

Pavlou and Majchrzak argued that research on business-to-business e-commerce portrayed technology as overly deterministic. The authors employed structuration theory to re-examine outcomes such as economic/business success as well as trust, coordination, innovation, and shared knowledge. They looked beyond technology into organizational structure and practices, and examined the effects on the structure of adapting to new technologies. The authors held that technology needs to be aligned and compatible with the existing &quot;trustworthy&quot; practices and organizational and market structure. The authors recommended measuring long-term adaptations using ethnography, monitoring and other methods to observe causal relationships and generate better predictions.

==See also==
*Action theory (sociology)
*Archaeology of religion and ritual
*&quot;A Community of Witches&quot; § Wicca as a religion of late modernity
*Comparative contextual analysis
*Constitutive criminology
*Grand theory
*Health geography
*Macrosociology
*Social change
*Sociology of space
*Text and conversation theory
==References==
== External links ==
* Anthony Giddens&quot;&#x27;The constitution of society: An outline of the theory of structuration&quot;.. Giddens&#x27; most comprehensive work on structuration theory. Available in part for free online via Google Books
* This book is intended to provide an accessible introduction to Giddens&#x27; work and also to situate structuration theory in the context of other approaches. Available in part for free online via Google Books.
* A critical assessment of Giddens&#x27; entire body of work. Available in part for free online via Google Books.
* Social theory for beginners. Available in part for free online via Google Books.
* Anthony Giddens: The theory of structuration - Theory.org.uk.
* detailing the structure of structuration theory as contrasted with Talcott Parsons&#x27;s action theory.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1768288" start="4" end="27" title="Structuration theory" label="theory of structuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990987" start="33" end="46" title="social theory" label="social theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q211606" start="142" end="151" title="Social structure" label="structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691992" start="168" end="174" title="Agency (sociology)" label="agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q12056630" start="186" end="206" title="structure and agency" label="structure and agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614079" start="289" end="294" title="Microsociology" label="micro"/>
<link wikidata="Q137973" start="300" end="313" title="Macrosociology" label="macro-focused"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="371" end="382" title="sociologist" label="sociologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q220008" start="383" end="398" title="Anthony Giddens" label="Anthony Giddens"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="478" end="491" title="phenomenology (philosophy)" label="phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="493" end="505" title="hermeneutics" label="hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377163" start="734" end="753" title="sociological theory" label="sociological theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q220008" start="793" end="808" title="Anthony Giddens" label="Anthony Giddens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233535" start="819" end="834" title="post-empiricism" label="post-empiricist"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="991" end="1001" title="Ontology" label="ontologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="1423" end="1431" title="ontology" label="ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="1480" end="1492" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q185698" start="1505" end="1525" title="research methodology" label="research methodology"/>
<link wikidata="Q126692" start="1558" end="1568" title="pragmatism" label="pragmatism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1598" end="1609" title="Objectivity (philosophy)#Objectivism" label="objectivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071659" start="1614" end="1626" title="subjectivism" label="subjectivist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1968" end="1981" title="Positivism#Comte&amp;#x27;s positivism" label="Auguste Comte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1983" end="1992" title="Materialism#Materialist conception of history and Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="1994" end="2003" title="Max Weber" label="Max Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948" start="2005" end="2019" title="Durkheim" label="Émile Durkheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q94018" start="2021" end="2034" title="Alfred Schutz" label="Alfred Schutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q312843" start="2036" end="2052" title="Robert K. Merton" label="Robert K. Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q314471" start="2054" end="2068" title="Erving Goffman" label="Erving Goffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q76357" start="2074" end="2089" title="Jürgen Habermas" label="Jürgen Habermas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773904" start="2756" end="2771" title="anthropologists" label="anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q184169" start="3466" end="3475" title="Althusser" label="Althusser"/>
<link wikidata="Q175661" start="3605" end="3625" title="philosophy of action" label="philosophy of action"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297282" start="3645" end="3669" title="interpretative sociology" label="interpretative sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="3749" end="3764" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Saussure&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466334" start="3907" end="3927" title="Structural linguistics" label="structural linguists"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="3936" end="3955" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Claude Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q36108" start="3960" end="3978" title="generative grammar" label="generative grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="3997" end="4009" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q267932" start="4018" end="4036" title="post-structuralist" label="post-structuralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q831725" start="4176" end="4189" title="Functionalism (sociology)" label="functionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="4355" end="4362" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="4516" end="4530" title="class conflict" label="class conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q301751" start="4787" end="4805" title="critical theorists" label="critical theorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q831725" start="6292" end="6305" title="structuralism (sociology)" label="structuralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310068" start="6393" end="6398" title="Reification (knowledge representation)" label="reify"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052882" start="6410" end="6420" title="ideal type" label="ideal type"/>
<link wikidata="Q421953" start="6481" end="6501" title="actor–network theory" label="actor–network theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="6851" end="6863" title="positivistic" label="positivistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q582437" start="6911" end="6925" title="Interpretivism (social science)" label="interpretivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q58873154" start="7064" end="7079" title="Gregor McLennan" label="Gregor McLennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="7296" end="7304" title="feedback" label="feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441228" start="7305" end="7316" title="Feed forward (control)" label="feedforward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888026" start="7576" end="7584" title="Modalities (sociology)" label="modality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564863" start="8041" end="8045" title="Unspoken rule" label="Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q314471" start="8098" end="8105" title="Goffman" label="Goffman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8881" end="8898" title="Institutionalization#Institutionalization" label="Institutionalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q314471" start="9511" end="9518" title="Goffman" label="Goffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q852957" start="9534" end="9550" title="ethnomethodology" label="ethnomethodology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503480" start="10219" end="10228" title="facework" label="face work"/>
<link wikidata="Q9453" start="10506" end="10515" title="dialectic" label="dialectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040471" start="11006" end="11016" title="systemness" label="systemness"/>
<link wikidata="Q217405" start="11386" end="11398" title="police state" label="police state"/>
<link wikidata="Q366139" start="12341" end="12353" title="Legitimation" label="Legitimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179168" start="13498" end="13511" title="structuralism" label="structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q267932" start="13516" end="13534" title="post-structuralism" label="post-structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="13683" end="13697" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="13711" end="13724" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299906" start="16283" end="16298" title="Regionalisation" label="Regionalization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16416" end="16427" title="Dynamic awareness theory#Presence" label="co-presence"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="17925" end="17933" title="ontology" label="ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="17939" end="17951" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362683" start="18087" end="18105" title="Expectation (epistemic)" label="agent expectations"/>
<link wikidata="Q82821" start="18136" end="18145" title="tradition" label="tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135789" start="18253" end="18289" title="Unintended consequences" label="intended and unintended consequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323686" start="18325" end="18335" title="explicit knowledge" label="discursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q743861" start="18340" end="18355" title="tacit knowledge" label="tacit knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006765" start="18666" end="18680" title="Cherry picking (fallacy)" label="cherry-picking"/>
<link wikidata="Q216681" start="19460" end="19467" title="in situ" label="in situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q185698" start="20140" end="20154" title="Methodology" label="methodological"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="20397" end="20402" title="ontic" label="ontic"/>
<link wikidata="Q432784" start="21209" end="21224" title="Margaret Archer" label="Margaret Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12056630" start="21259" end="21279" title="structure and agency" label="structure and agency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22287" end="22301" title="Nicos Mouzelis" label="Nicos Mouzelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625450" start="22635" end="22646" title="Syntagmatic analysis" label="syntagmatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q777864" start="25559" end="25578" title="linguistic analysis" label="linguistic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="25718" end="25731" title="semantic rule" label="semantic rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="26669" end="26679" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="26684" end="26700" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178706" start="27883" end="27895" title="social institutions" label="institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233172" start="30382" end="30389" title="Schema (Kant)" label="schemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q191928" start="30556" end="30564" title="polysemy" label="polysemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222181" start="30842" end="30849" title="Habitus (sociology)" label="habitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156268" start="31218" end="31226" title="Bourdieu" label="Bourdieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q815726" start="32174" end="32184" title="social solidarity" label="solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="32298" end="32308" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="32340" end="32362" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429045" start="32381" end="32390" title="Gerardine DeSanctis" label="DeSanctis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429050" start="32395" end="32400" title="Marshall Scott Poole" label="Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781738" start="32670" end="32683" title="Appropriation (sociology)" label="Appropriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14102" start="32908" end="32924" title="Wanda Orlikowski" label="Wanda Orlikowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q265623" start="33108" end="33123" title="false dichotomy" label="false dichotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q870898" start="33984" end="34001" title="security software" label="security software"/>
<link wikidata="Q215772" start="35288" end="35296" title="Emergent properties" label="emergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="36032" end="36048" title="public relations" label="public relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="36993" end="37001" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="38224" end="38236" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665312" start="38752" end="38760" title="lockdown" label="lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="39944" end="39947" title="Chief executive officer" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="39998" end="40009" title="Mergers and acquisitions" label="acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16503490" start="40245" end="40258" title="Overconfidence effect" label="overconfident"/>
<link wikidata="Q484847" start="40770" end="40780" title="e-commerce" label="e-commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q131133" start="40812" end="40825" title="determinism" label="deterministic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520882" start="41487" end="41512" title="Action theory (sociology)" label="Action theory (sociology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785501" start="41514" end="41548" title="Archaeology of religion and ritual" label="Archaeology of religion and ritual"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41550" end="41624" title="A Community of Witches#Wicca as a religion of late modernity" label="&amp;quot;A Community of Witches&amp;quot; § Wicca as a religion of late modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155631" start="41626" end="41657" title="Comparative contextual analysis" label="Comparative contextual analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164348" start="41659" end="41683" title="Constitutive criminology" label="Constitutive criminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595271" start="41685" end="41697" title="Grand theory" label="Grand theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286542" start="41699" end="41715" title="Health geography" label="Health geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q137973" start="41717" end="41731" title="Macrosociology" label="Macrosociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510761" start="41733" end="41746" title="Social change" label="Social change"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133414" start="41748" end="41766" title="Sociology of space" label="Sociology of space"/>
<link wikidata="Q29112583" start="41768" end="41796" title="Text and conversation theory" label="Text and conversation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="42042" end="42054" title="Google Books" label="Google Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="42254" end="42266" title="Google Books" label="Google Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="42368" end="42380" title="Google Books" label="Google Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="42451" end="42463" title="Google Books" label="Google Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q203913" start="42598" end="42613" title="Talcott Parsons" label="Talcott Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520882" start="42621" end="42634" title="Action theory (sociology)" label="action theory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405570" wikidata="Q706489" url="?curid=405570" title="José Moscardó Ituarte">
<text>José Moscardó e Ituarte, 1st Count of the Alcázar of Toledo, Grandee of Spain (26 October 1878 – 12 April 1956) was the military Governor of Toledo Province during the Spanish Civil War. He sided with the Nationalist army fighting the Republican government and his most notable action was the defence and holding of the Alcázar of Toledo against Republican forces.

When still a Colonel and military governor of the province, Moscardó was described by the English Major Geoffrey McNeill-Moss as &quot;a tall, reserved, gentle-mannered man, a little awkward, rather punctillious: happy enough with a few people he knew well, but shy in company. He had a strict sense of duty. He was religious. In a nation where most were slack, he was exact.&quot;

For some time leading up to the Civil War Moscardó had lived in semi-retirement, a middle-aged soldier. When conflict commenced he assumed the role of Commandant of the citadel in Toledo, with a total garrison of 1,028, which included six hundred Civil Guard under their own commander, 150 army officers, 35 Falangists, 10 Carlists, 25 members of the Monarchist Association, and 40 peasants and workmen. In addition there were 670 non-combatants including 100 men too old to serve, 520 women and 50 children.

==Spanish Civil War==
The Siege of the Alcázar commenced and Moscardó held out for General Francisco Franco&#x27;s Nationalist forces for 70 days from 22 July to 27 September 1936. Day after day, the Colonel sent out his daily radio report: &quot;Sin novedad en el Alcázar&quot; (&quot;Nothing new at the Alcázar,&quot; or &quot;All quiet at the Alcázar&quot;, an ironic understatement). His defiance heartened the Nationalists everywhere and maddened the Republicans, who committed vast forces in vain assaults on the Alcázar.

On 23 July, Republican forces captured Moscardó&#x27;s 24-year-old son, Luis. They called the Alcázar on the telephone and Moscardó himself picked up the receiver. The political officer of the Republican force informed him that unless he surrendered the Alcázar, Luis would be shot. Moscardó asked to speak to his son. He then told Luis, &quot;Commend your soul to God and die like a patriot, shouting &#x27;Long live Christ the King&#x27; and &#x27;Long live Spain.&#x27;&quot; &quot;That,&quot; answered his son, &quot;I can do.&quot; Although it has been viewed that Luis was immediately shot, other accounts provided that he was in fact shot a month later &quot;in reprisal for an air raid&quot;.

During the siege, a blindfolded Major Rojo approached the badly battered citadel with a white flag on September 9. His mission was to offer the garrison their lives if they would surrender. His proposal was rejected, but on leaving he asked Moscardó if he could convey any requests to the outside. Moscardó asked that a priest might be sent to the garrison to baptise children born during the siege. The Republicans agreed and sent in Canon Vásquez Camarassa. Of the priests in Toledo, only seven who were in hiding escaped massacre by the Republicans, so the Canon was in that respect lucky to be alive, said to be because of his left-wing sympathies. He urged the civilians, the women and children in particular to leave under a white flag. The unanimous reply was a refusal.

When the Alcázar was finally relieved, Moscardó is said to have greeted the relief force&#x27;s commanding Colonel. He had lost his son but saved his garrison. He stood stiffly to the salute and said, &quot;No change to report.&quot;

The rebel forces executed some of the hostages Moscardó kept in the Alcázar; also 100 wounded interns at the Tavera Hospital had their throats slit, 20 pregnant women were taken out of the Maternity and were shot down because they were deemed &quot;red&quot;, and a number of additional republican militiamen were killed in the ensuing repression, including those burned alive by the rebels in the College of Maristas, 80 in the Archbishopric Palace and more than 100 militiamen in the seminary Seminario.

A similar incident in Spanish history is that concerning Guzmán el Bueno, who chose the death of his son to surrendering the Tarifa fortress in 1296.

The defence of the Alcázar became a symbol of heroism in Francoist Spain. Moscardó was promoted to Army General after the relief of the Alcázar, and put in command of the Soria Division. In 1938 he was given command of the Aragon Army Corps, but took part in no further heroic episodes.

Franco, however, knew the value of propaganda and authorized Moscardó to wear a special black cloak of mourning for his son over his army uniform. This he did for the rest of his life, so that every soldier who saw him would know who he was.

==In Francoist Spain==
In late 1944, Moscardó, in command at Barcelona, led the successful defence against incursions by Spanish communists via the Val d&#x27;Aran into Lleida. In March 1945 he was named head of Franco&#x27;s &quot;Casa Militar&quot; (personal military staff).

In 1948, he was created Count of the Alcázar de Toledo and a Grandee of Spain.

His singular passion remained football, and, to his pleasure, he coached the Spanish football team at the 1948 London Olympic Games and the 1952 Games in Helsinki.

In 1947, he was responsible for returning the Spain National Football Team main colour to red, which had been changed in 1939 due to its association with the Republicans.

==Death==
He died on 12 April 1956 in Madrid at 77 years old, and was then promoted to Capitán General del Ejército. On 17 September 2018, after the planned exhumation of Francisco Franco, it was proposed by Podemos to also exhume Jaime Milans del Bosch and Moscardó, but it was rejected by Vox.

==References==
==Bibliography==
*Antony Beevor, &quot;The Battle for Spain&quot;, 2006.
* 


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q706489" start="0" end="77" title="José Moscardó Ituarte" label="José Moscardó e Ituarte, 1st Count of the Alcázar of Toledo, Grandee of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q54929" start="141" end="156" title="Toledo (province)" label="Toledo Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="168" end="185" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="205" end="216" title="Francoist" label="Nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="235" end="245" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326589" start="320" end="337" title="Alcázar of Toledo" label="Alcázar of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q88291" start="918" end="925" title="citadel" label="citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="929" end="935" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431652" start="1057" end="1066" title="Falangist" label="Falangist"/>
<link wikidata="Q679189" start="1072" end="1079" title="Carlist" label="Carlist"/>
<link wikidata="Q815108" start="1285" end="1305" title="Siege of the Alcázar" label="Siege of the Alcázar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="1350" end="1366" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q613611" start="1778" end="1785" title="Alcázar" label="Alcázar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937565" start="2196" end="2205" title="Viva, vive" label="Long live"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558835" start="2206" end="2221" title="Christ the King" label="Christ the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q815108" start="2501" end="2506" title="Siege of the Alcázar" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="2810" end="2816" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="2968" end="2974" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="3121" end="3130" title="left-wing" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3933" end="3953" title="Palacio arzobispal de Toledo" label="Archbishopric Palace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3999" end="4008" title="Seminario Conciliar de San Ildefonso" label="Seminario"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734497" start="4068" end="4083" title="Alonso Pérez de Guzmán" label="Guzmán el Bueno"/>
<link wikidata="Q222702" start="4136" end="4142" title="Tarifa" label="Tarifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="4219" end="4234" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q160910" start="4261" end="4273" title="Army general" label="Army General"/>
<link wikidata="Q12155" start="4333" end="4338" title="Soria" label="Soria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="4385" end="4391" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="4754" end="4763" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q12602" start="4841" end="4856" title="Val d&amp;#x27;Aran" label="Val d&amp;#x27;Aran"/>
<link wikidata="Q13904" start="4862" end="4868" title="Province of Lleida" label="Lleida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907844" start="5033" end="5049" title="Grandee" label="Grandee of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="5082" end="5090" title="football (soccer)" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q41583" start="5117" end="5124" title="coach (sport)" label="coached"/>
<link wikidata="Q8403" start="5163" end="5183" title="1948 Summer Olympics" label="London Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8407" start="5197" end="5202" title="1952 Summer Olympics" label="Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="5206" end="5214" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="5263" end="5291" title="Spain National Football Team" label="Spain National Football Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="5427" end="5433" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q56923" start="5476" end="5491" title="Capitán General" label="Capitán General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322103" start="5496" end="5504" title="Spanish Army" label="Ejército"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="5560" end="5576" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16059622" start="5597" end="5604" title="Podemos (Spanish political party)" label="Podemos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358421" start="5620" end="5642" title="Jaime Milans del Bosch" label="Jaime Milans del Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630787" start="5680" end="5683" title="Vox (political party)" label="Vox"/>
<link wikidata="Q380229" start="5719" end="5732" title="Antony Beevor" label="Antony Beevor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405574" wikidata="Q3162011" url="?curid=405574" title="Janine Pommy Vega">
<text>Janine Pommy Vega (February 5, 1942 – December 23, 2010) was an American poet associated with the Beats.

==Early life==
Janine Pommy was born in Jersey City, New Jersey. Her father worked as a milkman in the mornings and a carpenter in the afternoons. At the age of sixteen, inspired by Jack Kerouac &quot;On the Road&quot;, she went with a friend to the Cedar Tavern in Greenwich Village, where they met Gregory Corso; in 1960, after graduating as valedictorian of her high school class, she moved in with Allen Ginsberg and Peter Orlovsky.

==Career==
She worked as a waitress and wrote Beat-inspired experimental poetry. In December 1962, she married the Peruvian painter in Israel and moved with him to Paris, where she collected money for street musicians and modeled at the École des Beaux-Arts. After Vega&#x27;s sudden death in Ibiza in 1965, she returned to the United States and moved to California. Her first book, &quot;Poems to Fernando&quot;, was published by City Lights in 1968 in their City Lights Pocket Poets Series, the third volume by a woman. 

In the 1970s and 1980s Vega traveled widely, trekking in the Himalayas and living in Peru, Colombia, and Bolivia, including two years as a hermit on the Isla del Sol in Lake Titicaca on the Bolivian-Peruvian border, where she completed &quot;Journal of a Hermit&quot; (1974) and &quot;Morning Passage&quot; (1976). &quot;Tracking the Serpent: Journeys to Four Continents&quot; (1997) chronicles her 1980s travels to centers of ancient matriarchy.

In addition to her own books of poetry, the last of which was &quot;The Green Piano&quot; (2005), Vega was widely anthologized, including in &quot;City Lights Pocket Poets Anthology&quot; and &quot;Women of the Beat Generation&quot;. She also toured with a band called Tiamalu, performing in English and Spanish.

===Teaching===
Vega taught in schools in English and Spanish through arts in education programs including Teachers &amp; Writers Collaborative, Poets in the Schools, Arts/Genesis, and New York City Ballet, and beginning in the mid-1970s in prisons through Incisions/Arts, becoming its director in 1987, and later through the Bard Prison Initiative run by Bard College. She served on the PEN Prison Writing Committee.

==Later life and death==
From 1999, Vega lived with poet Andy Clausen. On December 23, 2010, she died at home in Willow, New York, of a heart attack.

==Awards==
She won two Golda Awards, the second for &quot;The Green Piano&quot;, and was awarded many grants, including an annual grant from the New York State Council on the Arts for her work in prisons through Incisions/Arts.

== Works==
* &quot;Poems to Fernando&quot; (1968)
* &quot;Journal of a Hermit&quot; (1974); repr. with &quot;Under The Sky&quot;
* &quot;Morning Passage&quot; (1976)
* &quot;Here at the Door&quot; (1978)
* &quot;The Bard Owl&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Skywriting&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Apex of The Earth&#x27;s Way&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Drunk on a Glacier, Talking to Flies&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Island of the Sun&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Threading the Maze&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Red Bracelets&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Tracking the Serpent: Journeys to Four Continents&quot; (1997)
* &quot;The Road to Your House Is A Mountain Road&quot; (1995)
* &quot;The Walker&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Mad Dogs of Trieste: New &amp; Selected Poems&quot; (2000)
* &quot;The Green Piano&quot; (2005)

==References==
==External links==
*Website
*Janine Pommy-Vega (1942-2010): cyber tombeau by poet Pierre Joris, including the opening poem of &quot;Poems to Fernando&quot; and a homage-poem by Valery Oişteanu, &quot;The Drum Circle for Janine Pommy Vega&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3162011" start="0" end="17" title="Janine Pommy Vega" label="Janine Pommy Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099146" start="64" end="72" title="United States poetry" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="73" end="77" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q213457" start="98" end="103" title="Beat generation" label="Beats"/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="146" end="169" title="Jersey City, New Jersey" label="Jersey City, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q160534" start="288" end="300" title="Jack Kerouac" label="Jack Kerouac"/>
<link wikidata="Q743180" start="307" end="318" title="On the Road" label="On the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056910" start="356" end="368" title="Cedar Tavern" label="Cedar Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="372" end="389" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q470871" start="406" end="419" title="Gregory Corso" label="Gregory Corso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416417" start="450" end="463" title="valedictorian" label="valedictorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="508" end="522" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Allen Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983102" start="527" end="541" title="Peter Orlovsky" label="Peter Orlovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630100" start="766" end="771" title="Life model" label="model"/>
<link wikidata="Q273593" start="781" end="801" title="Beaux-Arts de Paris" label="École des Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q52631" start="837" end="842" title="Ibiza" label="Ibiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="899" end="909" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394278" start="975" end="986" title="City Lights Bookstore" label="City Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123272" start="1004" end="1035" title="City Lights Pocket Poets Series" label="City Lights Pocket Poets Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q600282" start="1221" end="1233" title="Isla del Sol" label="Isla del Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q35342" start="1237" end="1250" title="Lake Titicaca" label="Lake Titicaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q185681" start="1503" end="1513" title="matriarchy" label="matriarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691236" start="1936" end="1972" title="Teachers &amp;amp; Writers Collaborative" label="Teachers &amp;amp; Writers Collaborative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336942" start="2014" end="2034" title="New York City Ballet" label="New York City Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q49109" start="2185" end="2197" title="Bard College" label="Bard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q206811" start="2217" end="2220" title="International PEN" label="PEN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2305" end="2317" title="Andy Clausen" label="Andy Clausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39050595" start="2361" end="2377" title="Willow, New York" label="Willow, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014063" start="2544" end="2578" title="New York State Council on the Arts" label="New York State Council on the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991004" start="3466" end="3479" title="tombeau" label="cyber tombeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192282" start="3488" end="3500" title="Pierre Joris" label="Pierre Joris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007941" start="3583" end="3598" title="Valery Oişteanu" label="Valery Oişteanu"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405577" wikidata="Q819299" url="?curid=405577" title="Hardfloor">
<text>Hardfloor is a German electronic music duo, consisting of Oliver Bondzio and Ramon Zenker. Their most famous track is &quot;Acperience 1&quot; (often titled more simply as &quot;Acperience&quot; on many compilation albums) and chosen by Feargal Sharkey as one of his &#x27;Inheritance Tracks&#x27; when interviewed on UK&#x27;s BBC Radio 4.

Their distinctive acid house sound is attributed to their skill at manipulating Roland TB-303 bass synthesisers, using up to six of these machines at once. Their UK chart hits include &quot;Hardtrance Acperience&quot; (1992), &quot;Trancescript&quot; (1993) and the remix of the aforementioned &quot;Acperience&quot; (1997). Their 1996 album, &quot;Home Run&quot;, peaked at No. 68 in the UK Albums Chart.

==Discography==
===Albums===
==== Da Damn Phreak Noize Phunk ====
Hardfloor also released albums under the pseudonym Da Damn Phreak Noize Phunk. These songs tend toward the chillout and lounge genres.

====Mix albums compiled by Hardfloor====
=== Singles and EPs ===
===Selected Hardfloor remixes===
* Robert Armani - &quot;Circus Bells&quot; 1993 Djax-Up-Beats
* Rising High Collective - &quot;Fever Called Love&quot; 1993 Rising High Records
* Sourmash - &quot;Pilgrimage To Paradise&quot; 1994 Prolekult Records
* Mory Kante - &quot;Yé ké yé ké&quot; 1995 FFRR Records
* Mary Kiani - &quot;When I Call Your Name&quot; 1995 Mercury Records
* Bassheads - &quot;Is There Anybody Out There?&quot; 1995 Deconstruction Records (Desa Basshead)
* New Order - &quot;Blue Monday&quot; 1995 London Records
* Baby Doc And The Dentist - Mantra To The Buddha 1995 TEC (Truelove Electronic Communications)
* TWA - &quot;Nasty Girls&quot; 1995 Mercury Records
* The Shamen - &quot;Destination Eschaton&quot; 1995 Epic Records
* Depeche Mode - &quot;It&#x27;s No Good&quot; 1997 Mute Records
* Mike Oldfield - Let There Be Light (Hardfloor Remix) 1995

==References==
==External links==
* hardfloor.de - official website
* [ Hardfloor] at Allmusic
* Hardfloor - Hardfloor&#x27;s Myspace-site
* Hardfloor discography Unofficial Hardfloor Discography
* Our Acid Experience 2006 - Hardfloor at eMusic
* Hardfloor at Last.fm</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q819299" start="0" end="9" title="Hardfloor" label="Hardfloor"/>
<link wikidata="" start="58" end="72" title=":de:Oliver Bondzio" label="Oliver Bondzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130271" start="77" end="89" title="Ramon Zenker" label="Ramon Zenker"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="203" end="220" title="compilation album" label="compilation album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299778" start="237" end="252" title="Feargal Sharkey" label="Feargal Sharkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="328" end="339" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q341364" start="360" end="370" title="acid house" label="acid house"/>
<link wikidata="Q507314" start="422" end="435" title="Roland TB-303" label="Roland TB-303"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="441" end="452" title="synthesiser" label="synthesiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="504" end="506" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q373899" start="507" end="512" title="record chart" label="chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997853" start="513" end="517" title="hit record" label="hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q214272" start="608" end="613" title="remix" label="remix"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="678" end="683" title="album" label="album"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="731" end="746" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q757143" start="922" end="930" title="chillout" label="chillout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141081" start="935" end="941" title="Lounge music" label="lounge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336124" start="1173" end="1192" title="Rising High Records" label="Rising High Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q551576" start="1266" end="1276" title="Mory Kante" label="Mory Kante"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918494" start="1285" end="1296" title="Yé ké yé ké" label="Yé ké yé ké"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425430" start="1308" end="1320" title="FFRR Records" label="FFRR Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q537433" start="1323" end="1333" title="Mary Kiani" label="Mary Kiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992530" start="1342" end="1363" title="When I Call Your Name (Mary Kiani song)" label="When I Call Your Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="1375" end="1390" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891955" start="1450" end="1472" title="Deconstruction Records" label="Deconstruction Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q214990" start="1491" end="1500" title="New Order (band)" label="New Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q885777" start="1509" end="1520" title="Blue Monday (New Order song)" label="Blue Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q935090" start="1532" end="1546" title="London Records" label="London Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="1680" end="1695" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q587713" start="1698" end="1708" title="The Shamen" label="The Shamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q216364" start="1749" end="1761" title="Epic Records" label="Epic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="1764" end="1776" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502925" start="1785" end="1802" title="It&amp;#x27;s No Good" label="It&amp;#x27;s No Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q240804" start="1814" end="1826" title="Mute Records" label="Mute Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q286400" start="2126" end="2132" title="eMusic" label="eMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183718" start="2148" end="2155" title="Last.fm" label="Last.fm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405581" wikidata="Q924606" url="?curid=405581" title="4hero">
<text>4hero (sometimes referred to as 4 Hero or 4-Hero) are an electronic music group from Dollis Hill, London, comprising producers Mark &quot;Marc Mac&quot; Clair &amp; Denis &quot;Dego&quot; McFarlane. 4hero are known for being pioneers of breakbeat hardcore, jungle/drum and bass, broken beat and nu jazz music.

==Early history, 1989–1995==
The main players in 4hero first met and came to prominence in the late 1980s when they were involved in the Strong Island FM pirate radio station. Marc Mac and Gus Lawrence set up Reinforced Records in 1989 to release their own productions as 4hero, with the group being completed by Dego and Ian Bardouille. Their first release was the 1990 single &quot;All B 3 / Rising Son&quot;.

The follow-up EP, &quot;Combat Dancin&quot;&#x27;, underpinned the sub-bass pressure of the bleep &#x27;n&#x27; bass artists associated with Sheffield&#x27;s Warp Records, such as LFO and Nightmares on Wax, with mid-tempo hip-hop-style breakbeats. It also brought the group to the attention of the rave community due to the track &quot;Mr Kirk&#x27;s Nightmare&quot;, which pivoted around the &quot;Get Into Something&quot; break (taken from The Isley Brothers) and a morbid vocal sample (&quot;Mr Kirk? Your son is dead. He died of an overdose.&quot;) taken from the Bobby Susser, anti-drug hit &quot;Once You Understand&quot; by Think. 4hero were among the first proponents of what would become known as &quot;drum and bass&quot;, which began to grow in profile via a series of releases on Reinforced. Another drum and bass figurehead, Goldie, met 4hero at a performance in London&#x27;s Astoria. Marc and Dego went on to teach and collaborate with Goldie which then brought the sounds Goldie envisioned to life, forming the Rufige Cru and Metalheadz monikers.

The band&#x27;s debut album, &quot;In Rough Territory&quot;, was released in 1991 on Reinforced. This would be the only one of the group&#x27;s albums to feature Gus and Ian as full members. In late 1992 and early 1993, 4hero would release the darkcore &quot;Journey from the Light EP&quot;, which according to and referenced by music journalist Simon Reynolds, &quot;If anyone can claim to have invented dark-core, it&#x27;s 4 Hero&quot;.

Marc Mac and Dego would also record together under the alias &quot;Tom &amp; Jerry&quot; (releasing classics such as &quot;The One Reason&quot;, &quot;We Can Be Free&quot;, &quot;Maximum Style&quot;, and &quot;Air Freshener&quot;), whilst Marc Mac solely as &quot;Manix&quot; (&quot;Manic Minds EP&quot;, &quot;Rainbow People EP&quot;, and &quot;Heading to the Light&quot;) and Dego as &quot;Tek 9&quot; (&quot;Just a Dream&quot;, and &quot;Return of Tek 9 EP&quot;).

In 1995, &quot;NME&quot; voted 4hero&#x27;s second album &quot;Parallel Universe&quot; the album of the year in its dance category.

==1996-present ==
In 1997, one of their tracks, a remix of Nuyorican Soul&#x27;s &quot;Black Gold of the Sun&quot;, was released to critical acclaim with Louie Vega describing it as &quot;...one of the best remixes ever...&quot;.

The next year, 4hero rose again to mainstream visibility with their third studio album as 4hero, &quot;Two Pages&quot; (1998). Released on Gilles Peterson&#x27;s Talkin&#x27; Loud record label, the double CD blended jazzy double bass, flowing breakbeats and a brew of mysticism, spiritualism, astrology, U.F.O.s, and environmentalism. Luke Parkhouse provided the drums while Ursula Rucker, Carol Crosby and Face V. Walsh provided vocals alongside veteran singer Terry Callier and a few other special guests. The album gained critical acclaim and a place on the shortlist for 1998&#x27;s Mercury Music Prize as well as picking up a MOBO award in the same year. Both this album and artists recording on 4hero&#x27;s Reinforced label were influential in the development of the broken beat scene.

Between 1998 and 2001, they hosted a Sunday night show with Kirk Degiorgio on Kiss 100 FM under the &quot;R Solution&quot; moniker.

4hero&#x27;s fourth album, &quot;Creating Patterns&quot; (2001), featured another Ursula Rucker collaboration, an appearance from Jill Scott, and a cover of Minnie Riperton&#x27;s classic 1970s song &quot;Les Fleurs&quot; with Carina Andersson as the lead vocalist. The latter was featured in a Baileys TV commercial and series 4 of &quot;Top Gear&quot; (both in 2004).

In 2004, the group released a compilation album consisting of two discs. The first disc contained 4hero remixes, while the tracks on disc 2 are remixes of 4hero tracks by other artists. This was released on their new label Raw Canvas. In 2006, 4hero was featured on the track &quot;Bed of Roses&quot; by Jody Watley on her album, &quot;The Makeover&quot;.

Six years after the release of &quot;Creating Patterns&quot;, &quot;Play with the Changes&quot; was released in February 2007 to critical acclaim. &quot;Mixmag&quot; described it as &quot;their finest album to date&quot; and awarded it the title of Album of the Month in its January 2007 issue.

In 2012, the album &quot;Hipology&quot; was released under the alias The Visioneers.

==Style==

4hero&#x27;s style was initially uptempo breakbeat, house and techno, and has progressed to breakbeat hardcore, oldschool jungle, and drum and bass. Comparisons have been drawn between them and East London band Shut Up and Dance, with both bands evolving in the early 1990s as a rapprochement between the breakbeat-driven African-diasporic musical structures of hip-hop and reggae, and the dark, European reconstruction of the techno sound popularised by the likes of Joey Beltram, CJ Bolland and Mundo Muzique. 4hero both embraced the dynamics of populist rave culture, and maintained an avant-garde status as innovative and experimental producers. They trailblazed genre-crossing studio techniques such as timestretching and pitch-shifting.

==Discography==
===Albums===
* &quot;In Rough Territory&quot; (Reinforced Records, 1991)
* &quot;Parallel Universe&quot; (Reinforced Records, 1994)
* &quot;Jacob&#x27;s Optical Stairway&quot; (as Jacob&#x27;s Optical Stairway) (R&amp;S Records, 1995)
* &quot;Two Pages&quot; (Talkin&#x27; Loud, 1998)
* &quot;Two Pages Remixed&quot; (Talkin&#x27; Loud, 1998)
* &quot;Two Pages Reinterpretations&quot; (Talkin&#x27; Loud, 1999)
* &quot;Creating Patterns&quot; (Talkin&#x27; Loud, 2001)
* &quot;The Remix Album&quot; (Raw Canvas Records, 2004)
* &quot;Play with the Changes&quot; (Raw Canvas Records, 2007)
* &quot;Extensions&quot; (Raw Canvas Records, 2009)
* &quot;Hipology&quot; (as the Visioneers) (BBE Records, 2012)

===Selected singles/EPs===
* &quot;All B 3 / Rising Son&quot; (Reinforced Records, 1990)
* &quot;Combat Dancin&#x27; / Mr Kirks Nightmare&quot; (Reinforced Records, 1990)
* &quot;The Scorcher / Kirk&#x27;s Back&quot; (Reinforced Records, 1990)
* &quot;No Sleep Raver/Marimba&quot; (Reinforced Records, 1991) 
* &quot;The Head Hunter&quot; (Reinforced Records, 1991) 
* &quot;Cookin Up Ya Brain / Where&#x27;s the Boy?&quot; (Reinforced Records, 1992)
* &quot;Journey from the Light&quot; (Reinforced Records, 1993) 
* &quot;Golden Age&quot; (Reinforced Records, 1993) 
* &quot;Internal Affairs EP&quot; (with Goldie as Internal Affairs) (Reinforced Records, 1993)
* &quot;Dreamers&quot; (as Cold Mission) (Reinforced Records, 1994)
* &quot;Afterglow Pt 1&amp;2&quot; (as Project A-KO) (Reinforced Records, 1994)
* &quot;Mr. Kirk&quot; (Sm:)e Communications, 1995)
* &quot;Universal Love EP&quot; (Selector, 1995) 
* &quot;Earth Pioneers&quot; (Talkin&#x27; Loud, 1997) 
* &quot;Loveless&quot; (Talkin&#x27; Loud, 1997) 
* &quot;Star Chasers&quot; (Talkin&#x27; Loud, 1998)
* &quot;We Who Are Not as Others&quot; (Talkin&#x27; Loud, 1998) 
* &quot;Escape That&quot; (Talkin&#x27; Loud, 1999) 
* &quot;Les Fleur&quot; (Talkin&#x27; Loud, 2001) 
* &quot;Morning Child&quot; (Raw Canvas Records, 2007) 
* &quot;Look Inside&quot; (featuring Face) (Raw Canvas Records, 2008)

==See also==
* Reinforced Records

==References==
== Articles &amp; Interviews ==
*Cardew, Ben. &quot;4-Hero are jungle legends: part two of two&quot;, Line Noise, Jul 24, 2024
*Cardew, Ben. &quot;4-Hero are jungle legends: part one of two&quot;, Line Noise, Jul 24, 2024
*Scaruffi, Piero. 4hero, (cultural historian music database)
*Cardew, Ben. &quot;Solid Gold: How 4Hero&#x27;s &#x27;Two Pages&#x27; predicted the future of d&amp;b&quot;, DJ Mag, January 23, 2020
*Dolan, Jon &amp; Matos, Michelangelo.  “The 30 Greatest EDM Albums of All Time:From Kraftwerk to Daft Punk to Deadmau5, it&#x27;s been a wild ride on the dance floor”. Rolling Stone,  August 2, 2012
*Vine, Richard. “A history of dance music: 4hero remix Nuyorican Soul&#x27;s I Am the Black Gold of the Sun. 1997: Number 32 in our series of the 50 key events in the history of dance music .”, The Guardian, Wed 15 Jun 2011
*Bellini, Lara (2009). &quot;4hero presents Extensions Review&quot;, BBC Music
*Buttimer, Andrew (2007). &quot;4hero Play With The Changes Review&quot;, BBC Music

==External links==
*Official site
*Archived Site at Wayback Machine
*Tom and Jerry discography at Discogs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q924606" start="0" end="5" title="4hero" label="4hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q924606" start="32" end="38" title="4hero" label="4 Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q924606" start="42" end="48" title="4hero" label="4-Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="57" end="73" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q146440" start="85" end="96" title="Dollis Hill" label="Dollis Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585075" start="237" end="255" title="breakbeat hardcore" label="breakbeat hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="257" end="263" title="Jungle music" label="jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="264" end="277" title="drum and bass" label="drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406633" start="279" end="290" title="broken beat" label="broken beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136331" start="295" end="302" title="nu jazz" label="nu jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q877017" start="465" end="477" title="pirate radio" label="pirate radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742982" start="520" end="538" title="Reinforced Records" label="Reinforced Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="738" end="740" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q543707" start="882" end="894" title="Warp Records" label="Warp Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798055" start="904" end="907" title="LFO (British band)" label="LFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q928905" start="912" end="929" title="Nightmares on Wax" label="Nightmares on Wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q663519" start="960" end="969" title="breakbeat" label="breakbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q645767" start="1022" end="1026" title="rave" label="rave"/>
<link wikidata="Q178134" start="1166" end="1184" title="The Isley Brothers" label="The Isley Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="1205" end="1211" title="sampling (music)" label="sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935616" start="1292" end="1304" title="Bobby Susser" label="Bobby Susser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="1306" end="1315" title="anti-drug" label="anti-drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784472" start="1355" end="1360" title="Think (band)" label="Think"/>
<link wikidata="Q507845" start="1562" end="1568" title="Goldie" label="Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258938" start="1614" end="1621" title="London Astoria" label="Astoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q507845" start="1751" end="1761" title="Rufige Cru" label="Rufige Cru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163942" start="1766" end="1776" title="Metalheadz" label="Metalheadz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693017" start="2032" end="2040" title="darkcore" label="darkcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q202676" start="2134" end="2148" title="Simon Reynolds" label="Simon Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="2713" end="2716" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134978" start="2761" end="2778" title="Parallel Universe (4hero album)" label="Parallel Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q214272" start="2881" end="2886" title="remix" label="remix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758822" start="2890" end="2904" title="Masters At Work" label="Nuyorican Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256698" start="2985" end="2995" title="Louie Vega" label="Louie Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704807" start="3165" end="3174" title="Two Pages" label="Two Pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q685223" start="3201" end="3216" title="Gilles Peterson" label="Gilles Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514529" start="3224" end="3241" title="Talkin&amp;#x27; Loud" label="Talkin&amp;#x27; Loud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242743" start="3260" end="3266" title="double album" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="3330" end="3339" title="mysticism" label="mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578143" start="3341" end="3353" title="Spiritualism (beliefs)" label="spiritualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="3355" end="3364" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q421" start="3366" end="3372" title="U.F.O." label="U.F.O."/>
<link wikidata="Q267039" start="3437" end="3450" title="Ursula Rucker" label="Ursula Rucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q501876" start="3649" end="3668" title="Mercury Music Prize" label="Mercury Music Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670259" start="3693" end="3697" title="MOBO Awards" label="MOBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q984341" start="3916" end="3930" title="Kirk Degiorgio" label="Kirk Degiorgio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416895" start="3934" end="3945" title="Kiss 100 FM" label="Kiss 100 FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183442" start="4022" end="4039" title="Creating Patterns" label="Creating Patterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q267039" start="4071" end="4084" title="Ursula Rucker" label="Ursula Rucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q232592" start="4119" end="4129" title="Jill Scott (singer)" label="Jill Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q232176" start="4146" end="4161" title="Minnie Riperton" label="Minnie Riperton"/>
<link wikidata="Q285480" start="4284" end="4291" title="Baileys Irish Cream" label="Baileys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824523" start="4328" end="4336" title="Top Gear (series 4)" label="Top Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="4390" end="4407" title="compilation album" label="compilation album"/>
<link wikidata="Q465897" start="4664" end="4675" title="Jody Watley" label="Jody Watley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749696" start="4696" end="4708" title="The Makeover" label="The Makeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203133" start="4785" end="4806" title="Play with the Changes" label="Play with the Changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q494400" start="4870" end="4876" title="Mixmag" label="Mixmag"/>
<link wikidata="Q663519" start="5151" end="5160" title="breakbeat" label="breakbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="5162" end="5167" title="house music" label="house"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="5172" end="5178" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="5222" end="5238" title="Jungle music" label="oldschool jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="5244" end="5257" title="drum and bass" label="drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5851484" start="5321" end="5338" title="Shut Up and Dance (band)" label="Shut Up and Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q369820" start="5432" end="5439" title="African music" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="5472" end="5479" title="hip hop music" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="5484" end="5490" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691794" start="5578" end="5590" title="Joey Beltram" label="Joey Beltram"/>
<link wikidata="Q713763" start="5592" end="5602" title="CJ Bolland" label="CJ Bolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295260" start="5818" end="5832" title="Audio timescale-pitch modification" label="timestretching"/>
<link wikidata="Q60630" start="5837" end="5851" title="pitch-shifting" label="pitch-shifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742982" start="5917" end="5935" title="Reinforced Records" label="Reinforced Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134978" start="5951" end="5968" title="Parallel Universe (4hero album)" label="Parallel Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971673" start="6082" end="6097" title="R&amp;amp;S Records" label="R&amp;amp;S Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704807" start="6113" end="6122" title="Two Pages" label="Two Pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514529" start="6130" end="6147" title="Talkin&amp;#x27; Loud" label="Talkin&amp;#x27; Loud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859150" start="6163" end="6180" title="Two Pages Remixed" label="Two Pages Remixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859149" start="6221" end="6248" title="Two Pages Reinterpretations" label="Two Pages Reinterpretations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183442" start="6289" end="6306" title="Creating Patterns" label="Creating Patterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q924606" start="6347" end="6362" title="The Remix Album (4hero album)" label="The Remix Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203133" start="6404" end="6425" title="Play with the Changes" label="Play with the Changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860414" start="6555" end="6566" title="BBE Records" label="BBE Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742982" start="6638" end="6656" title="Reinforced Records" label="Reinforced Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q507845" start="7184" end="7190" title="Goldie" label="Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514529" start="7519" end="7536" title="Talkin&amp;#x27; Loud" label="Talkin&amp;#x27; Loud"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742982" start="7960" end="7978" title="Reinforced Records" label="Reinforced Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q504063" start="9099" end="9106" title="Discogs" label="Discogs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405587" wikidata="Q321748" url="?curid=405587" title="General Levy">
<text>Paul Scott Levy (born 28 April 1971), also known as General Levy, is an English ragga deejay, regularly employed on studio tracks by drum and bass DJs. He is best known for the track &quot;Incredible&quot; which he recorded with M-Beat. A remixed version of this reached number 8 on the UK Singles Chart in 1994.

==Biography==
General Levy was born in Central Middlesex Hospital in Park Royal, London on 28 April 1971. He is of Trinidadian descent. Levy&#x27;s formative years were spent in Harlesden and Wembley in the London Borough of Brent in northwest London. Levy&#x27;s musical influence was developed in the area, collecting dancehall tapes, beginning in 1981. At the age of 12, General Levy began writing lyrics and went on to form his first sound system with friends, two years later, named Third Dimension.

General Levy&#x27;s first major releases were with the independent record label Fashion Records, who signed a distribution deal with London Records for the re-releases of the tracks he had recorded. He had earlier releases with the record producers Lloydy Crucial and Robbo Ranx (later of BBC 1xtra), but these were mainly tracks that were hits on the underground dancehall scene. General Levy was ostracized by the UK jungle scene in 1994, due to mis-reported comments he made relating to his collaboration with M-Beat on &quot;Incredible&quot;. He had claimed in an interview with &quot;The Face&quot; that &quot;I run jungle at the moment&quot;. This controversy has since died down and he is now being cited as one of the 25 UK MCs &quot;who changed the game&quot;.

&quot;Incredible&quot; was featured in the film &quot;Ali G Indahouse&quot;, and as a TV advertising campaign by Honda.

General Levy briefly collaborated with Rocco Barker of Flesh for Lulu in the band The Space Police. Levy also featured on the song &quot;Only God Can Judge Me&quot; by R&amp;B singer Mark Morrison.

He collaborated with Madness singer Suggs on his 1998 album &quot;The Three Pyramids Club&quot;, on the track &quot;Girl&quot;.

Levy featured on many sound systems in the late 1980s and early 1990s, such as Java One love and Tippertone Sound.

His collaborations with dub producer Joe Ariwa appear on several releases including &quot;In the Ghetto&quot; and &quot;Be Conscious &amp; Wise: Dub Showcase&quot;.

In 2018, he collaborated with artists such as Chase &amp; Status, Fedde Le Grand and Spragga Benz.

==Discography==

===Albums===
*&quot;Double Trouble&quot; (1991, Gussie P Records) – Capleton &amp; General Levy
*&quot;The Wickeder General&quot; (1992, Fashion Records)
*&quot;Wickedness Increase&quot; (1993, FFRR/London)
*&quot;Rumble in the Jungle Volume One&quot; (1994, Jungle Fashion Records) – Top Cat &amp; General Levy
*&quot;New Breed&quot; (1999, Arts Records)
*&quot;Spirit &amp; Faith&quot; (2008, BoombamMuzik)
*&quot;We Progressive&quot; (feat The PSB Family) (2011, X-Ray Records)
*&quot;In the Chamber of Dub&quot; (2012, Ariwa Sounds) – Joe Ariwa &amp; General Levy
*&quot;4ward&quot; (2014) – DJ Bonnot &amp; General Levy
*&quot;Be Conscious and Wise&quot; – General Levy &amp; Joe Ariwa

===Singles===
==Book==
On 13 November 2022 Levy self published his autobiography entitled Incredible exploring his life and career to date.

==References==
==External links==
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q321748" start="0" end="15" title="General Levy" label="Paul Scott Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q321748" start="52" end="64" title="General Levy" label="General Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q740911" start="80" end="85" title="ragga" label="ragga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369991" start="86" end="92" title="Deejay (Jamaican)" label="deejay"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="133" end="146" title="drum and bass" label="drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117679" start="189" end="199" title="Incredible (M-Beat song)" label="Incredible"/>
<link wikidata="Q71107071" start="229" end="235" title="M-Beat" label="M-Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061433" start="353" end="379" title="Central Middlesex Hospital" label="Central Middlesex Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q83394" start="383" end="393" title="Park Royal" label="Park Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="395" end="401" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q146335" start="492" end="501" title="Harlesden" label="Harlesden"/>
<link wikidata="Q146858" start="506" end="513" title="Wembley" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q207201" start="521" end="544" title="London Borough of Brent" label="London Borough of Brent"/>
<link wikidata="Q474027" start="634" end="643" title="dancehall" label="dancehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q389435" start="752" end="764" title="Sound system (Jamaican)" label="sound system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="875" end="899" title="independent record label" label="independent record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q935090" start="953" end="967" title="London Records" label="London Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q474027" start="1184" end="1193" title="dancehall" label="dancehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="1239" end="1245" title="Jungle music" label="jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q71107071" start="1333" end="1339" title="M-Beat" label="M-Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634273" start="1409" end="1417" title="The Face (magazine)" label="The Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="1441" end="1447" title="Jungle music" label="jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q497240" start="1552" end="1555" title="Emcees" label="MCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117679" start="1597" end="1607" title="Incredible (M-Beat song)" label="Incredible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758119" start="1645" end="1660" title="Ali G Indahouse" label="Ali G Indahouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458717" start="1767" end="1781" title="Flesh for Lulu" label="Flesh for Lulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="1880" end="1887" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364471" start="1895" end="1908" title="Mark Morrison" label="Mark Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q745741" start="1932" end="1939" title="Madness (band)" label="Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490265" start="1947" end="1952" title="Suggs (singer)" label="Suggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358268" start="1977" end="2000" title="The Three Pyramids Club" label="The Three Pyramids Club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2137" end="2153" title="Tippertone Sound" label="Tippertone Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067983" start="2368" end="2386" title="Chase &amp;amp; Status" label="Chase &amp;amp; Status"/>
<link wikidata="Q375820" start="2388" end="2402" title="Fedde Le Grand" label="Fedde Le Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534446" start="2407" end="2419" title="Spragga Benz" label="Spragga Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="3198" end="3211" title="autobiography" label="autobiography"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405589" wikidata="Q1335569" url="?curid=405589" title="Techstep">
<text>Techstep is a dark subgenre of drum and bass that was created in the mid-1990s.

==Style==
It is characterized by a dark, sci-fi mood, near-exclusive use of synthesised or sampled sound sources, 2-step kicks and snares and influences from industrial and techno music, what some writers have described as a &quot;clinical&quot; sound. Although described as having a &quot;techy&quot; feel, techstep&#x27;s relationship with techno should not be overstated. It shares the technique of creating a high-energy collage from abstract, synthetic noises, including samples, bleeps and squelches: it rarely uses instruments that have not been processed by effects. Similarly, quantized drum-machine kit and percussion sounds are favored over naturalistic human breakbeats. However, it usually adheres to drum and bass norms in other regards, especially in terms of musical structure, with the emphasis on the &quot;drop&quot;. Techstep saw jungle music&#x27;s obsession with bass change, from aiming for low and deep to exploring timbre, artists aiming to outdo each other with ever more distorted and &quot;twisted&quot; bass sounds.

==History==
Techstep developed from jungle music and hardstep around 1995. The name of the genre was coined by Ed Rush and Trace, who were both instrumental in shaping the sound of techstep. In this case, &quot;tech&quot; did not refer to the smoother style of Detroit techno, but to the raver, more caustic hardcore sounds that were popular in Belgium in the earlier part of the decade, often known as Belgian techno. Techstep was a reaction to the appearance of more pop and virtuosic musical elements on jungle and drum &#x27;n&#x27; bass tracks, which were seen as an adulteration of &quot;true&quot; or &quot;original&quot; jungle. Instead the genre was infused with a simpler, colder sound that stripped away most R&amp;B elements, and replaced them with a more hardcore sound, and ideological influences like dystopian films like &quot;Blade Runner&quot; and &quot;RoboCop&quot;.&lt;br&gt; One of the first incarnations of the techstep sound is DJ Trace&#x27;s remix of T-Power&#x27;s &quot;Mutant Jazz&quot; which appeared on S.O.U.R. Recordings in 1995. This remix, co-produced by Ed Rush and Nico, features the trademark stepping beats and distorted Reese bassline which would become symbolic of the techstep genre. The &quot;Torque&quot; compilation (No U Turn), the &quot;Techsteppin&quot;&#x27; compilation (Emotif), &quot;Breakage&quot; LP (Penny Black 1997), and &quot;Platinum Breakz 1, 2&quot;, and &quot;MDZ 01&quot; (Metalheadz) feature some selections of techstep tracks.

Some of the original techstep producers eventually developed the neurofunk style. These included early pioneers Ed Rush and Optical. Artists such as Teebee and Noisia further developed the Neurofunk sound. Moving Shadow and Metalheadz were important labels in the development of the style.

==See also==
* Drum and bass
* Neurofunk
* 2-step garage
* Digital hardcore
* Breakbeat
* Breakbeat hardcore
* Dubstep
* Breakcore
* Darkstep

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1335569" start="0" end="8" title="Techstep" label="Techstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="31" end="44" title="drum and bass" label="drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="122" end="128" title="sci-fi" label="sci-fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="157" end="168" title="synthesiser" label="synthesised"/>
<link wikidata="Q320002" start="172" end="179" title="sampler (musical instrument)" label="sampled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751409" start="195" end="201" title="2-step garage" label="2-step"/>
<link wikidata="Q487965" start="239" end="249" title="industrial music" label="industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="254" end="260" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976095" start="667" end="676" title="Quantization (music)" label="quantized"/>
<link wikidata="Q903577" start="752" end="762" title="break (music)" label="breakbeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="931" end="943" title="jungle music" label="jungle music"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="1021" end="1027" title="timbre" label="timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347355" start="1079" end="1088" title="distortion" label="distorted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="1163" end="1175" title="jungle music" label="jungle music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640307" start="1180" end="1188" title="hardstep" label="hardstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q526463" start="1388" end="1402" title="Detroit techno" label="Detroit techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1472" end="1479" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q112663444" start="1530" end="1544" title="Belgian techno" label="Belgian techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="1847" end="1854" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="1943" end="1951" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="1970" end="1982" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q372514" start="1999" end="2006" title="RoboCop" label="RoboCop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2287" end="2301" title="Kevin Saunderson#The Reese Bassline" label="Reese bassline"/>
<link wikidata="Q967654" start="2685" end="2694" title="neurofunk" label="neurofunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q326768" start="2732" end="2739" title="Ed Rush" label="Ed Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098804" start="2744" end="2751" title="Optical (artist)" label="Optical"/>
<link wikidata="Q563273" start="2769" end="2775" title="Teebee" label="Teebee"/>
<link wikidata="Q47227" start="2780" end="2786" title="Noisia" label="Noisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q605344" start="2826" end="2839" title="Moving Shadow" label="Moving Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163942" start="2844" end="2854" title="Metalheadz" label="Metalheadz"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="2926" end="2939" title="Drum and bass" label="Drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q967654" start="2942" end="2951" title="Neurofunk" label="Neurofunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751409" start="2954" end="2967" title="2-step garage" label="2-step garage"/>
<link wikidata="Q56580" start="2970" end="2986" title="Digital hardcore" label="Digital hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q663519" start="2989" end="2998" title="Breakbeat" label="Breakbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585075" start="3001" end="3019" title="Breakbeat hardcore" label="Breakbeat hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q20474" start="3022" end="3029" title="Dubstep" label="Dubstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q903735" start="3032" end="3041" title="Breakcore" label="Breakcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="3044" end="3052" title="Darkstep" label="Darkstep"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405594" wikidata="Q2210490" url="?curid=405594" title="Michael McGoldrick">
<text>Michael McGoldrick (born 26 November 1971, in Manchester, England) is a folk musician who plays Irish flute, uilleann pipes, low whistle and bodhran. He also plays other instruments such as acoustic guitar, cittern, and mandolin.

==Bands==
McGoldrick has been a member of several influential bands. In 1994 he was awarded the BBC Young Tradition Award, and in 2001 he was given the &quot;Instrumentalist of the Year&quot; award at the BBC Radio 2 Folk Awards.

McGoldrick was a founder-member of the Celtic rock band Toss the Feathers while still at school. He also competed at that time in the Fleadhanna with Dezi Donnelly (fiddle), whom he had met at local Comhaltas meetings. He made appearances at various local and national festivals and ran whistle/flute workshops at the Cambridge Folk Festival and for Folkworks on their &quot;Flutopia&quot; concert tour.

McGoldrick formed the band &quot;Fluke!&quot; (later renamed as &quot;Flook&quot;) with Brian Finnegan and Sarah Allen in November 1995. After one tour, he left to pursue other projects.

He was an early member of Lúnasa from 1997 until roughly 2000 and played on their first albums. He also joined &quot;Capercaillie&quot; in 1998, playing on six albums (one live) to date.

McGoldrick has played regularly for Afro-Celt Sound System and Kate Rusby&#x27;s band. he leads the Michael McGoldrick Band.

Between 1996 and the present, McGoldrick recorded five solo albums, all featuring an array of well-known supporting musicians: &quot;Morning Rory&quot; (1996) showcases his traditional skills. &quot;Fused&quot;, released in August 2000, explores several other musical genres including jazz; although &quot;Wired&quot;, released in January 2006, takes the experimental approach of &quot;Fused&quot; even further, it was preceded by a duo album &quot;At First Light&quot; (2001), with award-winning uilleann piper John McSherry (also ex-Lúnasa) which goes back to traditional roots. &quot;Aurora&quot;, released in 2010, features traditional as well as self-penned tunes, and a song (Waterbound) by a Louisiana master of old-time music, Dirk Powell. McGoldrick&#x27;s latest solo release is &quot;Arc&quot; (2018). 

Between 2007 and 2013, McGoldrick played with the house band for the Transatlantic Sessions (Sessions 3-6) including performing some of his own compositions/arrangements.

In 2010 Michael replaced John McCusker, joining Tim O&#x27;Brien on Mark Knopfler&#x27;s US leg of the Get Lucky Tour. This being a success, he was invited (and accepted) to stay on for the remainder of the World Tour in Europe when John McCusker had returned. He went on to play on the next Mark Knopfler album, Privateering and played with the band for the subsequent World Tour. McGoldrick also recorded for the &#x27;Ceol Tacsi&#x27; project with many other British and Irish artists.

==Discography==
===Solo/duo/trio===

==== Solo ====
* &quot;Morning Rory&quot; – Aughgrim Records AUGH01 (1996)
* &quot;Fused&quot; – Vertical Records VERTCD051 (2000)
* &quot;Wired&quot; – Vertical Records VERTCD074 (2005)
* &quot;Aurora&quot; – Vertical Records VERTCD090 (2010)
* &quot;Arc&quot; - Vertical Records VERTCD111 (2018)
* &quot;Waterman&#x27;s (Live)&quot; - Vertical Records (2020)

==== Duo ===
* &quot;At First Light&quot; (with John McSherry) – Vertical Records VERTCD061 (2001)
* &quot;Dog in the Fog&quot; (with Dezi Donnelly) - Boxroom Music (2018)
* &quot;Mike McGoldrick &amp; John Doyle&quot; (with John Doyle) - Boxroom Music (2020)
* &quot;At Our Leisure&quot; (with John Carty) - Racket Records (2022)
* &quot;Jamland&quot; (with Tim Edey) (2024)

==== Trio ====
* &quot;Live&quot; (with John McCusker &amp; John Doyle, 2009 tour) – Vertical Records (2012)
* &quot;The Mark Radcliffe Folk Sessions&quot; (with John McCusker &amp; John Doyle) - Smooth Operations (2016)
* &quot;The Wishing Tree&quot; (with John McCusker &amp; John Doyle, studio album) – Under One Sky Records UOSR004 (2018)
* &quot;The Reed That Bends in the Storm&quot; (with John McCusker &amp; John Doyle) - Under One Sky Records UOSR007 (2020)
* &quot;Christmas at Home&quot; (with John McCusker &amp; John Doyle) (2020)
* &quot;At Home This Spring (Live)&quot; (with John McCusker &amp; John Doyle) (2021)
* &quot;The Best Of&quot; (with John McCusker &amp; John Doyle) - Under One Sky Records UOSR011 (2024)

===As band member of===
==== Toss the Feathers ====
* &quot;Live at the 32&quot; - Bop Cassettes (1988)
* &quot;Rude Awakening&quot; (1993)
* &quot;The Next Round&quot; (1995)

==== Arcady ====
* &quot;Many Happy Returns&quot; – Dara Records DARACD080 (1995)
==== Flook ====
* &quot;Flook! Live!&quot; – Small CD 9405 (1996)

==== Capercaillie ====
* &quot;Beautiful Wasteland&quot; - Survival Records (1997)
* &quot;Dawn Till Dusk (The Best of Capercaillie)&quot; - Survival Records (1998)
* &quot;Nàdurra&quot; - Survival Records (2000)
* &quot;Live in Concert&quot; - Survival Records (2002)
* &quot;Choice Language&quot; - Vertical Records (2003)
* &quot;Grace And Pride: The Anthology 1984-2004&quot; - Survival Records (2004)
* &quot;Roses and Tears&quot; - Vertical Records (2008)
* &quot;At the Heart of It All&quot; - Vertical Records (2013)
* &quot;ReLoved&quot; - Vertical Records (2024)

==== Lúnasa ====
* &quot;Lúnasa&quot; - Self-released (1998)
* &quot;Otherworld&quot; - Green Linnet (1999)
* &quot;The Story So Far...&quot; - Compass Records (2008)

==== Kate Rusby ====
* &quot;Hourglass&quot; – Compass Records (1997)
* &quot;Cowsong –&quot; Pure Records (1998)
* &quot;Sleepless&quot; – Compass Records (1999)
* &quot;Little Lights&quot; – Pure Records (2001)
* &quot;Withered And Died&quot; - Pure Records (2001)
* &quot;10&quot; - Pure Records (2002)
* &quot;Underneath The Stars&quot; - Pure Records (2003)
* &quot;The Girl Who Couldn&#x27;t Fly&quot; - Pure Records (2005)
* &quot;Awkward Annie&quot; - Pure Records (2007)
* &quot;20&quot; - Pure Records, Mighty Village, &amp; Island Records (2012)
* &quot;Ghost&quot; - Pure Records (2014)
* &quot;Life in a Paper Boat&quot; - Pure Records (2016)
* &quot;30: Happy Years&quot; - Pure Records (2022)

==== Eden&#x27;s Bridge ====
* &quot;All in a Life&quot; - Straightway Records (2000)
* &quot;Isle of Tides&quot; - Whole World Media Group (2002)
* &quot;New Celtic Worship&quot; - Whole World Media Group (2005)

==== Sharon Shannon, Frankie Gavin / Dezi Donnelly, Jim Murray ====
* &quot;Tunes&quot; – Compass Records (2005)
* &quot;Upside Down&quot; – The Daisy Label (2006)
* &quot;Renegade&quot; – The Daisy Label (2007)

==== Future Trad Collective ====
* &quot;Future Trad Collective&quot; - Vertical Records (2011)
Celtic Melt

* &quot;Celtic Melt&quot; - Cavendish Music (2001)

==== Usher&#x27;s Island ====
* &quot;Usher&#x27;s Island&quot; - Vertical Records (2017)

==== The McGoldrick Family ====
* &quot;One for the Road&quot; (2024)

==== Mark Knopfler ====

* &quot;Border Reiver (Single) - Reprise Records&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Get Lucky&quot; - Reprise Records (2009)
* &quot;Privateering&quot; - Mercury Records (2012)
* &quot;Tracker&quot; - Verve (2015)
* &quot;Down the Road Wherever&quot; - Virgin Records (2018)
* &quot;One Deep River -&quot; EMI/British Grove (2024)

===As guest artist/other===
* &quot;Straight on No Problem&quot; - Anthony John Clarke (1997)
* &quot;Spellbound&quot; - Ten (1998)
* &quot;1 Douar&quot; - Alan Stivell (1998)
* &quot;Volume 1: The Source&quot; - Big Sky (1999)
* &quot;Volume 2: Release&quot; - Afro Celt Sound System (1999)
* &quot;Identités&quot; - Idir (1999)
* &quot;Missa Celtica&quot; - John Cameron (1999)
* &quot;Seal Maiden&quot; - Karan Casey (2000)
* &quot;Yella Hoose&quot; - John McCusker (2000)
* &quot;New Celtic Music From Green Linnet&quot; - Various (2000)
* &quot;Ceol Tacsi&quot; - Various (2000)
* Two Journeys - Tim O&#x27;Brien (2001)
* &quot;The Wind Begins To Sing&quot; - Karan Casey (2001)
* &quot;Live Recordings From The William Kennedy Piping Festival&quot; - Various (2002)
* &quot;50 US Cents&quot; - Reel &amp; Soul Association (2002)
* &quot;Warm &amp; Tender Love (Single)&quot; - Reel &amp; Soul Association (2002)
* &quot;The Acoustic Folk Box&quot; - Various (2002)
* &quot;Through the Round Window&quot; - Eamonn Coyne (2002)
* &quot;Time To Fall&quot; - Karen Matheson (2002)
* &quot;Distant Shore&quot; - Karan Casey (2003)
* &quot;What Road?&quot; - Session A9 (2003)
* &quot;If Not Now&quot; - e2K (2003)
* &quot;The Arms Dealer&#x27;s Daughter&quot; - Shooglenifty (2004)
* &quot;Musical Tour of New Zealand&quot; - Billy Connolly (2004)
* &quot;Movin&quot;&#x27; - Human Touch (2004)
* &quot;Shots&quot; - Damien Dempsey (2005)
* &quot;ZOOM ZOOM ZOOM&quot; - Aquarium (2005)
* &quot;Wayward Son&quot; - John Doyle (2005)
* &quot;Downriver&quot; - Karen Matheson (2005)
* &quot;Strategy&quot; - Horace X (2005)
* &quot;Earthsongs&quot; - Secret Garden (2005)
* &quot;The Essential Collection 1995–2005 -&quot; Ten (2005)
* &quot;Hands Across The Water&quot; - Various (2005)
* &quot;Folktopia - Music of Vertical Records, Vol. 1&quot; - Various (2005)
* &quot;The Furthest Wave&quot; - Cathie Ryan (2005)
* &quot;Raining Up&quot; - Máiréad (2005)
* &quot;My Secret Is My Silence&quot; - Roddy Woomble (2006)
* &quot;The Seventh Veil&quot; - Theresa Kavanagh (2006)
* &quot;Live Acoustic at the Jam House&quot; - Ocean Colour Scene (2006)
* &quot;The Songs of The Radio Ballads&quot; - Various (2006)
* &quot;Og Mhadainn Shamhraidh&quot; - Kathleen MacInnes (2006)
* &quot;Música na Maleta&quot; - Tejedor (2006)
* &quot;Peacetime&quot; - Eddi Reader (2007)
* &quot;Cuilidh&quot; - Julie Fowlis (2007)
* &quot;Prism&quot; - Beth Nielsen Chapman (2007)
* &quot;Across The Black River&quot; - Kevin Burke &amp; Cal Scott (2007)
* &quot;Before the Ruin&quot; - Kris Drever, John McCusker &amp; Roddy Woomble (2008)
* &quot;Yella House + Goodnight Ginger&quot; - John McCusker (2008)
* &quot;In Love + Love&quot; - Heidi Talbot (2008)
* &quot;Imeall&quot; - Mairéad Ní Mhaonaigh (2009)
* &quot;Wells For Zoë - Water For Life&quot; - Various (2009)
* &quot;Exiles Return&quot; - John Doyle and Karan Casey (2010)
* &quot;On the Move&quot; - Colin Farrell (2010)
* &quot;Bretonne&quot; - Nolwenn Leroy (2010)
* &quot;Summer Hill&quot; - Damien O&#x27;Kane (2010)
* &quot;Last Star&quot; - Heidi Talbot (2010)
* &quot;Capture 1995-2010&quot; - Afro Celt Sound System (2010)
* &quot;Celtic Roots&quot; - Various (2010)
* &quot;Transatlantic Sessions - Series 4: Volume 2&quot; - Jerry Douglas, Aly Bain, &amp; Various (2010)
* &quot;Transatlantic Sessions - Series 4: Volume 3&quot; - Jerry Douglas, Aly Bain, &amp; Various (2010)
* &quot;Transatlantic Sessions - Series 5: Volume 1&quot; - Jerry Douglas, Aly Bain, &amp; Various (2011)
* &quot;Shadow And Light&quot; - John Doyle (2011)
* &quot;Out on the Edge&quot; - Chris Dawson (2011)
* &quot;Ô Filles De L&#x27;Eau&quot; - Nolwenn Leroy (2012)
* &quot;All The Way Home&quot; - Cathy Jordan (2012)
* &quot;Only Boys Aloud&quot; - Only Boys Aloud (2012)
* &quot;Chimes of Freedom: The Songs of Bob Dylan&quot; - Various (2012)
* &quot;Die Wanderhure - Best Of&quot; - Stephan Massimo (2012)
* &quot;The Sailor&#x27;s Revenge&quot; - Bap Kennedy (2012)
* &quot;Five And Twenty&quot; - Aly Bain &amp; Phil Cunningham (2012)
* &quot;Angels Without Wings&quot; - Heidi Talbot (2013)
* &quot;These Wilder Things&quot; - Ruth Moody (2013)
* &quot;Tierra&quot; - Vicente Amigo (2013)
* &quot;Полная Дискография&quot; - Aquarium (2013)
* &quot;Gach Sgeul - Every Story&quot; - Julie Fowlis (2014)
* &quot;Songs from Twisting River&quot; - West of Eden (2014)
* &quot;Homecoming - A Scottish Fantasy&quot; - Nicole Benedetti (2014)
* &quot;Transatlantic Session - Series 6: Volume 3&quot; - Jerry Douglas, Aly Bain, &amp; Various (2014)
* &quot;Make a Note&quot; - Colin Farrell (2015)
* &quot;JEKYLL + HYDE&quot; - Zac Brown Band (2015)
* &quot;Encore Heureux&quot; - Zazie (2015)
* &quot;Complicated Game&quot; - James McMurty (2015)
* &quot;Urram&quot; - Karen Matheson (2015)
* &quot;Katie Morag (Music from the BBC Series)&quot; - Donald Shaw (2015)
* &quot;The Widening Gyre&quot; - Altan (2015)
* &quot;Vagabond&quot; - Eddi Reader (2015)
* &quot;My Secret Is My Silence&quot; - Roddy Woombie (2016)
* &quot;Altamira&quot; - Mark Knopfler &amp; Evelyn Glennie (2016)
* &quot;Hello Goodbye&quot; - John McCusker (2016)
* &quot;Doolin&quot;&#x27; - Doolin&#x27; (2016)
* &quot;The Seven Suns&quot; - John McSherry (2016)
* &quot;The Pound Ridge Sessions&quot; - Kevin Burke &amp; John Brennan (2016)
* &quot;Alterum&quot; - Julie Fowlis (2017)
* &quot;Pretty Little Troubles&quot; - Malcolm Holcombe (2017)
* &quot;Searbh Siúcra&quot; - Éilís Crean (2017)
* &quot;Pretty Peg&quot; - Sam Kelly &amp; The Lost Boys (2017)
* &quot;Celtic Colours Live, Vol. 5&quot; - Various (2017)
* &quot;Happy 2017 from Tim Edey!&quot; - Tim Edey (2017)
* &quot;Hebrides - Islands on the Edge Soundtrack&quot; (2017)
* &quot;Cavalier&quot; - Eddi Reader (2018)
* &quot;Folk Fever&quot; - The Band of Love (2018)
* &quot;The Art of Forgetting&quot; - Kyle Carey (2018)
* &quot;Banjophony&quot; - Damien O&#x27;Kane &amp; Ron Block (2018)
* &quot;Basque Selfie&quot; - Korrontzi (2018)
* &quot;Love Is The Bridge Between Two Hearts&quot; - Heidi Talbot &amp; John McCusker (2018)
* &quot;Quarehawk&quot; - Michael Walsh (2019)
* &quot;La Lluz Encesa&quot; - Llan de Cubel (2019)
* &quot;Inversions&quot; - Belinda O&#x27;Hooley (2019)
* &quot;The Path of Stones&quot; - John Doyle (2020)
* &quot;Simply Whistle&quot; - Pat Walsh (2020)
* &quot;Glackanacker&quot; - The Black Brothers (2020)
* &quot;When I Wait For You&quot; - Dirk Powell (2020)
* &quot;Earthbound&quot; - Starless (2020)
* &quot;Songs for the Sparrows&quot; - Nefesh Mountain (2021)
* &quot;Blue Shaman&quot; - Abaji (2021)
* &quot;I Got Rhythm&quot; - Tim Edey (2021)
*&quot;The Wishing Tree&quot; - Sam Kelly &amp; The Lost Boys (2021)
*&quot;Flook/McGoldrick Remixes&quot; - Zazim (2021)
* &quot;Autumn&quot; - Laura Auer (2022)
* &quot;Our Voices Echo&quot; - Rura (2022)
* &quot;Women of the World&quot; - Chris While &amp; Julie Matthews (2022)
*&quot;Now and the Evermore&quot; - Colin Hay (2022)
*&quot;Michael McGoldrick - Honesty Bar [Rua Soul Remix]&quot; - Rua Soul (2022)
*&quot;Banjophonics&quot; - Damien O&#x27;Kane &amp; Ron Block (2022)
* &quot;The Best of John McCusker&quot; - John McCusker (2023)
*&quot;Is It?&quot; - Ben Howard (2023)
*&quot;Palm Bay Frost&quot; - Palm Bay Frost (2023)
*&quot;Ozark Symphony&quot; - Kelly Hunt (2023)
*&quot;Korrontzi 20&quot; - Korrontzi (2023)
*&quot;Live from Celtic Connections 2023&quot; - Transatlantic Sessions (2023)
*&quot;This is Something Constant&quot; - Jack Rutter (2023)
*&quot;Live from Celtic Connections 2024&quot; - Transatlantic Sessions (2024)
*&quot;Songs of Clear Light&quot; - Boris Grebenshchikov (2024)
*&quot;Returning Home&quot; - Starless (2024)
*&quot;Andenes Del Tiempo&quot; - Vicente Amigo (2024)
*&quot;Oceania&quot; - Anya Hinkle (2024)
*&quot;Went To Walk&quot; - Claudia Schwab (2024)
*Coming Home - Cara Dillon (2024)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2210490" start="0" end="18" title="Michael McGoldrick" label="Michael McGoldrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="46" end="56" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="72" end="85" title="folk musician" label="folk musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672931" start="96" end="107" title="Irish flute" label="Irish flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q543833" start="109" end="123" title="uilleann pipes" label="uilleann pipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723974" start="125" end="136" title="low whistle" label="low whistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q244976" start="141" end="148" title="bodhran" label="bodhran"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="190" end="205" title="acoustic guitar" label="acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="220" end="228" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104864883" start="331" end="352" title="Young Tradition Award" label="Young Tradition Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q795559" start="436" end="459" title="BBC Radio 2 Folk Awards" label="BBC Radio 2 Folk Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662148" start="501" end="512" title="Celtic rock" label="Celtic rock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="518" end="535" title="Toss the Feathers (band)" label="Toss the Feathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067766" start="596" end="602" title="Fleadh" label="Fleadh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="612" end="625" title="Dezi Donnelly" label="Dezi Donnelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="627" end="633" title="fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342901" start="661" end="670" title="Comhaltas" label="Comhaltas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934694" start="780" end="803" title="Cambridge Folk Festival" label="Cambridge Folk Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464632" start="812" end="821" title="Folkworks" label="Folkworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052881" start="937" end="942" title="Flook (band)" label="Flook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484893" start="955" end="969" title="Brian Finnegan" label="Brian Finnegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052881" start="974" end="985" title="Sarah Allen (musician)" label="Sarah Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509651" start="1081" end="1087" title="Lúnasa (band)" label="Lúnasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034596" start="1172" end="1184" title="Capercaillie (band)" label="Capercaillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q325111" start="1279" end="1301" title="Afro-Celt Sound System" label="Afro-Celt Sound System"/>
<link wikidata="Q447652" start="1306" end="1316" title="Kate Rusby" label="Kate Rusby"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="1654" end="1658" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1881" end="1894" title="John McSherry (musician)" label="John McSherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833786" start="2253" end="2275" title="Transatlantic Sessions" label="Transatlantic Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247603" start="2381" end="2394" title="John McCusker" label="John McCusker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434211" start="2404" end="2420" title="Tim O&amp;#x27;Brien (musician)" label="Tim O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q185343" start="2424" end="2437" title="Mark Knopfler" label="Mark Knopfler"/>
<link wikidata="Q178475" start="2459" end="2468" title="Get Lucky (Mark Knopfler album)" label="Get Lucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034596" start="4687" end="4699" title="Capercaillie (band)" label="Capercaillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877835" start="4713" end="4732" title="Beautiful Wasteland (album)" label="Beautiful Wasteland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954831" start="4855" end="4862" title="Nadurra (Capercaillie album)" label="Nàdurra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035282" start="4903" end="4918" title="Capercaillie Live in Concert" label="Live in Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104024" start="4959" end="4974" title="Choice Language" label="Choice Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922808" start="4983" end="4999" title="Vertical Records" label="Vertical Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368657" start="5096" end="5111" title="Roses and Tears" label="Roses and Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151024" start="5152" end="5174" title="At the Heart of It All (album)" label="At the Heart of It All"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509651" start="5261" end="5267" title="Lúnasa (band)" label="Lúnasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711459" start="5281" end="5287" title="Lúnasa (album)" label="Lúnasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108676" start="5325" end="5335" title="Otherworld (album)" label="Otherworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776322" start="5344" end="5356" title="Green Linnet Records" label="Green Linnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q447652" start="5429" end="5439" title="Kate Rusby" label="Kate Rusby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375758" start="5453" end="5462" title="Kate Rusby discography" label="Hourglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476036" start="5471" end="5486" title="Compass Records" label="Compass Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375758" start="5502" end="5509" title="Kate Rusby discography" label="Cowsong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375758" start="5546" end="5555" title="Kate Rusby discography" label="Sleepless"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375758" start="5595" end="5608" title="Kate Rusby discography" label="Little Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375758" start="5639" end="5668" title="Kate Rusby discography" label="&amp;quot;Withered And Died&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375758" start="5693" end="5707" title="Kate Rusby discography" label="&amp;quot;10&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958971" start="5732" end="5764" title="Underneath the Stars (album)" label="&amp;quot;Underneath The Stars&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736529" start="5795" end="5825" title="The Girl Who Couldn&amp;#x27;t Fly" label="The Girl Who Couldn&amp;#x27;t Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830088" start="5862" end="5875" title="Awkward Annie" label="Awkward Annie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630522" start="5912" end="5914" title="20 (Kate Rusby album)" label="20"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="5959" end="5973" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344416" start="5989" end="5994" title="Ghost (Kate Rusby album)" label="Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q28448231" start="6031" end="6051" title="Life in a Paper Boat" label="Life in a Paper Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718995" start="6138" end="6156" title="Eden&amp;#x27;s Bridge" label="Eden&amp;#x27;s Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q457684" start="6352" end="6366" title="Sharon Shannon" label="Sharon Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886411" start="6368" end="6381" title="Frankie Gavin (Irish fiddle player)" label="Frankie Gavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30238370" start="6726" end="6745" title="Usher&amp;#x27;s Island (band)" label="Usher&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q185343" start="6888" end="6901" title="Mark Knopfler" label="Mark Knopfler"/>
<link wikidata="Q645889" start="6941" end="6956" title="Reprise Records" label="Reprise Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q178475" start="6978" end="6987" title="Get Lucky (Mark Knopfler album)" label="Get Lucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q645889" start="6996" end="7011" title="Reprise Records" label="Reprise Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q726508" start="7027" end="7039" title="Privateering (album)" label="Privateering"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="7048" end="7063" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q18785225" start="7079" end="7086" title="Tracker (album)" label="Tracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124849" start="7095" end="7100" title="Verve Records" label="Verve"/>
<link wikidata="Q56670557" start="7116" end="7138" title="Down the Road Wherever" label="Down the Road Wherever"/>
<link wikidata="Q203059" start="7147" end="7161" title="Virgin Records" label="Virgin Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q124458943" start="7177" end="7191" title="One Deep River" label="One Deep River"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="7200" end="7203" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084133" start="7204" end="7217" title="British Grove Studios" label="British Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772833" start="7293" end="7312" title="Anthony John Clarke" label="Anthony John Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q735409" start="7347" end="7350" title="Ten (band)" label="Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q325111" start="7488" end="7510" title="Afro Celt Sound System" label="Afro Celt Sound System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699530" start="7586" end="7598" title="John Cameron (musician)" label="John Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q274052" start="7634" end="7645" title="Karan Casey" label="Karan Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247603" start="7681" end="7694" title="John McCusker" label="John McCusker"/>
<link wikidata="Q39056336" start="7812" end="7824" title="Tim O&amp;#x27;Brien discography" label="Two Journeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434211" start="7827" end="7843" title="Tim O&amp;#x27;Brien (musician)" label="Tim O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q274052" start="7891" end="7902" title="Karan Casey" label="Karan Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714302" start="8449" end="8480" title="The Arms Dealer&amp;#x27;s Daughter" label="The Arms Dealer&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q284537" start="8489" end="8501" title="Shooglenifty" label="Shooglenifty"/>
<link wikidata="Q298838" start="8553" end="8567" title="Billy Connolly" label="Billy Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212415" start="8644" end="8658" title="Damien Dempsey" label="Damien Dempsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q119590" start="8697" end="8705" title="Aquarium (band)" label="Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193118" start="8785" end="8799" title="Karen Matheson" label="Karen Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q735409" start="8904" end="8938" title="The Essential Collection 1995–2005" label="The Essential Collection 1995–2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q735409" start="8947" end="8950" title="Ten (band)" label="Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053029" start="9123" end="9134" title="Cathie Ryan" label="Cathie Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332158" start="9310" end="9340" title="Live Acoustic at the Jam House" label="Live Acoustic at the Jam House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332158" start="9349" end="9367" title="Ocean Colour Scene" label="Ocean Colour Scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376811" start="9476" end="9493" title="Kathleen MacInnes" label="Kathleen MacInnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695215" start="9534" end="9541" title="Tejedor (band)" label="Tejedor"/>
<link wikidata="Q443837" start="9575" end="9586" title="Eddi Reader" label="Eddi Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q467103" start="9618" end="9630" title="Julie Fowlis" label="Julie Fowlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q274032" start="9640" end="9657" title="Prism (Beth Nielsen Chapman album)" label="&amp;quot;Prism&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q274032" start="9660" end="9680" title="Beth Nielsen Chapman" label="Beth Nielsen Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061806" start="9727" end="9738" title="Kevin Burke (musician)" label="Kevin Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880370" start="9770" end="9785" title="Before the Ruin" label="Before the Ruin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437161" start="9794" end="9805" title="Kris Drever" label="Kris Drever"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247603" start="9807" end="9820" title="John McCusker" label="John McCusker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303485" start="9827" end="9840" title="Roddy Woomble" label="Roddy Woomble"/>
<link wikidata="Q5698969" start="9947" end="9959" title="Heidi Talbot" label="Heidi Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291226" start="9975" end="9981" title="Imeall" label="Imeall"/>
<link wikidata="Q660794" start="9990" end="10010" title="Mairéad Ní Mhaonaigh" label="Mairéad Ní Mhaonaigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q910620" start="10201" end="10209" title="Bretonne (album)" label="Bretonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q58168" start="10218" end="10231" title="Nolwenn Leroy" label="Nolwenn Leroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212492" start="10267" end="10285" title="Damien O&amp;#x27;Kane" label="Damien O&amp;#x27;Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5698969" start="10319" end="10331" title="Heidi Talbot" label="Heidi Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q325111" start="10373" end="10395" title="Afro Celt Sound System" label="Afro Celt Sound System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833786" start="10449" end="10504" title="Transatlantic Sessions" label="&amp;quot;Transatlantic Sessions - Series 4: Volume 2&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q705743" start="10507" end="10520" title="Jerry Douglas" label="Jerry Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q450214" start="10522" end="10530" title="Aly Bain" label="Aly Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833786" start="10561" end="10604" title="Transatlantic Sessions" label="Transatlantic Sessions - Series 4: Volume 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833786" start="10661" end="10716" title="Transatlantic Sessions" label="&amp;quot;Transatlantic Sessions - Series 5: Volume 1&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918576" start="10961" end="10973" title="Cathy Jordan" label="Cathy Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348892" start="11013" end="11028" title="Only Boys Aloud" label="Only Boys Aloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704170" start="11044" end="11085" title="Chimes of Freedom (album)" label="Chimes of Freedom: The Songs of Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857499" start="11215" end="11226" title="Bap Kennedy" label="Bap Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181821" start="11281" end="11296" title="Phil Cunningham (folk musician)" label="Phil Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383135" start="11397" end="11407" title="Ruth Moody" label="Ruth Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q505159" start="11438" end="11451" title="Vicente Amigo" label="Vicente Amigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q119590" start="11494" end="11502" title="Aquarium (band)" label="Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987067" start="11613" end="11625" title="West of Eden (band)" label="West of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q462739" start="11681" end="11697" title="Nicola Benedetti" label="Nicole Benedetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833786" start="11707" end="11761" title="Transatlantic Sessions" label="&amp;quot;Transatlantic Session - Series 6: Volume 3&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19627464" start="11867" end="11880" title="Jekyll + Hyde" label="JEKYLL + HYDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q139154" start="11889" end="11903" title="Zac Brown Band" label="Zac Brown Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q17355642" start="12061" end="12100" title="Katie Morag (TV series)" label="Katie Morag (Music from the BBC Series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036090" start="12109" end="12120" title="Donald Shaw (musician)" label="Donald Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q434372" start="12162" end="12167" title="Altan (band)" label="Altan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047441" start="12227" end="12250" title="My Secret is my Silence" label="My Secret Is My Silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303485" start="12259" end="12272" title="Roddy Woomble" label="Roddy Woombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q23682915" start="12282" end="12302" title="Altamira (soundtrack)" label="&amp;quot;Altamira&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q239275" start="12325" end="12339" title="Evelyn Glennie" label="Evelyn Glennie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061806" start="12540" end="12551" title="Kevin Burke (musician)" label="Kevin Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q467103" start="12586" end="12593" title="Alterum" label="Alterum"/>
<link wikidata="Q467103" start="12602" end="12614" title="Julie Fowlis" label="Julie Fowlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197711" start="12661" end="12677" title="Malcolm Holcombe" label="Malcolm Holcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969219" start="12761" end="12770" title="Sam Kelly (musician)" label="Sam Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058494" start="12806" end="12833" title="Celtic Colours" label="Celtic Colours Live, Vol. 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q443837" start="13003" end="13014" title="Eddi Reader" label="Eddi Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q18604960" start="13111" end="13121" title="Kyle Carey" label="Kyle Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212492" start="13156" end="13174" title="Damien O&amp;#x27;Kane" label="Damien O&amp;#x27;Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363537" start="13181" end="13190" title="Ron Block" label="Ron Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314966" start="13417" end="13430" title="Llan de Cubel" label="Llan de Cubel"/>
<link wikidata="Q85788150" start="13787" end="13802" title="Nefesh Mountain" label="Nefesh Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820145" start="13838" end="13843" title="Abaji (Lebanese musician)" label="Abaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q24572765" start="13880" end="13888" title="Tim Edey" label="Tim Edey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108457" start="14138" end="14149" title="Chris While" label="Chris While"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308368" start="14156" end="14170" title="Julie Matthews" label="Julie Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q725969" start="14214" end="14223" title="Colin Hay" label="Colin Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212492" start="14340" end="14358" title="Damien O&amp;#x27;Kane" label="Damien O&amp;#x27;Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363537" start="14365" end="14374" title="Ron Block" label="Ron Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247603" start="14424" end="14437" title="John McCusker" label="John McCusker"/>
<link wikidata="Q119583355" start="14452" end="14458" title="Is It?" label="Is It?"/>
<link wikidata="Q816518" start="14467" end="14477" title="Ben Howard" label="Ben Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833786" start="14679" end="14701" title="Transatlantic Sessions" label="Transatlantic Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833786" start="14819" end="14841" title="Transatlantic Sessions" label="Transatlantic Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q542101" start="14885" end="14905" title="Boris Grebenshchikov" label="Boris Grebenshchikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q505159" start="14993" end="15006" title="Vicente Amigo" label="Vicente Amigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q467591" start="15121" end="15132" title="Cara Dillon" label="Cara Dillon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405595" wikidata="Q51143" url="?curid=405595" title="Adam F">
<text>Adam Fenton (born 8 February 1972), also known as Adam F, is an English record producer and DJ who has worked across various genres. He is also the co-founder of the drum and bass label Breakbeat Kaos along with DJ Fresh. He found initial success with the 1990s drum and bass singles &quot;Circles&quot;, &quot;Metropolis&quot; / &quot;Mother Earth&quot;, and &quot;F-Jam&quot;, before releasing his debut studio album &quot;Colours&quot; in 1997. In 2001, he transitioned into hip hop music, producing the album &quot;&quot;, featuring collaborations with LL Cool J, Redman and De La Soul. He later released a remix album, &quot;Drum and Bass Warfare&quot;, and collaborated with DJ Fresh.

==Career==
Adam began his career with his early release, the techstep 12&quot;, &quot;Metropolis&quot; / &quot;Mother Earth&quot;, released in 1996 on the Metalheadz record label. His other early successes were the tracks &quot;F-Jam&quot; and &quot;Circles&quot; (the latter breaking into the Top 20 in the UK Singles Chart). In 1998 he won a MOBO award for his debut album, &quot;Colours&quot;.

In 2001, he found success in the field of hip hop, primarily with &quot;&quot;, working alongside artists such as LL Cool J, Redman and De La Soul. In 2002, Adam created the score for the feature film &quot;Ali G Indahouse&quot; starring Sacha Baron Cohen for Working Title Films.

He is founder and co-owner of the UK independent record label Breakbeat Kaos, which released Pendulum&#x27;s album &quot;Hold Your Colour&quot;; he is also co-owner of the drum and bass website Dogs on Acid.

In early 2007 he was cast in his first film role, the crime thriller &quot;The Heavy&quot;. In December 2007, Adam also co-starred in &quot;Cuckoo&quot;, a thriller about sound and lies, co-starring Richard E. Grant and Laura Fraser, directed by Richard Bracewell.

2009 saw Adam back in the studio, this time with Horx to remix The Prodigy&#x27;s &quot;Take Me to the Hospital&quot; from their album &quot;Invaders Must Die&quot;. Months later, Adam collaborated with Horx again to release &quot;Shut The Lights Off&quot; with Redman. Adam F and DJ Fresh&#x27;s 2010 collaboration single under the artist name WTF?! was next, built around Dead Prez&#x27;s &quot;Hip Hop&quot;. Over the past few years Adam has remixed David Guetta, Rihanna, Afrojack, Missy Elliott, Sander van Doorn and Scrufizzer.
Returning to the studio in recent years, Adam&#x27;s &quot;In The Air&quot; collaboration with Sonic C was released as a free download and supported by Annie Mac, MistaJam, Zinc, A-Trak and Zeds Dead. It set the scene for &quot;When The Rain Is Gone&quot;, Adam&#x27;s first official single release under his own name for some time. The single was released in 2012 on 3Beat.

Adam later released his Elements EP on Breakbeat Kaos. It included the tracks &quot;Elements&quot;, &quot;When The Rain Is Gone&quot;, &quot;In The Air&quot;, &quot;It&#x27;s Bigger Than Hip Hop UK&quot; and his remixes of Afrojack&#x27;s &quot;Take Over Control&quot; and Sander van Doorn&#x27;s &quot;Nothing Inside&quot;.

Adam&#x27;s most recent output was in the form of &quot;See You Again&quot;, a collaboration with DJ Fresh featuring Michael Warren which was on Fresh&#x27;s album &quot;Nextlevelism&quot;. He has also recently collaborated with British electronic music producer Doctor P and Method Man, who is also known for his collaborations with Redman, to produce the late-2013 track &quot;The Pit&quot;.

==Personal life==
Adam comes from a musical family. He is the son of singer and actor Alvin Stardust and the nephew of Rory Storm, whose band Rory Storm and the Hurricanes once included Ringo Starr before he joined the Beatles.

He is married to Kirsty Hawkshaw, member of group Opus III.

Storm was friends with Bill Shankly, which played a part in Adam becoming a lifelong Liverpool F.C. fan.

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
* &quot;Colours&quot; (1997)
* &quot;&quot; (2001)

===Remix albums===
* &quot;Drum and Bass Warfare&quot; (2002)

===Film scores===
* &quot;Ali G Indahouse&quot; (2002), Working Title Films and Universal Pictures

===Singles and EPs===
* 1995: &quot;Circles&quot; [Section 5]
* 1996: &quot;Before Today&quot; / Adam F Remix Everything But the Girl Virgin 
* 1996: &quot;Aromatherapy&quot; [Section 5]
* 1996: &quot;Metropolis&quot; / &quot;Mother Earth&quot; [Metalheadz]
* 1997: &quot;Telling Lies&quot; / Adam F Mix David Bowie BMG/Arista
* 1997: &quot;F-Jam&quot; [F-Jams] – UK No. 122
* 1997: &quot;Circles&quot; [F-Jams] – UK No. 20
* 1998: &quot;Music in My Mind&quot; [F-Jams] – UK No. 27
* 2001: &quot;Stand Clear&quot; [EMI] – UK No. 43
* 2002: &quot;Where&#x27;s My..?&quot; [EMI] – UK No. 37
* 2002: &quot;Metrosound&quot; [Kaos] – UK No. 54
* 2002: &quot;Stand Clear&quot; (Remixes) [Kaos] – UK No. 50
* 2002: &quot;Smash Sumthin&#x27;&quot; [Kaos] – UK No. 11
* 2002: &quot;Dirty Harry&#x27;s Revenge&quot; [Kaos] – UK No. 50
* 2005: &quot;Eightball&quot; / &quot;Original Junglesound&quot; [Breakbeat Kaos] – UK No. 93
* 2009: &quot;Take Me to the Hospital&quot; / Adam F &amp; Horx Remix The Prodigy XL Recordings 
* 2009: &quot;Shut the Lights Off!&quot; [Breakbeat Kaos]
* 2012: &quot;When the Rain Is Gone&quot; [3Beat]
* 2012: &quot;Elements&quot; [Breakbeat Kaos]
* 2013: &quot;The Pit&quot; [Circus]
* 2015: &quot;Believer&quot; [Ministry of Sound] – UK No. 58
* 2016: &quot;Harmony&quot; [Sony Music Entertainment]

===Featured artists===
* &quot;When the Sun Goes Down&quot; (2005) UK No. 69
* &quot;See You Again&quot; (2012)

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q51143" start="0" end="11" title="Adam F" label="Adam Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q51143" start="50" end="56" title="Adam F" label="Adam F"/>
<link wikidata="Q850546" start="186" end="200" title="Breakbeat Kaos" label="Breakbeat Kaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q941738" start="212" end="220" title="DJ Fresh" label="DJ Fresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="262" end="275" title="drum and bass" label="drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984468" start="425" end="432" title="Colours (Adam F album)" label="Colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="478" end="485" title="hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q52440" start="557" end="566" title="LL Cool J" label="LL Cool J"/>
<link wikidata="Q313138" start="568" end="574" title="Redman (rapper)" label="Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q685595" start="579" end="589" title="De La Soul" label="De La Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335569" start="753" end="761" title="techstep" label="techstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163942" start="847" end="857" title="Metalheadz" label="Metalheadz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="986" end="992" title="Top 40" label="Top 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="1000" end="1016" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670259" start="1036" end="1040" title="MOBO" label="MOBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984468" start="1068" end="1087" title="Colours (Adam F album)" label="&amp;quot;Colours&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="1132" end="1139" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q52440" start="1204" end="1213" title="LL Cool J" label="LL Cool J"/>
<link wikidata="Q313138" start="1215" end="1221" title="Redman (rapper)" label="Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q685595" start="1226" end="1236" title="De La Soul" label="De La Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758119" start="1297" end="1312" title="Ali G Indahouse" label="Ali G Indahouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q29055" start="1328" end="1345" title="Sacha Baron Cohen" label="Sacha Baron Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060840" start="1350" end="1369" title="Working Title Films" label="Working Title Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="1409" end="1433" title="independent record label" label="independent record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q850546" start="1434" end="1448" title="Breakbeat Kaos" label="Breakbeat Kaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q20672" start="1465" end="1480" title="Pendulum (drum and bass band)" label="Pendulum&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q967599" start="1493" end="1509" title="Hold Your Colour" label="Hold Your Colour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288438" start="1566" end="1578" title="Dogs on Acid" label="Dogs on Acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739277" start="1656" end="1665" title="The Heavy (film)" label="The Heavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192360" start="1715" end="1733" title="Cuckoo (2009 film)" label="&amp;quot;Cuckoo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q380856" start="1780" end="1796" title="Richard E. Grant" label="Richard E. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q266067" start="1801" end="1813" title="Laura Fraser" label="Laura Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324307" start="1827" end="1844" title="Richard Bracewell" label="Richard Bracewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256860" start="1910" end="1921" title="The Prodigy" label="The Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756658" start="1935" end="1958" title="Take Me to the Hospital" label="Take Me to the Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757244" start="1988" end="2005" title="Invaders Must Die" label="Invaders Must Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q313138" start="2109" end="2115" title="Redman (rapper)" label="Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q941738" start="2128" end="2136" title="DJ Fresh" label="DJ Fresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180841" start="2221" end="2230" title="Dead Prez" label="Dead Prez"/>
<link wikidata="Q8298" start="2300" end="2312" title="David Guetta" label="David Guetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q36844" start="2314" end="2321" title="Rihanna" label="Rihanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q349041" start="2323" end="2331" title="Afrojack" label="Afrojack"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="2333" end="2346" title="Missy Elliott" label="Missy Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q252893" start="2348" end="2364" title="Sander van Doorn" label="Sander van Doorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16232914" start="2369" end="2379" title="Scrufizzer" label="Scrufizzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955223" start="2533" end="2542" title="Annie Mac" label="Annie Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879997" start="2544" end="2552" title="MistaJam" label="MistaJam"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="2554" end="2558" title="Zinc" label="Zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q277976" start="2560" end="2566" title="A-Trak" label="A-Trak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3005564" start="2571" end="2580" title="Zeds Dead" label="Zeds Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q850546" start="2796" end="2810" title="Breakbeat Kaos" label="Breakbeat Kaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q349041" start="2980" end="2988" title="Afrojack" label="Afrojack"/>
<link wikidata="Q252893" start="3030" end="3046" title="Sander van Doorn" label="Sander van Doorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q941738" start="3181" end="3189" title="DJ Fresh" label="DJ Fresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021249" start="3253" end="3265" title="Nextlevelism" label="Nextlevelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061" start="3346" end="3354" title="Doctor P" label="Doctor P"/>
<link wikidata="Q298694" start="3359" end="3369" title="Method Man" label="Method Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180433" start="3393" end="3423" title="Method Man &amp;amp; Redman" label="his collaborations with Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q51139" start="3564" end="3578" title="Alvin Stardust" label="Alvin Stardust"/>
<link wikidata="Q16509396" start="3597" end="3607" title="Rory Storm" label="Rory Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16509396" start="3620" end="3649" title="Rory Storm and the Hurricanes" label="Rory Storm and the Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="3664" end="3675" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="3693" end="3704" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q271028" start="3724" end="3739" title="Kirsty Hawkshaw" label="Kirsty Hawkshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099122" start="3757" end="3765" title="Opus III (band)" label="Opus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q207457" start="3791" end="3803" title="Bill Shankly" label="Bill Shankly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="3853" end="3867" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2984468" start="3918" end="3925" title="Colours (Adam F album)" label="Colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758119" start="4051" end="4066" title="Ali G Indahouse" label="Ali G Indahouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060840" start="4081" end="4100" title="Working Title Films" label="Working Title Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="4105" end="4123" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q313779" start="4235" end="4258" title="Everything But the Girl" label="Everything But the Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="4429" end="4440" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="4489" end="4491" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577696" start="4839" end="4858" title="Smash Sumthin&amp;#x27;" label="Smash Sumthin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256860" start="5114" end="5125" title="The Prodigy" label="The Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123947" start="5126" end="5139" title="XL Recordings" label="XL Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q23783720" start="5346" end="5354" title="Believer (DJ Fresh and Adam F song)" label="Believer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405598" wikidata="Q6109397" url="?curid=405598" title="J Majik">
<text>J Majik (born James Spratling, Northwood, England) is a drum and bass DJ and producer. He has been active since his early teens in the early 1990s.

==Biography==
He released his first track in 1992 (as DJ Dextrous) on the Planet Earth record label. By 1994, he had changed his stage name to the current moniker (because there was already another DJ Dextrous within the scene with a following) recording with Suburban Base Records, and was releasing tracks on the Metalheadz label. Since then Majik has released tracks on the Mo&#x27; Wax label, and now runs his own label, Infrared. He also makes music under the names Innervisions and Infrared.

==Collaborations with==
*Goldie
*Adam F
*Danny J
*DJ Hype
*Hatiras
*Kathy Brown
*Liquid People
*Sonic &amp; Silver
*Wickaman
*Junglist BassPrey
*DJ Ugallu

==Discography==

===Selected albums===
*&quot;FabricLive.13&quot;
*&quot;Red Alert 2005&quot;
*&quot;Crazy World 2008&quot;

===Singles===
*&quot;Your Sound&quot; (1995)
*&quot;Jim Kutta&quot; (1995)
*&quot;Arabian Nights&quot; (1996)
*&quot;Love Is Not a Game&quot; (2000) - UK #34
*&quot;The Lizard&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Solarize&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Metrosound&quot; (2002) - UK #54
*&quot;24 Hours&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Spaced Invader&quot; (2001) on Defected Records
*&quot;Scooby Doo&quot; / &quot;Spycatcher&quot; (2004) - UK #67
*&quot;Crazy World&quot; (2008)
*&quot;In Pieces&quot; (2011)

===Remixes===
* 2003: Adam F - Where&#x27;s My...?
* 2005: Breakfastaz - Midnight (With Wickaman)
* 2008: Deadmau5 &amp; Kaskade - I Remember (With Wickaman)
* 2008: Goldie - Shining Down (With Goldie)
* 2010: The Qemists featuring Maxsta - Renegade (With Wickaman)
* 2010: Cutline - Die for You (With Wickaman)

===Infrared Records releases===
==References==
==External links==
*Infrared </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6109397" start="0" end="7" title="J Majik" label="J Majik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6109397" start="14" end="29" title="J Majik" label="James Spratling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090609" start="31" end="40" title="Northwood, London" label="Northwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="42" end="49" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="56" end="69" title="drum and bass" label="drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="70" end="72" title="Disc jockey" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="77" end="85" title="Music producer" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131774" start="122" end="127" title="adolescence" label="teens"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="236" end="248" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055303" start="278" end="288" title="stage name" label="stage name"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205292" start="347" end="358" title="DJ Dextrous" label="DJ Dextrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="394" end="403" title="sound recording and reproduction" label="recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163942" start="464" end="474" title="Metalheadz" label="Metalheadz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744506" start="526" end="538" title="Mo&amp;#x27; Wax" label="Mo&amp;#x27; Wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049169" start="620" end="632" title="Innervisions" label="Innervisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q507845" start="673" end="679" title="Goldie" label="Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q51143" start="681" end="687" title="Adam F" label="Adam F"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154114" start="698" end="705" title="DJ Hype" label="DJ Hype"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608989" start="716" end="727" title="Kathy Brown" label="Kathy Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998252" start="764" end="772" title="Wickaman" label="Wickaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427983" start="850" end="863" title="FabricLive.13" label="FabricLive.13"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="1080" end="1082" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q51143" start="1421" end="1427" title="Adam F" label="Adam F"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998252" start="1487" end="1495" title="Wickaman" label="Wickaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q49009" start="1505" end="1513" title="Deadmau5" label="Deadmau5"/>
<link wikidata="Q595529" start="1520" end="1527" title="Kaskade" label="Kaskade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998252" start="1547" end="1555" title="Wickaman" label="Wickaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q507845" start="1565" end="1571" title="Goldie" label="Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q507845" start="1593" end="1599" title="Goldie" label="Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067701" start="1609" end="1620" title="The Qemists" label="The Qemists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796028" start="1631" end="1637" title="Maxsta" label="Maxsta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998252" start="1655" end="1663" title="Wickaman" label="Wickaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585177" start="1673" end="1680" title="Cutline" label="Cutline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998252" start="1701" end="1709" title="Wickaman" label="Wickaman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405605" wikidata="Q387288" url="?curid=405605" title="Andy C">
<text>Andrew Michael Clarke (born 7 April 1976) is an English DJ, record producer and co-founder of RAM Records, a label in the drum and bass genre.

==Music career==

===Early years===

Andy C was a DJ in his own right but gained a strong reputation and more bookings off the back of the successful &quot;Valley of the Shadows&quot; track, an early drum and bass track that walked the line perfectly between hardcore and drum and bass just as the genres were starting to split. The track, created and released by Origin Unknown (made up of Andy C and Ant Miles)—often referred to as &quot;31 Seconds&quot; or &quot;Long Dark Tunnel&quot; because of the samples it incorporates—made use of a heavy bassline, bell samples and a rolling drum track to produce a popular, easy to recognise track that was easy to mix and became a favourite in dance floors at raves across the UK and beyond. The track was released as an EP in 1993 and has been remixed and re-released several times, and is widely recognised as one of the most influential drum and bass tunes of the early 90s. His signature look (Andy C is rarely seen without a baseball cap) and energetic movement behind the decks when playing make him a recognisable figure.

In 2001, he collaborated with Shimon on the single &quot;Body Rock&quot;, which reached number 28 on the UK Singles Chart in January 2002 and became one of the most popular drum and bass songs of the year. However, it also polarized some fans of the genre due to its unusual sound; it utilized a swinging rhythm and &quot;clownish&quot; synthesizer leads, leading to the pejorative term &quot;clownstep&quot; to describe similar tracks that were released in the wake of its success.

Andy C has continued to produce strong selling records released on his label RAM Records throughout the duration of his career, and has earned extensive respect both as a producer and as a DJ. Due to its success as a label, Ram Records has been able to attract and nurture other artists of high calibre, including Chase &amp; Status, Loadstar, Sub Focus and Wilkinson. Showcasing their label and DJ talents, Andy has secured headline acts and their own stage at major events including Creamfields, Global Gathering, The Sunbeat Festival and The Electric Daisy Carnival.

===2010–2014===
In 2011, Andy C won the Best DJ title in the 2011 Drum &amp; Bass Arena Awards, and since the awards&#x27; inception in 2009, he has won the people&#x27;s vote in the awards for Best DJ each year. He specialises in fast mixing, often employing three turntables. A signature mixing style of Andy is what he refers to as the &quot;Double Drop&quot;: lining up two tunes so that both basslines drop at the same time. Andy C has often organised events where he DJs continuously for six hours. In January 2011, &quot;Mixmag&quot; UK announced the result of 14 month global poll from 35 nominations chosen by other big names in dance music: the survey asked global voters to decide &quot;Who is the Greatest DJ of All Time&quot;; Andy C was ranked number four on it and the highest British DJ on the list. He is the only DJ to date, to receive in excess of 20 annual &#x27;Best DJ&#x27; titles in any genre.

In 2012 Andy C launched a new concept – Andy C Alive, where he uses custom made software and settings to mix both audio and visuals, creating stunning light and laser shows. At the heart of the setup are 3 deck mixing desks, audio and image editing suites and a setup that allows Andy to custom mix content on the fly. These sets need to be custom made for each venue, and to this date Andy C has already had bookings at SXSW in Texas, Beyond Wonderland in California, Vooruit in Gent Belgium and Melkweg in Amsterdam, as well as Brixton Academy and Cambridge Junction.

His talent as a producer and a DJ have earned him extensive respect from his peers, cited as a musical influence and inspiration by some of the biggest names in drum and bass; so diverse is his style that Andy C has played for events run by LTJ Bukem&#x27;s Good Looking Records, Goldie&#x27;s Metalheadz and jump up parties like JungleMania and Desire 2000AD. DMC World DJ Championships Hall of Fame Inductee DJ Craze retains that Andy C is his favorite DJ to hear play drum and bass.

His first single in ten years, &quot;Haunting / Workout&quot;, was released as a promotional double A-side from the &quot;Nightlife 6&quot; compilation on 3 November 2013. It entered the UK Singles Chart at number 188. His next single, &quot;Heartbeat Loud&quot; (with Fiora), was released in November 2014 and entered the UK Singles Chart at number 50.

=== 2015–present ===
Andy C released the Singles &#x27;New Era&#x27; and &#x27;What Bass?&#x27; 2016 and 2017. Throughout 2017 he performed at a string of major festivals.

In 2018 Andy C sold out Wembley Arena in three days, becoming the first Drum and Bass artist to do so.

In 2019, Andy C released the singles &#x27;Till Dawn&#x27; (which had been featured in his sets since 2015) and &#x27;Back &amp; Forth&#x27;. He also toured extensively and headlined many festivals throughout the year.

==Awards and nominations==
Andy C ranked #61 in DJ Magazine&#x27;s 2010 Top 100 DJs annual poll announced 27 October 2010.

On 1 December 2011 Andy C won the Best DJ title in the 2011 Drum and Bass Arena Awards.

On 29 November 2013, Andy C won Ambassador of Bass Music in the 2013 Bass Music Awards, and his label Ram Records was nominated for Best Label.

In 2019, Andy C won the &#x27;DJ Mag Top 100 DJs - Highest Drum and Bass Award&#x27;, climbing 11 positions on the previous year to no.79.

Since its inception in 2009, the peoples vote each year for the annual award for best DJ at The Drum and Bass Arena Awards has been won each year by Andy C for 10 consecutive years. 

==Musical style and influence==
He is considered a pioneering force in the drum and bass genre. He specialises in fast mixing, often employing three analogue turntables. A signature mixing style of Andy is what he refers to as &quot;The Double Drop&quot; – lining up 2 tunes so their heaviest basslines drop at the same time.

==Personal life==
Andy C is a self-confessed tech freak and a lifelong fan of West Ham United. 

==Discography==

===Extended plays===
===Singles===
===Mix CDs===
=== Remixes ===
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q387288" start="0" end="21" title="Andy C" label="Andrew Michael Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="56" end="58" title="DJ" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="60" end="75" title="record producer" label="record producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048005" start="94" end="105" title="RAM Records" label="RAM Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="122" end="135" title="drum and bass" label="drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q12270934" start="300" end="321" title="Valley of the Shadows" label="Valley of the Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q65063532" start="508" end="522" title="Origin Unknown" label="Origin Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496978" start="1249" end="1255" title="Shimon (DJ)" label="Shimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="1324" end="1340" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q14867674" start="1515" end="1530" title="Swung note" label="swinging rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048005" start="1780" end="1791" title="RAM Records" label="RAM Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067983" start="2017" end="2035" title="Chase &amp;amp; Status" label="Chase &amp;amp; Status"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052759" start="2037" end="2045" title="Loadstar (duo)" label="Loadstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848854" start="2047" end="2056" title="Sub Focus" label="Sub Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139979" start="2061" end="2070" title="Wilkinson (musician)" label="Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2340" end="2361" title="Drum &amp;amp; Bass Arena" label="Drum &amp;amp; Bass Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="2540" end="2549" title="Phonograph" label="turntable"/>
<link wikidata="Q494400" start="2802" end="2808" title="Mixmag" label="Mixmag"/>
<link wikidata="Q959755" start="3614" end="3618" title="SXSW" label="SXSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900057" start="3629" end="3646" title="Beyond Wonderland" label="Beyond Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q907677" start="3662" end="3669" title="Vooruit" label="Vooruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q60481" start="3690" end="3697" title="Melkweg" label="Melkweg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239788" start="3723" end="3738" title="Brixton Academy" label="Brixton Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989883" start="3743" end="3761" title="Cambridge Junction" label="Cambridge Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q921236" start="4005" end="4014" title="LTJ Bukem" label="LTJ Bukem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582718" start="4022" end="4042" title="Good Looking Records" label="Good Looking Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q507845" start="4044" end="4050" title="Goldie" label="Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163942" start="4058" end="4068" title="Metalheadz" label="Metalheadz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205611" start="4125" end="4151" title="DMC World DJ Championships" label="DMC World DJ Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154047" start="4174" end="4182" title="DJ Craze" label="DJ Craze"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091427" start="4288" end="4306" title="Haunting / Workout" label="Haunting / Workout"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="4438" end="4454" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451158" start="4520" end="4525" title="Fiora (musician)" label="Fiora"/>
<link wikidata="Q313444" start="5151" end="5162" title="DJ Magazine" label="DJ Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="5860" end="5873" title="drum and bass" label="drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="5943" end="5952" title="Phonograph" label="turntable"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="6190" end="6205" title="West Ham United" label="West Ham United"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405607" wikidata="Q322283" url="?curid=405607" title="DJ Dara">
<text>DJ Dara (Darragh Guilfoyle, Brooklyn, New York) is an Irish drum and bass DJ who performs mainly in North America. He is also a co-founder (along with DJ DB) of Breakbeat Science, a drum &amp; bass record label and store in New York.

He is also a member of the drum &amp; bass group known as the Planet of the Drums.

==Discography==
===Albums===
* (1997) &quot;Rinsimus Maximus&quot; (CD) – Sm:)e
* (1998) &quot;Full Circle: Drum &amp; Bass DJ Mix&quot; (CD) – Moonshine
* (1999) &quot;Renegade Continuum Vol. 2&quot; (CD) – Rawkus Raw Kuts
* (1999) &quot;Halfway Home&quot; (CD) – Sm:)e
* (2000) &quot;From Here to There&quot; (CD) – Moonshine
* (2001) &quot;Future Perfect&quot; (CD) – Moonshine
* (2002) &quot;Further&quot; (CD) – Moonshine
* (2003) &quot;Breakbeat Science: Exercise 01&quot; (CD) – Breakbeat Science
* (2004) &quot;The Antidote&quot; (CD) – Breakbeat Science

===Singles===
* (1995) &quot;Schizophrenia&quot; (12&quot;) – Smile

==References==
* Official Facebook Fan Page
* https://web.archive.org/web/20050708020617/http://www.breakbeatscience.com/ – Breakbeat Science
* https://web.archive.org/web/20090216224104/http://ravearchive.com/mixtapes/Dara – Dara Mixtapes - Updated May &#x27;09
* Video Interview with DJ Dara (2009) - Part 1
* Video Interview with DJ Dara (2009) - Part 2
* Discography </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q322283" start="0" end="7" title="DJ Dara" label="DJ Dara"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="28" end="46" title="Brooklyn, New York" label="Brooklyn, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="54" end="59" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="60" end="73" title="drum and bass" label="drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="74" end="76" title="disc jockey" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="100" end="113" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205284" start="151" end="156" title="DJ DB" label="DJ DB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201204" start="297" end="316" title="Planet of the Drums" label="Planet of the Drums"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="363" end="379" title="Rinsimus Maximus" label="Rinsimus Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="" start="414" end="449" title="Full Circle: Drum &amp;amp; Bass DJ Mix" label="Full Circle: Drum &amp;amp; Bass DJ Mix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="488" end="513" title="Renegade Continuum Vol. 2" label="Renegade Continuum Vol. 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="558" end="570" title="Halfway Home (DJ Dara album)" label="Halfway Home"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="605" end="623" title="From Here to There" label="From Here to There"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="662" end="676" title="Future Perfect (DJ Dara album)" label="Future Perfect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="715" end="722" title="Further (DJ Dara album)" label="Further"/>
<link wikidata="" start="761" end="791" title="Breakbeat Science: Exercise 01" label="Breakbeat Science: Exercise 01"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="838" end="850" title="The Antidote (DJ Dara album)" label="The Antidote"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405608" wikidata="Q1776917" url="?curid=405608" title="Bramley, Surrey">
<text>Bramley is a village and civil parish about three miles (5 km) south of Guildford in the Borough of Waverley in Surrey, south east England. Most of the parish lies in the Surrey Hills Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.

Within its boundaries there is evidence of the Iron Age but documents record a village at the end of Anglo-Saxon era of the Kingdom of England and track its expansion and division during the Middle Ages. Much of the building was linear along the Horsham road: many such buildings have survived and the village has a substantial conservation area.

==History==

===Pre 1600===
The name Bramley is of Old English (Anglo-Saxon) origin; like &quot;Bromley&quot;, one of its earlier forms, it means a clearing or lea in the broom). Birtley within the parish in the south and means a clearing in the birch.

Before the Saxons arrived the wider area was lightly settled. The builders of the Iron Age fort at Hascombe probably included farmers from the Wintershall and Thorncombe Street areas of present-day Bramley, but there is no evidence for early settlement in the village area and no evidence of any Roman settlement.

The settlement appears in six large parcels in the Domesday Book of 1086 as &quot;Brolege&quot; and &quot;Bronlei&quot;. These were held by the Bishop of Bayeux (William the Conqueror&#x27;s half-brother). Its Domesday assets were: 39½ hides; 3 churches, 5 mills worth £1 6s 0d, 39 ploughs, of meadow, woodland worth 100 hogs. In 1086 its wide definition and well-cultivated, fertile area with valuable mills made Bramley the largest and most valuable manor in Surrey by yearly income. It rendered a total of £83 14s 8d per year to its feudal overlords. The area comprised most of the western half of the Hundred of Blackheath, extending to the Sussex border and including Shalford, Wonersh, Hascombe and west Cranleigh.

The Anglo-Saxon settlers of neighbouring Wonersh – the name means a crooked field – and any Celts not displaced by them may have been the people who developed the Linish, Bramley. This name means a flax-stubble field and in 1843, when the Tithe Assessment map was drawn, it covered the area now occupied by the Library, Blunden Court and Old Rectory Close. Flax was used to make linen but before spinning and weaving the stems were &quot;retted&quot;; soaking in running water, a procedure which could have used the stream which also powered the mills.

Cranleigh Waters flows through and drains the village. There were two mills, Bramley Mill and Snowdenham Mill, probably both here at the time of the Domesday survey, and Lane (now a bridleway) led to the second of these mills from the higher land around Wintershall.

Coronation Oak green today is all that remains of the original village green at the centre of the village. It was once the crossroads where Linersh Lane, the road from Wonersh, met Deep Lane, the original route from Wintershall, and the first Mill Lane (moved in the 1820s), which started from the north side of the house now called &#x27;Saddlers&#x27;, which was previously known as &#x27;Corners&#x27; or &#x27;Old Corners&#x27;. There is a reference to a moated manor house near the village green, which would probably have dated from the 14th century; it survived to the early 19th century.

At some time during the Middle Ages the village&#x27;s arterial A281 road through the village leading to Birtley Green around the east slope of Hurst Hill was established as an alternative Horsham and main Loxwood and Billingshurst (all West Sussex) route from Guildford, as was the road from Thorncombe Street to Bramley (Snowdenham Lane) and Wonersh, the village centred immediately east of the street and Cranleigh Waters. Wonersh is only away from Station Road, hence the station with two names later.

By the mid 16th century there were 63 houses in what was called Bramley township, 22 of them within half a mile of the church. Two of the grandest houses in the village, of Tudor architecture, remain: East Manor (which faces the rebuilt manor house) and East Water House; its external staircase was added in the 1580s, when it would have been seen from the village green, demonstrating the importance of the owners at a time when domestic staircases were still rare.

===Holy Trinity Church===
 Bramley Church, dedicated to the Holy Trinity, dates from the 12th century with further additions in the 13th century. The tower and chancel date from the early 13th century with the south transept (now part of the south aisle) added later in the century.

Boundary walls were built and the burial ground was licensed for the first time in 1676. Holy Trinity was a daughter church of Shalford; Bramley only became a separate ecclesiastical parish in 1847.

===Post 1600===
The village was growing in the 17th century; many of the houses on the west side of the High Street date from this period. Bramley Manor, opposite East Manor and originally the farm for Bramley Manor, was built in the middle of the century.

The 18th century brought more changes with the road through the village becoming part of the turnpike road from Guildford to Arundel, following an Act of Parliament of 1757; there is still a milestone in Birtley Road. A bridge and causeway were built on the road to Wonersh in the 1770s; the river was then diverted from its original course close to the bottom of Wonersh Hollow into a new straight course to align with the new bridge.

Most villagers made their living from agriculture. A house &quot;The Nunnery&quot; was purchased for the poor of the parish in 1735. This was at the far end of the Bramley millpond; it was sold a century later when the poor had to go to Hambledon Workhouse, in the early part of which century the &quot;Jolly Farmer&quot; public house was established.

The Napoleonic Wars brought concerns for shipping in the English Channel and plans to create an inland waterway between London and Portsmouth led to the building of a canal to connect Guildford to West Sussex and the now traditional port of Littlehampton. This finally opened in 1816. James Stanton was appointed Superintendent of the canal in 1819; by the time of his death in 1857 he had five barges of his own, but by now use of the canal was declining and it finally closed in 1871. Stanton&#x27;s cottage on the wharf still survives. In 1825 the Earl of Egremont, a great supporter of the canal, had purchased a property in Bramley on the site of the present Park Drive which was soon demolished. He diverted some of the water from the millpond to the canal in an attempt to improve the canal&#x27;s water supply; this had a lasting effect as the watercourse would define the boundary between the later school and cemetery. The Earl redirected the lane to the mill, roughly to the present Park Drive, and his nephew built Bramley House, now almost completely demolished. This house was later leased by Captain Jekyll and was the childhood home of Gertrude Jekyll. After the Jekyll family left in 1868 the house was considerably extended and the lane to the mill now became a driveway to the house with a third Mill Lane (the present one) put through in 1871.

Development in the village was also influenced by Mrs Charlotte Sutherland, who leased Church House in 1848. She largely financed the building of the north aisle of the Church in 1851, the new Vicarage (now demolished and replaced by Old Rectory Close), the Village School, the cemetery and its chapel (also demolished); her brother, Richard Charles Hussey, was the architect for all these developments.

Various railway companies had built lines in the vicinity and there were stations at Guildford in 1845, Godalming soon after, and Shalford in 1849. Then in 1865 the Cranleigh Line linking Guildford with Horsham opened, and &quot;Bramley &amp; Wonersh station&quot; (initially known as &quot;Bramley&quot;) was the last stop on the line before Guildford. This was perhaps the main reason for the increase in population that followed, and there were housing developments including Station Road, Birtley Road and Eastwood Road; the south aisle, incorporating the south transept, was added to the Church in 1875. There were several shops in the village by the 1850s but at the end of the century William Lawn Head re-fronted several of the houses on the west side of the High Street to provide Head&#x27;s Stores. The Stores have since been split into various premises but Head&#x27;s elegant shop-fronts remain.

The oldest existing school in the village, now called Bramley Infants School (previously Bramley C of E Primary School) was established in 1850 and at that time consisted of only two classrooms and a clock tower. Two more classrooms were added in 1874 and a further classroom and hall were built in 1894. Architecturally, its clock tower has been well maintained. An extension in 1957 provided indoor toilets and office accommodation. The school has recently been entirely refurbished out of doors and decorated throughout indoors. Originally the school catered for four- to fourteen-year-olds but in 1973 it became a First School and caters for girls and boys from four to seven years old.

St Catherine&#x27;s School was established in 1885, and has grown to have a significant physical presence in the village. Building of the Chapel began in 1893 and it was dedicated in the following year. It is a notable example of the work of Charles Eamer Kempe, who was responsible for much of the interior decoration, especially the stained glass windows.

By the end of the 19th century the local government of the village changed with the establishment of a Parish Council in 1894. This met, as it still does, in the Village Hall whose Victorian exterior and modern additions conceal a barn with timbers dating back to c.1400.

The gardener Gertrude Jekyll retained an interest in the area, and her friend, leading Arts and Crafts movement architect Edwin Lutyens designed Millmead House in Snowdenham Lane as a speculative development for her in 1904; she designed the garden. This has coursed and part snecked Bargate sandstone/red brick quoins and dressings and is Grade II listed. Grange Cottages were also built at the beginning of the century as staff cottages for Bramley Grange.

World War I brought deaths and wounded men from the front were also seen in the village as Thorncombe Park was used as a hospital. In 1921 the war memorial at the crossroads was built, designed by architect and local resident Frederick Hodgson.

In 1887 Bramley Grange was built on the site of the earlier White House for Colonel Webster (who later developed Bramley Golf course). After the Great War it was converted to a popular hotel and remained a hotel until burnt down in 1996. Between the wars there was more housing development, including the start of Linersh Wood.

In the years since World War II there has been considerable development in the centre of the village, much of it on the east side, including shops, Windrush Close, the Catholic Church, the public library, Blunden Court and Old Rectory Close. On the opposite side houses were built in Mill Lane and Home Park Close was built on the old kitchen garden of Bramley House, which had once contained &#x27; a long range of greenhouses and an abundance of peaches, nectarines, plums, cherries and pears.&#x27;

As one of the Beeching closures the Cranleigh Line to Horsham, including Bramley &amp; Wonersh railway station, closed in 1965 after serving the village for almost a century. The Bramley Grange Hotel was heavily damaged in a fire in 1996. In 2004, the building was replaced by retirement apartments constructed in a similar style.

==Amenities and events==

===Schools===
*St. Catherine&#x27;s School, an independent girls&#x27; school established in 1885
*Bramley C of E Primary School, also supported by the County Council, established in 1850.

===Businesses===
Amenities include a post office, small supermarket, butchers, Chinese takeaway, Indian restaurant, antiques shop, art gallery, café, fish and chip shop, two hairdressers and a classic car showroom. There are also two public houses: the &quot;Jolly Farmer&quot; and the &quot;Wheatsheaf&quot;.

===Sports===
There is a golf course and cricket green. This was the first cricket ground to host an all women&#x27;s cricket match in 1745 on Gosden Common where Bramley Cricket Club play today.

===Churches===
There are two churches, one Roman Catholic, and the Anglican Holy Trinity Church.

===Events and other amenities===
A library is in the village.

The village fête is held in May each year on Gosden Common, and the village Bonfire in November is a huge local event.

The village is twinned with Rhens, in Germany.

== Localities ==

Four named localities cover the south of Bramley: Birtley Green, Thorncombe Street, Grafham and Smithbrook.

=== Birtley Green ===
Birtley Green Hamlet, separated by a green buffer to its north, consists of Birtley Green Nursing Home, three listed buildings that form Birtley Courtyard and ten houses, three of which are listed buildings. The A281 road passes through the hamlet after passing through Bramley. Birtley Brook is a small linear woodland brook to its south that flows into the Cranleigh Waters or Cran, significant tributary of the main river Wey in Guildford.

Charles Smith purchased a site from Elizabeth Street of Birtley House in 1848. His son William established a brewery in Bramley High Street before 1865. This continued in operation until 1923, when the brewery chimney was demolished. His other son Richard established a foundry in Bramley High Street which lasted until the early 1960s and is now the site of Bramley Motors.

=== Thorncombe Street ===
This hamlet is SSW of Bramley village centre and has 29 houses and four listed buildings.

===Grafham===

Grafham, like Bramley, is a settlement by the A281 Guildford-Horsham road and includes three roadside buildings that form part of Palmers Cross hamlet and Goose Green to the southwest. In shape it is a linear hamlet with 35 houses. The Grade II*-listed church, St Andrew&#x27;s, is the burial place of its stone-specialist Gothic Revival architect Henry Woodyer. The church was built between 1861 and 1864 at his own expense; it has a statue of Saint Andrew and carvings of Woodyer himself, his wife and daughter.

There is cricket ground in Grafham used by Blackheath CC.

===Smithbrook===
Smithbrook is a cluster of 26 buildings of which eight form Smithbrook kilns a former brick-making factory; it is centred south of Bramley village centre Smithbrook Brickworks (1936) Ltd were its major operator, see British quarrying and mining narrow gauge railways.

==Demography and housing==

The average level of accommodation in the region composed of detached houses was 28%, the average that was apartments was 22.6%.
The proportion of households in the civil parish who owned their home outright compares to the regional average of 35.1%. The proportion who owned their home with a loan compares to the regional average of 32.5%. The remaining % is made up of rented dwellings (plus a negligible % of households living rent-free).

==References==
==External links==

*Bramley Parish Council
*Bramley History Society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1776917" start="0" end="7" title="Bramley, Surrey" label="Bramley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="25" end="37" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q213465" start="72" end="81" title="Guildford" label="Guildford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116521" start="100" end="108" title="Waverley, Surrey" label="Waverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785050" start="171" end="183" title="Surrey Hills AONB" label="Surrey Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q174945" start="184" end="218" title="Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty" label="Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="268" end="276" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="322" end="333" title="Anglo-Saxon England" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="345" end="363" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="412" end="423" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q505681" start="450" end="456" title="linear settlement" label="linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q177544" start="467" end="474" title="Horsham" label="Horsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q473972" start="549" end="566" title="conservation area" label="conservation area"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="620" end="631" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="633" end="644" title="Anglo-Saxon language" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q145781" start="740" end="745" title="broom (shrub)" label="broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q25243" start="815" end="820" title="birch" label="birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="834" end="840" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="905" end="913" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441634" start="922" end="930" title="Hascombe" label="Hascombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="1189" end="1202" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q49961" start="1282" end="1298" title="Odo of Bayeux" label="Bishop of Bayeux"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="1300" end="1321" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q521994" start="1374" end="1378" title="hide (unit)" label="hide"/>
<link wikidata="Q623605" start="1395" end="1399" title="gristmill" label="mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11464" start="1420" end="1426" title="plough" label="plough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777019" start="1432" end="1438" title="meadow" label="meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241565" start="1440" end="1448" title="woodland" label="woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="1459" end="1462" title="hog (swine)" label="hog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="1590" end="1595" title="Manorialism" label="manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="1674" end="1680" title="feudal system" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5942306" start="1743" end="1764" title="Hundred of Blackheath, Surrey" label="Hundred of Blackheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="1783" end="1789" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831198" start="1811" end="1819" title="Shalford, Surrey" label="Shalford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889136" start="1821" end="1828" title="Wonersh" label="Wonersh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441634" start="1830" end="1838" title="Hascombe" label="Hascombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681944" start="1848" end="1857" title="Cranleigh" label="Cranleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889136" start="1901" end="1908" title="Wonersh" label="Wonersh"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="2058" end="2062" title="flax" label="flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426327" start="2239" end="2244" title="linen" label="linen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182205" start="2414" end="2430" title="Cranleigh Waters" label="Cranleigh Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="3303" end="3314" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975622" start="3343" end="3372" title="A281 road" label="A281 road through the village"/>
<link wikidata="Q177544" start="3468" end="3475" title="Horsham" label="Horsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200801" start="3485" end="3492" title="Loxwood" label="Loxwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148483" start="3497" end="3510" title="Billingshurst" label="Billingshurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q213465" start="3540" end="3549" title="Guildford" label="Guildford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889136" start="3623" end="3630" title="Wonersh" label="Wonersh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182205" start="3687" end="3703" title="Cranleigh Waters" label="Cranleigh Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q509364" start="3959" end="3977" title="Tudor architecture" label="Tudor architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="4023" end="4034" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q103841669" start="4414" end="4421" title="chancel" label="chancel"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="4706" end="4727" title="ecclesiastical parish" label="ecclesiastical parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q406633" start="5089" end="5097" title="Turnpike trust" label="turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q716658" start="5121" end="5128" title="Arundel" label="Arundel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131141" start="5652" end="5666" title="Poor Law Amendment Act 1834" label="poor had to go"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622969" start="5670" end="5679" title="Hambledon, Surrey" label="Hambledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="5790" end="5805" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="5843" end="5858" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990274" start="5953" end="5958" title="Wey and Arun Canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23287" start="5983" end="5994" title="West Sussex" label="West Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q990112" start="6027" end="6040" title="Littlehampton" label="Littlehampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546569" start="6337" end="6353" title="George Wyndham, 3rd Earl of Egremont" label="Earl of Egremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q452354" start="6938" end="6953" title="Gertrude Jekyll" label="Gertrude Jekyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182203" start="7721" end="7735" title="Cranleigh Line" label="Cranleigh Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956187" start="7779" end="7820" title="Bramley &amp;amp; Wonersh railway station" label="&amp;quot;Bramley &amp;amp; Wonersh station&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077212" start="9400" end="9419" title="Charles Eamer Kempe" label="Charles Eamer Kempe"/>
<link wikidata="Q452354" start="9803" end="9818" title="Gertrude Jekyll" label="Gertrude Jekyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q330369" start="9877" end="9901" title="Arts and Crafts movement" label="Arts and Crafts movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q378157" start="9912" end="9925" title="Edwin Lutyens" label="Edwin Lutyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178168" start="10049" end="10055" title="course (architecture)" label="course"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860550" start="10074" end="10091" title="Bargate stone" label="Bargate sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q10532622" start="10102" end="10107" title="quoin (architecture)" label="quoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10250" end="10261" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10844" end="10856" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q814018" start="11342" end="11359" title="Beeching Report" label="Beeching closures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182203" start="11364" end="11378" title="Cranleigh Line" label="Cranleigh Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956187" start="11401" end="11438" title="Bramley &amp;amp; Wonersh railway station" label="Bramley &amp;amp; Wonersh railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592765" start="11701" end="11728" title="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s School, Bramley" label="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386325" start="11838" end="11852" title="Surrey County Council" label="County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="12261" end="12268" title="cricket (sport)" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031140" start="12291" end="12311" title="women&amp;#x27;s cricket" label="women&amp;#x27;s cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="12426" end="12440" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="12450" end="12458" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q552498" start="12692" end="12697" title="Rhens" label="Rhens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="12875" end="12881" title="hamlet (place)" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054581" start="12898" end="12910" title="buffer zone" label="green buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="12971" end="12986" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975622" start="13073" end="13082" title="A281 road" label="A281 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182205" start="13220" end="13236" title="Cranleigh Waters" label="Cranleigh Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096427" start="13280" end="13289" title="river Wey" label="river Wey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11114344" start="13722" end="13725" title="boxing the compass" label="SSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="14049" end="14065" title="Listed building" label="Grade II*-listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="14136" end="14150" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730491" start="14161" end="14174" title="Henry Woodyer" label="Henry Woodyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43399" start="14258" end="14270" title="Andrew the Apostle" label="Saint Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971430" start="14620" end="14670" title="British quarrying and mining narrow gauge railways" label="British quarrying and mining narrow gauge railways"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405609" wikidata="Q412026" url="?curid=405609" title="Bramley">
<text>Bramley may refer to:
== People ==
* Bramley (surname)

== Places ==
===Australia===
* Bramley, Western Australia

===England===
* Bramley, Derbyshire
* Bramley, Hampshire
** Bramley Training Area, a British Army training camp
* Bramley, Rotherham, South Yorkshire
* Bramley, Surrey
* Bramley, Leeds
**Bramley Buffaloes, a rugby league club
**Bramley R.L.F.C., a defunct rugby league club

===South Africa===
* Bramley, Gauteng

== Other uses ==
* Bramley apple, a variety of apple
* &quot;Bramley&quot; is also a term given to a particular shot played in pocket billiards and similar games

== See also ==
* Bromley (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q412026" start="0" end="7" title="Bramley" label="Bramley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16860347" start="37" end="54" title="Bramley (surname)" label="Bramley (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q53516653" start="87" end="113" title="Bramley, Western Australia" label="Bramley, Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956185" start="131" end="150" title="Bramley, Derbyshire" label="Bramley, Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618034" start="153" end="171" title="Bramley, Hampshire" label="Bramley, Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956191" start="175" end="196" title="Bramley Training Area" label="Bramley Training Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290294" start="229" end="247" title="Bramley, Rotherham" label="Bramley, Rotherham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776917" start="267" end="282" title="Bramley, Surrey" label="Bramley, Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q606313" start="285" end="299" title="Bramley, Leeds" label="Bramley, Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956190" start="302" end="319" title="Bramley Buffaloes" label="Bramley Buffaloes"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061494" start="343" end="359" title="Bramley R.L.F.C." label="Bramley R.L.F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q4956184" start="411" end="427" title="Bramley, Gauteng" label="Bramley, Gauteng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923647" start="448" end="461" title="Bramley apple" label="Bramley apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q11020" start="556" end="572" title="pocket billiards" label="pocket billiards"/>
<link wikidata="Q409943" start="609" end="633" title="Bromley (disambiguation)" label="Bromley (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405614" wikidata="Q14894" url="?curid=405614" title="Peeler">
<text>A peeler (vegetable scraper) is a kitchen tool, a distinct type of kitchen knife, consisting of a metal blade with a slot with a sharp edge attached to a handle, used to remove the outer layer (the &quot;skin&quot; or &quot;peel&quot;) of some vegetables such as potatoes, broccoli stalks, and carrots, and fruits such as apples and pears. A paring knife may also be used to peel vegetables. The blade of a peeler has a slot with one side sharpened; the other side of the slot prevents the blade from cutting too far into the vegetable.

==Overview==
There are numerous designs of peelers used today. Most handheld peelers are either straight or Y-type, while the particular designs vary depending on region and personal preference.

==Straight peelers==
A straight peeler has the blade parallel to the handle, resembling a knife. The blade may be fixed or pivoting. The Lancashire and French &quot;Econome&quot; designs contain a fixed blade which does not pivot. The Lancashire often has a round wooden handle wrapped in string, and is often single edged, though there are dual edged variants. The &quot;Econome&quot;, invented in 1928 by Victor Pouzet, entails a unique blade design that features two slits.

===Swivel peelers===
Swivel peelers have the blade mounted on a pivot; the angle of the blade self-adjusts as pressure is applied, increasing ease of use.

The Jonas peeler, designed in Sweden in 1953, is a straight design with a pivoting blade attached to the end of an oblong metal loop handle, which is held like a knife. A shaft runs through the length of the handle. The blade has two edges to enable use in either direction, and by either hand. While often copied, the original is still made by Linden Sweden. For many decades, it has been the standard type of peeler in the United States.

==Y peelers==

A Y peeler or speed peeler has a blade perpendicular to its handle, a design closely resembling a safety razor. It is used with a similar action to a razor, shaving off skin in strips parallel to the handle. Most speed peelers have an &#x27;eye gouger&#x27; beside the blade, a loop of metal used to dig out eyes and blemishes from a potato.

A particularly famous example of this variety is the Zena Rex peeler, invented in 1947 by Alfred Neweczerzal of Davos, Switzerland. Considered an icon of Swiss design, it was featured on a 2004 Swiss postage stamp. It has a one piece aluminum handle and a pivoting carbon steel blade with dual edges. The stainless steel handled variant, the Zena Star peeler, was the model popularized by legendary New York City street hawker Joe Ades.

==Other types==

Most &quot;Y&quot; and inline pivoting peelers have a straight blade. A few have a curved blade which is a closer fit to the contour of a potato or other item being peeled; it takes a wider bite, requiring fewer passes to complete peeling.

A mechanical apple peeler is a crank operated device that peels apples and optionally cores and slices them in one motion. When the slicer is enabled it cuts a normal apple into a helical shape. It is designed to work on apples but will also peel a number of other fruits and vegetables such as pears, beetroot, potatoes, cucumbers and thick carrots.

Several variations of this type of crank peeler have appeared in modern times, such as The CrankMaster Peeler, which claims to help those with arthritis be able to peel various fruits like apples and pears.

==Industrial peelers==

In an industrial setting, potatoes may be peeled using steam jets to loosen the surface skin, followed by a dry abrasion. The process may also involve treatment with lye to soften the outer skin. One type of mechanical peeler, the Magnascrubber, tumbles the potatoes on rollers with rubber studs, which removes the skin. Similar tumbling units with variously sized disc-shaped studs are used for peaches, tomatoes, beets and carrots.

== See also ==
* Garlic peeler
* Spiral vegetable slicer

==References==
== Further reading ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14894" start="2" end="8" title="Peeler" label="peeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q14894" start="10" end="27" title="Peeler" label="vegetable scraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q8892" start="34" end="46" title="List of food preparation utensils" label="kitchen tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="244" end="253" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="263" end="269" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q47722" start="273" end="281" title="broccoli" label="broccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q81" start="294" end="300" title="carrot" label="carrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="307" end="312" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="322" end="327" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q434" start="333" end="337" title="pear" label="pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q599312" start="342" end="354" title="paring knife" label="paring knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q32489" start="824" end="829" title="knife" label="knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219606" start="1922" end="1934" title="safety razor" label="safety razor"/>
<link wikidata="Q68097" start="2279" end="2284" title="Davos" label="Davos"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="2286" end="2297" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208288" start="2594" end="2602" title="Joe Ades" label="Joe Ades"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122650" start="3613" end="3616" title="lye" label="lye"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314979" start="3899" end="3912" title="Garlic peeler" label="Garlic peeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311022" start="3915" end="3938" title="Spiral vegetable slicer" label="Spiral vegetable slicer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405623" wikidata="Q251166" url="?curid=405623" title="Bifurcation">
<text>Bifurcation or bifurcated may refer to:

==Science and technology==
* Bifurcation theory, the study of sudden changes in dynamical systems
** Bifurcation, of an incompressible flow, modeled by squeeze mapping the fluid flow
* River bifurcation, the forking of a river into its distributaries
* Bifurcation lake, a lake that flows into two different drainage basins
* Bifurcated bonding, a single hydrogen atom participates in two hydrogen bonds
* Bifurcated stick grip, a type of aircraft control column

==Other uses==
* Bifurcation (law), the division of issues in a trial 

==See also==
* Aortic bifurcation, the point at which the abdominal aorta bifurcates into the left and right common iliac arteries
* Tracheal bifurcation, or the carina of trachea (Latin: &quot;bifurcatio tracheae&quot;)
* Bifurcation diagram
* Bifurcate merging, a kinship system
* False dilemma or bifurcation
* Tongue bifurcation (disambiguation)
* Fork (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q251166" start="0" end="11" title="Bifurcation" label="Bifurcation"/>
<link wikidata="Q251166" start="15" end="25" title="Bifurcation" label="bifurcated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154357" start="70" end="88" title="Bifurcation theory" label="Bifurcation theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="193" end="208" title="squeeze mapping#Fluid flow" label="squeeze mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q720349" start="226" end="243" title="River bifurcation" label="River bifurcation"/>
<link wikidata="Q591942" start="277" end="291" title="Distributary" label="distributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904826" start="294" end="310" title="Bifurcation lake" label="Bifurcation lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="367" end="385" title="Bifurcated bonding" label="Bifurcated bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q15150284" start="447" end="468" title="Centre stick" label="Bifurcated stick grip"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904824" start="522" end="539" title="Bifurcation (law)" label="Bifurcation (law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778754" start="592" end="610" title="Aortic bifurcation" label="Aortic bifurcation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298243" start="710" end="730" title="Tracheal bifurcation" label="Tracheal bifurcation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595915" start="800" end="819" title="Bifurcation diagram" label="Bifurcation diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536028" start="822" end="839" title="Bifurcate merging" label="Bifurcate merging"/>
<link wikidata="Q265623" start="860" end="873" title="False dilemma" label="False dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821172" start="891" end="926" title="Tongue bifurcation (disambiguation)" label="Tongue bifurcation (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q340624" start="929" end="950" title="Fork (disambiguation)" label="Fork (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405628" wikidata="Q1239845" url="?curid=405628" title="Hellcat Records">
<text>Hellcat Records is an independent record label based in Los Angeles, California. The label, an offshoot of Epitaph Records, was started as a partnership between Brett Gurewitz of Bad Religion, the owner of Epitaph, and Tim Armstrong of Rancid, who was generally responsible for signing bands.

Hellcat published its &quot;Give &#x27;Em the Boot&quot; label sampler in multiple volumes starting in 1997.

== Films ==

In 2005, a &quot;Give &#x27;Em the Boot&quot; DVD was released, featuring tour footage of numerous Hellcat bands.

On January 15, 2006, the label released &quot;Live Freaky! Die Freaky!&quot;, a full-length film produced by Tim Armstrong and filmed using marionettes. The plot involves Charlie Manson&#x27;s story being misinterpreted by a nomad on a post-apocalyptic Earth. It features the voice talents of the members of Rancid, Green Day, AFI and the Transplants.

== Notable bands ==
=== Active ===

*Tim Timebomb
*Charged GBH
*Civet
*The Creepshow
*Danny Diablo
*Devil&#x27;s Brigade
*Grade 2
*HorrorPops
*The Interrupters
*Left Alone
*Nekromantix
*Orange
*Rancid
*Rat Boy
*The Slackers
*Static Thought
*The Unseen
*Westbound Train
=== Former ===

*The Aggrolites
*Choking Victim
*Dave Hillyard and the Rocksteady Seven
*The Distillers
*Dropkick Murphys 
*F-Minus
*The Gadjits
*The Heart Attacks
*Hepcat
*The Independents
*Joe Strummer and the Mescaleros
*King Django
*Lars Frederiksen and the Bastards
*Leftöver Crack
*The Luchagors
*Mercy Killers
*The Mighty Mighty Bosstones
*The Nerve Agents
*Operation Ivy (re-release only)
*The Pietasters
*Roger Miret and the Disasters
*Street Dogs
*Tiger Army
*Time Again
*Transplants
*U.S. Bombs
== References ==
== External links ==
*Official site
*Official Hellcat fan site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1239845" start="0" end="15" title="Hellcat Records" label="Hellcat Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="22" end="46" title="independent record label" label="independent record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q726153" start="107" end="122" title="Epitaph Records" label="Epitaph Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q506558" start="161" end="175" title="Brett Gurewitz" label="Brett Gurewitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q201669" start="179" end="191" title="Bad Religion" label="Bad Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q503710" start="219" end="232" title="Tim Armstrong" label="Tim Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q390590" start="236" end="242" title="Rancid (band)" label="Rancid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622455" start="351" end="364" title="sampler (record)" label="label sampler"/>
<link wikidata="Q722064" start="578" end="602" title="Live Freaky! Die Freaky!" label="Live Freaky! Die Freaky!"/>
<link wikidata="Q503710" start="641" end="654" title="Tim Armstrong" label="Tim Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q189888" start="672" end="683" title="marionettes" label="marionettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q485508" start="703" end="717" title="Charlie Manson" label="Charlie Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q197949" start="768" end="784" title="post-apocalyptic" label="post-apocalyptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="785" end="790" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q390590" start="840" end="846" title="Rancid (band)" label="Rancid"/>
<link wikidata="Q47871" start="848" end="857" title="Green Day" label="Green Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q292061" start="859" end="862" title="AFI (band)" label="AFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q623292" start="867" end="882" title="the Transplants" label="the Transplants"/>
<link wikidata="Q503710" start="922" end="934" title="Tim Armstrong" label="Tim Timebomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q601984" start="936" end="947" title="Charged GBH" label="Charged GBH"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094427" start="949" end="954" title="Civet (band)" label="Civet"/>
<link wikidata="Q543555" start="956" end="969" title="The Creepshow" label="The Creepshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220279" start="971" end="983" title="Danny Diablo" label="Danny Diablo"/>
<link wikidata="Q267004" start="985" end="1005" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Brigade (band)" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251607" start="1007" end="1014" title="Grade 2 (band)" label="Grade 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q782745" start="1016" end="1026" title="HorrorPops" label="HorrorPops"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451312" start="1028" end="1044" title="The Interrupters (band)" label="The Interrupters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229021" start="1046" end="1056" title="Left Alone" label="Left Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q257712" start="1058" end="1069" title="Nekromantix" label="Nekromantix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099499" start="1071" end="1077" title="Orange (band)" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q390590" start="1079" end="1085" title="Rancid (band)" label="Rancid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295378" start="1087" end="1094" title="Rat Boy" label="Rat Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888627" start="1096" end="1108" title="The Slackers" label="The Slackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604150" start="1110" end="1124" title="Static Thought" label="Static Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927585" start="1126" end="1136" title="The Unseen (band)" label="The Unseen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987137" start="1138" end="1153" title="Westbound Train" label="Westbound Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q203062" start="1171" end="1185" title="The Aggrolites" label="The Aggrolites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075851" start="1187" end="1201" title="Choking Victim" label="Choking Victim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228962" start="1203" end="1241" title="Dave Hillyard" label="Dave Hillyard and the Rocksteady Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q913662" start="1243" end="1257" title="The Distillers" label="The Distillers"/>
<link wikidata="Q938630" start="1259" end="1275" title="Dropkick Murphys" label="Dropkick Murphys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736467" start="1278" end="1285" title="F-Minus" label="F-Minus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735595" start="1287" end="1298" title="The Gadjits" label="The Gadjits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739151" start="1300" end="1317" title="The Heart Attacks" label="The Heart Attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163718" start="1319" end="1325" title="Hepcat (band)" label="Hepcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741831" start="1327" end="1343" title="The Independents (band)" label="The Independents"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338971" start="1345" end="1376" title="Joe Strummer and the Mescaleros" label="Joe Strummer and the Mescaleros"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411439" start="1378" end="1389" title="King Django" label="King Django"/>
<link wikidata="Q956081" start="1391" end="1424" title="Lars Frederiksen and the Bastards" label="Lars Frederiksen and the Bastards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753290" start="1426" end="1440" title="Leftöver Crack" label="Leftöver Crack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521696" start="1442" end="1455" title="The Luchagors" label="The Luchagors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855095" start="1457" end="1470" title="Mercy Killers" label="Mercy Killers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327973" start="1472" end="1499" title="The Mighty Mighty Bosstones" label="The Mighty Mighty Bosstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988451" start="1501" end="1517" title="The Nerve Agents" label="The Nerve Agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q165846" start="1519" end="1532" title="Operation Ivy (band)" label="Operation Ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q458561" start="1552" end="1566" title="The Pietasters" label="The Pietasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q933061" start="1568" end="1597" title="Roger Miret and the Disasters" label="Roger Miret and the Disasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q117669" start="1599" end="1610" title="Street Dogs" label="Street Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164080" start="1612" end="1622" title="Tiger Army" label="Tiger Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511974" start="1624" end="1634" title="Time Again" label="Time Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q623292" start="1636" end="1647" title="Transplants (band)" label="Transplants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402096" start="1649" end="1659" title="U.S. Bombs" label="U.S. Bombs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405634" wikidata="Q586027" url="?curid=405634" title="Lethal Injection (album)">
<text>Lethal Injection is the fourth studio album by American rapper Ice Cube. It was released on December 7, 1993, through Lench Mob Records and Priority Records. The album was produced by QDIII, Madness 4 Real, Sir Jinx, Laylaw, D&#x27;Mag, and Ice Cube.

&quot;Lethal Injection&quot; was supported by three singles: &quot;Really Doe&quot;, &quot;You Know How We Do It&quot;, and the Funkadelic-sampling &quot;Bop Gun (One Nation)&quot;, which became a staple on MTV. The track &quot;Down for Whatever&quot; also gained popularity after featuring in the 1999 film &quot;Office Space&quot;. The album received generally positive reviews from critics and was a commercial success similar to the rapper&#x27;s previous albums. The album debuted at number five on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, selling 215,000 copies in its first week.

==Criticism==
The album was heavily criticized for what many saw as Ice Cube&#x27;s pandering to gangsta rap, and for lyrics which were considered to be anti-police, racist and misogynistic, as well as the toning down of socio-political content found on his earlier efforts. The album&#x27;s standing has increased over time.

==Commercial performance==
&quot;Lethal Injection&quot; debuted at number five on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 chart, selling 215,000 copies in its first week. This became Ice Cube&#x27;s third US top-ten album. The album also debuted at number one on the US Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums chart. On February 1, 1994, the album was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for sales of over a million copies in the United States.

==Track listing==

==Singles==
&quot;Really Doe&quot;
*Released: 1993
*B-side: &quot;My Skin Is My Sin&quot;
&quot;You Know How We Do It&quot;
*Released: February 1994
*B-side: &quot;2 &#x27;n the Morning&quot;
&quot;Bop Gun (One Nation)&quot;
*Released: August 1994
*B-side: &quot;Down for Whatever&quot;

==Charts==
===Weekly charts===
===Year-end charts===
== Certifications ==


==See also==
*List of number-one albums of 1993 (U.S.)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173637" start="63" end="71" title="Ice Cube" label="Ice Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415590" start="118" end="135" title="Lench Mob Records" label="Lench Mob Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q522618" start="140" end="156" title="Priority Records" label="Priority Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q748538" start="184" end="189" title="QDIII" label="QDIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q12308053" start="191" end="205" title="Den Gale Pose" label="Madness 4 Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527533" start="207" end="215" title="Sir Jinx" label="Sir Jinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746426" start="217" end="223" title="Laylaw" label="Laylaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="304" end="311" title="Single (music)" label="singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301306" start="319" end="329" title="Really Doe (Ice Cube song)" label="Really Doe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057313" start="343" end="364" title="You Know How We Do It" label="You Know How We Do It"/>
<link wikidata="Q523957" start="380" end="390" title="Funkadelic" label="Funkadelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944164" start="406" end="426" title="Bop Gun (One Nation)" label="Bop Gun (One Nation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="459" end="462" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044523" start="566" end="578" title="Office Space" label="Office Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="763" end="788" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q753679" start="930" end="941" title="gangsta rap" label="gangsta rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="1249" end="1274" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001897" start="1423" end="1449" title="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums" label="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="1502" end="1510" title="RIAA Certification" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="1518" end="1559" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301306" start="1662" end="1672" title="Really Doe (Ice Cube song)" label="Really Doe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057313" start="1740" end="1761" title="You Know How We Do It" label="You Know How We Do It"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944164" start="1842" end="1862" title="Bop Gun (One Nation)" label="Bop Gun (One Nation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431881" start="2022" end="2062" title="List of number-one albums of 1993 (U.S.)" label="List of number-one albums of 1993 (U.S.)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405636" wikidata="Q243566" url="?curid=405636" title="Carvin">
<text>Carvin () is a commune in the Pas-de-Calais department in the Hauts-de-France region of France about northeast of Lens.

==History==

During World War I, from October 1914 to October 1918, Carvin was occupied by the Germans. Over 6,000 soldiers are buried in one of the largest German cemeteries in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region.

Carvin was awarded the Croix de Guerre on 28 September 1920.

In May 1940, during the German invasion of France, a battle in Carvin&#x27;s town centre allowed the bulk of British and French troops to escape to the Dunkirk evacuation. Once the allies had gone, the troops of the Wehrmacht arrested and murdered many miners at Arras.

In 1947, Carvin lost nearly a third of its territory with the separation of the commune of Libercourt.

==Population==

==Twin towns==
Carvin is twinned with:
* Kłodzko, Poland
* Carvico, Italy

==See also==
*Communes of the Pas-de-Calais department

==References==
==External links==

* Website of the Mairie de Carvin 
* Website of the Communauté d&#x27;agglomération d&#x27;Hénin-Carvin 
* website of the CWGC graves in the communal cemetery </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q243566" start="0" end="6" title="Carvin" label="Carvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="15" end="22" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q12689" start="30" end="43" title="Pas-de-Calais" label="Pas-de-Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="44" end="54" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q36784" start="78" end="94" title="region of France" label="region of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q165271" start="114" end="118" title="Lens, Pas-de-Calais" label="Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="141" end="152" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727598" start="354" end="369" title="Croix de guerre 1914–1918 (France)" label="Croix de Guerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="417" end="423" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="545" end="563" title="Dunkirk evacuation" label="Dunkirk evacuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="609" end="618" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q131329" start="656" end="661" title="Arras" label="Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q471100" start="755" end="765" title="Libercourt" label="Libercourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="809" end="816" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q284604" start="825" end="832" title="Kłodzko" label="Kłodzko"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="834" end="840" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q100153" start="843" end="850" title="Carvico" label="Carvico"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="852" end="857" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q243036" start="873" end="913" title="Communes of the Pas-de-Calais department" label="Communes of the Pas-de-Calais department"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405638" wikidata="Q368688" url="?curid=405638" title="Cauchy-à-la-Tour">
<text>Cauchy-à-la-Tour (; ; Dutch:&quot;Turringhem&quot; (house of the sons of Turr)) is a commune in the Pas-de-Calais department in the Hauts-de-France region of France southwest of Béthune and southwest of Lille.

==Population==
==Notable people==
* Philippe Pétain, was born here on the 24 April 1856.

==See also==
*Communes of the Pas-de-Calais department

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q368688" start="0" end="16" title="Cauchy-à-la-Tour" label="Cauchy-à-la-Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="22" end="27" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="85" end="92" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q12689" start="100" end="113" title="Pas-de-Calais" label="Pas-de-Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="114" end="124" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q207145" start="178" end="185" title="Béthune" label="Béthune"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="203" end="208" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721" start="247" end="262" title="Philippe Pétain" label="Philippe Pétain"/>
<link wikidata="Q243036" start="315" end="355" title="Communes of the Pas-de-Calais department" label="Communes of the Pas-de-Calais department"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405643" wikidata="Q233643" url="?curid=405643" title="Croisilles">
<text>Croisilles may refer to:

==France==
Several communes in France:

*Croisilles, Calvados, in the Calvados &quot;département&quot;
*Croisilles, Eure-et-Loir, in the Eure-et-Loir &quot;département&quot;
*Croisilles, Orne, in the Orne &quot;département&quot;
*Croisilles, Pas-de-Calais, in the Pas-de-Calais &quot;département&quot;

==Papua New Guinea==
*Cape Croisilles, Papua New Guinea
*Croisilles languages of Papua New Guinea

==New Zealand==
*Croisilles Harbour, New Zealand
*Croisilles Peak, New Zealand</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q233643" start="0" end="10" title="Croisilles" label="Croisilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q865113" start="67" end="87" title="Croisilles, Calvados" label="Croisilles, Calvados"/>
<link wikidata="Q569022" start="130" end="154" title="Croisilles, Eure-et-Loir" label="Croisilles, Eure-et-Loir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096200" start="201" end="217" title="Croisilles, Orne" label="Croisilles, Orne"/>
<link wikidata="Q318268" start="256" end="281" title="Croisilles, Pas-de-Calais" label="Croisilles, Pas-de-Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q34829991" start="351" end="366" title="Cape Croisilles" label="Cape Croisilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952821" start="386" end="406" title="Croisilles languages" label="Croisilles languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q32169894" start="445" end="463" title="Croisilles Harbour" label="Croisilles Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="478" end="493" title="Croisilles Peak" label="Croisilles Peak"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405646" wikidata="Q49665" url="?curid=405646" title="EarthStation 5">
<text>Earth Station 5 (ES5) was a peer-to-peer network active between 2003 and 2005, operated by a company of the same name. The user client application also shared this name. Earth Station 5 was notable for its strong, if overstated, emphasis on user anonymity, and for its bold advocacy of piracy and copyright infringement. ES5&#x27;s highly antagonistic position toward copyright advocacy and enforcement organizations garnered the group significant attention and peaked with an ES5 press release announcing a &quot;declaration of war&quot; against the Motion Picture Association of America. ES5 claimed to operate out of the Jenin in the Palestinian Authority-controlled West Bank, a region where they argued that copyright laws were unenforceable. Investigative journalism cast serious doubts on the company&#x27;s Palestinian origin as well as many of its other claims. To this day, much about the company and its leadership remains uncertain or unknown.

== Peer-to-peer services ==
Earth Station 5 was based around a peer-to-peer (P2P) file sharing service and a standalone Earth Station 5 file-sharing client. Initial versions of the software could only share or download files by using the ES5 network.

ES5&#x27;s P2P network and client were announced on June 9, 2003. People associated with ES5 claimed in media reports that the network had more than 16,000,000 participants at its peak, but these numbers were unsupported and viewed very skeptically. The actual number of participants was probably several orders of magnitude smaller.

Largely due to the low availability of files on the small ES5 network, later versions of the ES5 client included the free software/open source giFT daemon which provided ES5 users access to the larger Gnutella and FastTrack networks. While Gnutella and FastTrack offered access to many more files, the functionality that let users access these networks did not take advantage of any of ES5&#x27;s anonymity features, which decreased the advantages of ES5 over other P2P clients — in particular other FastTrack or Gnutella clients.

=== ES5 software ===
The first version of the ES5 client used a space and spaceship motif and provided many options. In addition to several filesharing options, it provided links to chat, news, forums, dating functionality and news. The client interface was derided by reviewers as &quot;clunky&quot; and &quot;a busy affair&quot; for its plethora of features.

The second version of the client, released a year later, garnered better reviews. However, users still felt overwhelmed by the &quot;bundled&quot; features that included a dating service and audio-visual chat. ES5 claimed it planned to capitalize on these features in order to become profitable.

=== Claims to anonymity ===

ES5 became well known for its strong claims that file-sharing on its network was entirely anonymous — a feature it billed as its most important and revolutionary — and that its users could share files while remaining undetectable and thus invulnerable to lawsuits by the RIAA&#x27;s member companies, which had recently begun suing P2P users. ES5 president Ras Kabir claimed that on ES5, &quot;users no longer have to be concerned about what they are sharing, or with whom they are sharing because there is complete anonymity.&quot;

Many groups countered ES5&#x27;s claims about its users&#x27; anonymity. RIAA vice president Matt Oppenheim described it as &quot;marketing hype of the worst kind. It is playing on the fears of others, encouraging them to engage in behavior that will get them into a boatload of trouble.&quot; Even many participating in or sympathetic to the file-sharing community were skeptical, believing that anonymous communication on P2P networks was technically impossible without critically compromising quality of service, and as a result they considered ES5&#x27;s claims to be snake oil.

ES5&#x27;s claims to anonymity were based on its use of several security technologies. The first version of the software used Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) encryption, encrypted searches over UDP, and integration with PGPDisk. However, none of these layers of security prevented RIAA member companies from detecting and gathering information about ES5 users&#x27; file trading activities. In later versions of its client, ES5 added the ability to use a network of proxies to obscure the source of requests or shared files. ES5 staffers maintained a frequently-updated list of proxy servers. List updates were posted regularly to the ES5 forums and then updated into the clients by hand. ES5 also added the ability to &quot;spoof&quot; IP addresses in a way that ES5 claimed made it more difficult to track down file sharers. While ES5&#x27;s claim to anonymity continued to be viewed skeptically by both P2P advocates and RIAA representatives, no ES5 users were ever sued by the RIAA.

=== Copyright infringement by ES5 ===

After the ruling in A&amp;M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc., which held Napster liable for contributory infringement by its users, most P2P networks were careful to adopt a strategy of &quot;turning a blind eye&quot; to copyright infringement on their network in order to escape or minimize liability. ES5 distinguished itself by openly supporting its users&#x27; copyright infringement over its network and by actively participating in sharing movies with its users.

Some within the file-sharing community speculated that ES5 shared media in order to &quot;seed&quot; the network with media — a step necessary because ES5&#x27;s user base was very small compared to other networks and it did not require quotas. ES5 shared media by downloading content from other networks (e.g., Kazaa and Gnutella), vetting these for quality, and then connecting a version of their client to their network from one of their servers. This step was important in assuring that ES5&#x27;s network could offer a sufficient amount of content to users.

In the early stages of the network, ES5 tried to attract users by streaming movies in addition to in-network sharing. To do this, ES5 created a website at es5.org which provided links to dozens of Hollywood films immediately available for streaming.

== Antagonistic relationship to media industry ==

While few P2P networks enjoy friendly relationships with the media and content industries, ES5 displayed a famously antagonistic relationship to them—most notably the US-based Motion Picture Association of America and Recording Industry Association of America. This position culminated in a famous press release where ES5 formally declared war on the MPAA:

:In response to the email received today from the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) to Earthstation 5 for copyright violations for streaming FIRST RUN movies over the internet for FREE, this is our official response!
:Earthstation 5 is at war with the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) and the Record Association of America (RIAA), and to make our point very clear that their governing laws and policys [sic] have absolutely no meaning to us here in Palestine, we will continue to add even more movies for FREE.

In the same release, ES5 claimed that, &quot;unlike Kazaa and other P2P programs who subsequently deny building their P2P program for illegal file-sharing, ES5 is the only P2P application and portal to actually join its users in doing P2P.&quot;

Because of its antagonistic relationship to media companies, its highly outspoken stance, and its claims to be based in a refugee camp in the West Bank, ES5 became the center of a large amount of media attention. Investigative articles ultimately served to expose much of the lies and misinformation behind the site and its operators.

== People and leadership ==

ES5 intentionally obscured the details of its company leadership. While ES5 claimed that it had over one thousand employees (most based in the West Bank), the facts seem to indicate that there were never more than a handful.

Publicly, ES5 was run by President Ras Kabir, Lead Programmer &quot;File Hoover&quot;, and Forums Administrator and Programmer &quot;SharePro&quot;. Faced with evidence that the company had a relationship with Stephen M. Cohen, then a fugitive because of his involvement in the sex.com scandal, the company announced its retention of Cohen&#x27;s services as an executive consultant.

=== Ras Kabir ===

Most ES5 press releases quoted company president Ras Kabir who, like most of the company, was nominally based in Jenin in the West Bank.

=== Stephen M. Cohen ===

While his involvement in the project was publicly hidden early on, Stephen Michael Cohen was closely involved in all stages of ES5 and, in most opinions, was the founder, primary architect, and primary participant in most of its actions. Cohen is best known as the person involved in fraudulently obtaining control of the sex.com domain name.

ES5&#x27;s business registrations papers, filed with the Palestinian Authority, listed Cohen as the &quot;sole director&quot; of ES5. Both in the forum and through their spokesperson, ES5 officials claimed that Cohen played the role of a consultant. Kabir claimed that, &quot;We offered Mr. Cohen an executive job with our company. He initially turned us down, however after several telephone calls, he finally gave in and agreed to help us in the capacity of a consultant.&quot;

Fueling speculation about Cohen&#x27;s close involvement, ES5&#x27;s unanticipated closing coincided closely with Cohen&#x27;s arrest for activity related to sex.com.

== Downfall ==

ES5 suffered a precipitous downfall that ultimately ended with the closing of the network in 2005. Analysts have seen several factors as contributing to its downfall and ultimate closing.

=== Accusations of Malicious code ===

In September 2003, Shaun &quot;Random Nut&quot; Garriok posted an email message to the Full Disclosure email list claiming to have uncovered &quot;malicious code&quot; in the ES5 client. By sending a specially-formed request, a remote user could use a facility of the ES5 client in order to delete arbitrary files on the computer of anybody running the ES5 client. Garriok concluded that &quot;the people behind ES5 have intentionally added malicious code to ES5&quot; and speculated that:

:They could be working for the RIAA, MPAA, or a similar organization. Once they have enough users on their ES5 network, they would start deleting all copyrighted files they own which their users are sharing. The users wouldn&#x27;t know what hit them.

ES5 representatives replied and suggested that this ability was an unintended side effect of the program&#x27;s automatic upgrade functionality and patched it through a software update soon after Garriok&#x27;s revelation. While there no public evidence of collusion between ES5 and the MPAA or RIAA, speculation about it dogged ES5, sowing seeds of distrust.

=== Untrue claims exposed ===

The anonymous authors claimed they were based in a refugee camp in Jenin, though some investigative attempts to locate their headquarters in Jenin were fruitless.

Many of the claims behind ES5 were unsubstantiated and untrue. With increased media analysis, especially from &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, it became clear that ES5 was not what it claimed to be. ES5 was not based in Jenin or even elsewhere in Palestine. Most of the people claimed to be behind ES5 were found to be fabricated, and many of ES5&#x27;s technical claims were debunked; also, ES5 was not nearly as large as it claimed at several points.

ES5 had claimed that the encryption around its system made identifying and blocking traffic from the site impossible. A P2P Watch Dog post demonstrated a method by which packets from ES5 could be identified and blocked. This was quickly put into action in several anti-P2P systems on the market at the time.

=== Other contributing factors ===

There were several other reasons that many in the P2P and file-sharing community distrusted ES5. Many speculated that the project was engaging in practices such as seeding and streaming of films from ES5 servers and proxying that would not scale.

But as the apparently secretive and untruthful acts of ES5 came to light, the core fan base began to rebel in the main ES5 forum, leading to many users being banned and topics being deleted. Eventually, the forum collapsed and a new forum was started by the admin &quot;SharePro.&quot; The new forum never gained the popularity that the old one had.

=== Closing ===

In February 2005, ES5 quietly closed its doors. On January 24, 2005, Stephen Cohen posted a strange message on the ES5 forums asking users to work with him to reinvent the platform:

Within a month, ES5 was completely shut down and dismantled. The ES5 website and forums were taken offline permanently and are today only accessible through the Internet Archive&#x27;s Wayback Machine.

== Notes and references ==

== External links ==
* Softpedia page which includes links to screenshots and the ability to download the (now useless) client
* Story on P2P.Net</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q49665" start="0" end="15" title="EarthStation 5" label="Earth Station 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q161410" start="28" end="40" title="peer-to-peer" label="peer-to-peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16546711" start="286" end="292" title="software piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="297" end="319" title="copyright infringement" label="copyright infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q676222" start="551" end="588" title="Motion Picture Association of America" label="Motion Picture Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q374748" start="624" end="629" title="Jenin" label="Jenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42620" start="637" end="658" title="Palestinian Authority" label="Palestinian Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="670" end="679" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q161410" start="1020" end="1032" title="peer-to-peer" label="peer-to-peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q518730" start="1514" end="1533" title="order of magnitude" label="orders of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="1661" end="1674" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q39162" start="1675" end="1686" title="open source" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q745982" start="1687" end="1691" title="giFT" label="giFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q49667" start="1745" end="1753" title="Gnutella" label="Gnutella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397643" start="1758" end="1767" title="FastTrack" label="FastTrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q49667" start="1784" end="1792" title="Gnutella" label="Gnutella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397643" start="1797" end="1806" title="FastTrack" label="FastTrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397643" start="2044" end="2053" title="FastTrack" label="FastTrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q49667" start="2057" end="2065" title="Gnutella" label="Gnutella"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="3035" end="3039" title="RIAA" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084553" start="3870" end="3879" title="snake oil (cryptography)" label="snake oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="4008" end="4028" title="Secure Sockets Layer" label="Secure Sockets Layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="4035" end="4045" title="encryption" label="encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q11163" start="4071" end="4074" title="User Datagram Protocol" label="UDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119182" start="4097" end="4104" title="PGPDisk" label="PGPDisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11189" start="4343" end="4350" title="Proxy server" label="proxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646779" start="4924" end="4962" title="A&amp;amp;M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc." label="A&amp;amp;M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q275141" start="4975" end="4982" title="Napster" label="Napster"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325042" start="4994" end="5019" title="contributory copyright infringement" label="contributory infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163401" start="5684" end="5689" title="Kazaa" label="Kazaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49667" start="5694" end="5702" title="Gnutella" label="Gnutella"/>
<link wikidata="Q676222" start="6414" end="6451" title="Motion Picture Association of America" label="Motion Picture Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="6456" end="6497" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="7520" end="7529" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="7886" end="7895" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728130" start="8179" end="8195" title="Stephen M. Cohen" label="Stephen M. Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233787" start="8247" end="8262" title="Sex.com" label="sex.com scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728130" start="8604" end="8625" title="Stephen Michael Cohen" label="Stephen Michael Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233787" start="8859" end="8866" title="sex.com" label="sex.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q42620" start="8938" end="8959" title="Palestinian Authority" label="Palestinian Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233787" start="9520" end="9527" title="sex.com" label="sex.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508177" start="9861" end="9876" title="Full disclosure (mailing list)" label="Full Disclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q622499" start="10961" end="10973" title="refugee camp" label="refugee camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q374748" start="10977" end="10982" title="Jenin" label="Jenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="11190" end="11209" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11648" end="11661" title="P2P Watch Dog" label="P2P Watch Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="12833" end="12849" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12857" end="12872" title="Internet Archive#Wayback Machine" label="Wayback Machine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405648" wikidata="Q865113" url="?curid=405648" title="Croisilles, Calvados">
<text>Croisilles () is a commune in the Calvados department in the Normandy region in northwestern France.

The mother of explorer Dumont D&#x27;Urville was born in Croisilles. He named an inlet of New Zealand&#x27;s coast Croisilles Harbour after the village.

==Geography==

The commune is part of the area known as Suisse Normande.

The commune is made up of the following collection of villages and hamlets, Le Breuil, L&#x27;Église, La Vallée and Croisilles.

The River Orne plus five streams The Traspy, The Aunay Douffieres, The Trois Cours, The Neumer and the Pont de Combray are the main watercourses running through the commune.

==Population==

==Points of interest==

===National heritage sites===

*Saint-Martin Church is a thirteenth century church which was listed as a Monument historique in 1933.

==See also==
*Communes of the Calvados department

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q865113" start="0" end="10" title="Croisilles, Calvados" label="Croisilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="19" end="26" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249" start="34" end="42" title="Calvados (department)" label="Calvados"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="43" end="53" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q18677875" start="61" end="69" title="Normandy (administrative region)" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36784" start="70" end="76" title="Regions of France" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="93" end="99" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q204735" start="125" end="146" title="Dumont D&amp;#x27;Urville" label="Dumont D&amp;#x27;Urville"/>
<link wikidata="Q32169894" start="217" end="235" title="Croisilles Harbour" label="Croisilles Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q936918" start="312" end="327" title="Norman Switzerland" label="Suisse Normande"/>
<link wikidata="Q659526" start="463" end="473" title="Orne (river)" label="River Orne"/>
<link wikidata="Q916475" start="779" end="798" title="Monument historique" label="Monument historique"/>
<link wikidata="Q243594" start="823" end="858" title="Communes of the Calvados department" label="Communes of the Calvados department"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405650" wikidata="Q318268" url="?curid=405650" title="Croisilles, Pas-de-Calais">
<text>Croisilles () is a village and commune in the Pas-de-Calais department of the Hauts-de-France region of France.

==Geography==
A small farming village located 8 miles (13 km) south of Arras at the junction of the D5 and D9 roads. Many of the residents commute to work in Arras or the town of Bapaume to the south.

The village is bypassed to the north and east by the LGV Nord high speed line and the A1 Autoroute. The junction with the Angy branch of the LGV Nord, in the direction of Arras, is located to the north of Croisilles.

In addition to its church, the village has two bars, a supermarket (including petrol station), a pharmacy, a post office and a small DIY store, which is operated by the local farmers&#x27; co-operative. There is also a village stadium (including indoor sports hall), an ecole maternale (kindergarten) and an ecole primaire (primary school), which is attached to the mairie (town hall).

==Population==
==Places of interest==
* The church of St.Martin, rebuilt, as was most of the town, after World War I.
* The two Commonwealth War Graves Commission cemeteries.
* Some remains of an 11th-century castle.

==See also==
*Communes of the Pas-de-Calais department

==References==
==External links==

* The first CWGC cemetery at Croisilles
* The second CWGC cemetery at Croisilles
* Croisilles on the Quid website 
* Website with information about Croisilles </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q318268" start="0" end="10" title="Croisilles, Pas-de-Calais" label="Croisilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="31" end="38" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q12689" start="46" end="59" title="Pas-de-Calais" label="Pas-de-Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="60" end="70" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q18677767" start="78" end="93" title="Hauts-de-France" label="Hauts-de-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="104" end="110" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q131329" start="184" end="189" title="Arras" label="Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q317235" start="292" end="299" title="Bapaume" label="Bapaume"/>
<link wikidata="Q241723" start="368" end="376" title="LGV Nord" label="LGV Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q692788" start="401" end="413" title="A1 autoroute (France)" label="A1 Autoroute"/>
<link wikidata="Q614286" start="437" end="441" title="Angy, Oise" label="Angy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="899" end="905" title="mairie" label="mairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1025" end="1036" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="1048" end="1082" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth War Graves Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q243036" start="1152" end="1192" title="Communes of the Pas-de-Calais department" label="Communes of the Pas-de-Calais department"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405656" wikidata="Q323072" url="?curid=405656" title="Courrières">
<text>Courrières () is a commune in the Pas-de-Calais department in the Hauts-de-France region of France about northeast of Lens. The Lens canal and the canalized river Deûle forms three quarters of the borders of the commune.

== Nearest communes ==
*Harnes (west)
*Estevelles (northwest)
*Carvin (north)
*Oignies (east)
*Dourges (southeast)
*Montigny-en-Gohelle

==History==

The Courrières mine disaster which resulted in 1,099 deaths on 10 March 1906. All the regions&#x27; coalmines were closed by 1970. It was the site of a massacre in 1940.

==Population==
==Notable people==
* Jules Adolphe Aimé Louis Breton, painter
* Catherine Plewinski, swimmer
* Eric Sikora, footballer

==International relations==
Courrières is twinned with:
* Barlinek, Poland
* Aylesham, United Kingdom

==See also==
*Communes of the Pas-de-Calais department

==References==
==External links==

* Official website of the town 
* Regional website 
* Website about the town 
* The CWGC cemetery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q323072" start="0" end="10" title="Courrières" label="Courrières"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="19" end="26" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q12689" start="34" end="47" title="Pas-de-Calais" label="Pas-de-Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="48" end="58" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q36784" start="82" end="98" title="region of France" label="region of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q165271" start="118" end="122" title="Lens, Pas-de-Calais" label="Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207449" start="163" end="168" title="Deûle" label="Deûle"/>
<link wikidata="Q274822" start="246" end="252" title="Harnes" label="Harnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q989662" start="261" end="271" title="Estevelles" label="Estevelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q243566" start="285" end="291" title="Carvin" label="Carvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q177479" start="301" end="308" title="Oignies" label="Oignies"/>
<link wikidata="Q841275" start="317" end="324" title="Dourges" label="Dourges"/>
<link wikidata="Q455249" start="338" end="357" title="Montigny-en-Gohelle" label="Montigny-en-Gohelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550228" start="376" end="400" title="Courrières mine disaster" label="Courrières mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="472" end="480" title="coalmine" label="coalmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q108101483" start="524" end="540" title="Oignies and Courrières massacre" label="massacre in 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q282043" start="579" end="610" title="Jules Adolphe Aimé Louis Breton" label="Jules Adolphe Aimé Louis Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q446815" start="622" end="641" title="Catherine Plewinski" label="Catherine Plewinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591360" start="653" end="664" title="Eric Sikora" label="Eric Sikora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="666" end="676" title="Association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="720" end="727" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q808344" start="736" end="744" title="Barlinek" label="Barlinek"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="746" end="752" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485028" start="755" end="763" title="Aylesham" label="Aylesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="765" end="779" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q243036" start="795" end="835" title="Communes of the Pas-de-Calais department" label="Communes of the Pas-de-Calais department"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405658" wikidata="Q987503" url="?curid=405658" title="Dainville">
<text>Dainville () is a commune in the Pas-de-Calais department in the Hauts-de-France region of France west of Arras..

==Population==
==Twin towns==
Dainville is twinned with the following town:
* Whitstable, Kent, England

==See also==
*Communes of the Pas-de-Calais department

==References==
==External links==

* The CWGC cemetery at Dainville
* The communal cemetery
* Official website of Dainville 
* Official website of the communauté urbaine d&#x27;Arras </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q987503" start="0" end="9" title="Dainville" label="Dainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="18" end="25" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q12689" start="33" end="46" title="Pas-de-Calais" label="Pas-de-Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="47" end="57" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q36784" start="81" end="97" title="region of France" label="region of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q131329" start="106" end="111" title="Arras" label="Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q964785" start="193" end="218" title="Whitstable" label="Whitstable, Kent, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q243036" start="234" end="274" title="Communes of the Pas-de-Calais department" label="Communes of the Pas-de-Calais department"/>
</links>
</doc>
