<doc id="407739" wikidata="Q1026831" url="?curid=407739" title="California Lutheran University">
<text>California Lutheran University (CLU, Cal Lutheran, or Cal Lu) is a private university in Thousand Oaks, California. It was founded in 1959 and is affiliated with the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, but is nonsectarian. It opened in 1960 as California Lutheran College and was California&#x27;s first four-year liberal arts college and the first four-year private college in Ventura County. It changed its name to California Lutheran University on January 1, 1986.

It is located on a campus, northwest of Los Angeles. It offers degrees at the bachelor&#x27;s, master&#x27;s, and doctoral levels, as well as post-master&#x27;s and post-bachelor&#x27;s certificates. CLU offers 36 majors and 34 minors. The university is based in Thousand Oaks, with additional locations in Woodland Hills (Los Angeles), Westlake Village, Oxnard, Santa Maria, and Berkeley.

Cal Lutheran has been called the West Coast&#x27;s &quot;Cradle of Coaches&quot;; nearly 1 in 4 of football coach Bob Shoup&#x27;s players would go on to coach at some level, while 144 players have become football coaches, and several have been drafted to the NFL. Particularly many players were drafted following the NAIA Championship win in 1971. The celebration was held at the Hollywood Palladium in conjunction with the Dallas Cowboys that won their first Super Bowl the following month. In college baseball, 24 student players have been drafted for Major League Baseball as of 2014.

==History==
California Lutheran College (CLC) was constructed in the early 1960s on nearly of land in northern Thousand Oaks. Much of the land had been donated by Richard Pederson, the son of Norwegian immigrants and a member of the Norwegian Colony. Pederson donated , while more was purchased from other ranchers. The original $2.1 million campus first constructed a swimming pool, and soon also dormitories, administrative offices, and classrooms. The college first opened in September 1961 with an enrollment of 330 students and had reached 1400 students ten years later. It became fully accredited within its first year. In 1963, the Community Leaders Club was established in order to bring the town and college closer together. The group conducted annual auctions, staged events, assisted athletic programs, etc. Nearly half of its faculty held doctoral degrees by the early 1970s. The largest gift in the school&#x27;s history was received from Clifford and Alma Pearson, who donated $1 million in 1985 to help establish the Pearson Library. California Lutheran University remained the only four-year university in Ventura County as of 1989. In 1995, CLU was the only four-year university in Ventura County.

Notable visitors to CLU events include U.S. presidents Ronald Reagan in 1979 and Gerald Ford in 1981; Bob Hope in 1984; Nicaraguan president Violeta Barrios de Chamorro in 1991; President George H. W. Bush in 1990; and former secretary of state Condoleezza Rice in 2018.

===Background and origins===

As far back as the turn of the 20th century, when the first Norwegian Lutheran settlers came to the Conejo Valley, Lutherans had the dream of one day establishing a college of their own. U.S. Senator Leland Stanford had offered a lot near Palo Alto, California, to Swedish Lutherans, but withdrew the offer when asked to fund the construction. Decades later in 1928, a group of Los Angeles developers gave a site in Del Rey Hills in order to establish &quot;Los Angeles Lutheran University&quot;. The land was donated by the Harry Culver Company, Dickinson &amp; Gillespie, film director King Vidor, and Joseph Mesmer. Architects planned a Mediterranean-style campus with a campanile on the mesa&#x27;s edge. The ground-breaking was scheduled for the summer of 1928, but according to a front-page article in the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, the 1929 stock market crash postponed the scheduled construction indefinitely. This site is now the current location of Loyola Marymount University.
The first official steps in creating a college took place at the first annual convention of the new South Pacific District of the American Lutheran Church (ALC) in 1951. A resolution passed which urged congregations to contribute an amount of money to the project, equal to twenty percent of their offering to the national synodical budget. The convention also established the Higher Education Committee, whose purpose was to study the details of establishing a college in the district. The committee held its meetings in downtown Los Angeles restaurants, hotels, and churches. The committee made a resolution which was adopted at the Evangelical Lutheran Church (ELC) convention in Minneapolis, Minnesota on June 5, 1952, which requested the Board of Christian Education of the ELC to study educational possibilities in the California District. Participants in the study included leaders of the national church bodies of the ALC, the United Lutheran Church in America (ULCA), the United Evangelical Lutheran Church (UELC), and the Augustana Synod.

When World War II ended, the 1944 GI Bill of Rights made it financially possible for over a million veterans to return to college, doubling and even quadrupling the size of some Lutheran colleges in the United States. At the time, California was home to 16 Protestant and 12 Roman Catholic colleges, however, Lutherans lacked a four-year college in the state. A 1954 inter-Lutheran study of educational possibilities in California, conducted by the study, concluded that there was the desirability of establishing a Lutheran four-year college in the state due to factors such as the long distance to other Lutheran liberal arts colleges and a large growth of Lutheran churches. Among those responsible for preparing the study was Dr. Orville Dahl, executive secretary of the Board of Higher Education of the ELC; Dr. William L. Young of the ALC; Dr. Gould Wickey of the ULCA; and Dr. Carl Segerhammar of the Augustana Lutheran Church. The president of the California District of the ELC, Gaylerd Falde, later made it one of his ministry&#x27;s top priorities to establish a Lutheran college in California. He convened a North Hollywood meeting on September 13, 1954, that took initial steps toward the formation of committees to plan for a Lutheran college. A steering committee was assigned to handle public relations, while four subcommittees were formed to deal with incorporation, finance and location.

===California Lutheran Educational Foundation===
The Committee of Twenty-Five grew out of the meeting and first convened on October 29, 1954, with representatives of the same Lutheran church bodies sitting on the committee. They studied and developed plans while drafting the Articles of Incorporation, which received preliminary approval. The Articles of Incorporation were to be signed on April 20, 1957, but the signing was delayed due to disagreements over whether the college should be governed by a local or national board. Another meeting was held on May 25, 1957, in Chicago, Illinois, but no agreement was reached. A charitable foundation known as California Lutheran Educational Foundation (CLEF) was established on June 4, 1957, with the purpose of gathering funds for the college. Office facilities for the foundation were rented in the First National Bank Building on the corner of Hollywood Boulevard and Highland Avenue in Hollywood. Dr. Raymond Olson, the director of stewardship for the ELC and later president of the college, was helping to analyze potential fundraising and financing policies for Gaylerd Falde. The ELC had not established a college since 1903 and an important task was to enlist the participation of the five different national and local Lutheran judicatories. 

Dahl and members of the CLEF visited over fifty sites in search of a location for the new college. Some of the sites considered included an old hotel site at the foot of the San Bernardino Mountains, an abandoned military hospital near Corona, a peninsula near Dana Point, and a new town just being built near Santa Rosa in Northern California. His last visit, which took place on Sept. 24, 1957, took him 45 miles (72 km) northwest of Los Angeles to the Conejo Valley, where Dahl was offered land by Norwegian farmer Lawrence Pederson. The price tag was however too high, but his brother, Richard Pederson, approached Dahl the next day and handed him the deed to his 130-acre (53 ha) ranch property. Richard and Lawrence Pederson were the sons of Norwegian immigrants Lars and Karn Pederson, who were among the first settlers in the valley and part of the Norwegian Colony. Having arrived in the Conejo Valley in 1890, the Pedersons lived in a Sears Roebuck catalog house on the property (Pederson House and Water Tower). The Pedersons and nearby Olsen families were notable for having constructed the nearby Norwegian Grade. The Pedersons donated the ranch to the Lutheran church for the purpose of building a college where students could obtain a Christian education.

On November 3, 1957, the college&#x27;s first board of governors was installed at the First Lutheran Church in Glendale, California. Falde was elected chairman of its board of governors and Dahl was elected director. The board&#x27;s first meeting was held on March 7, 1958, when Dahl announced that the college was to be opened in 1961. Falde then made the establishment of the new college the top priority for his ministry. After the Thousand Oaks-site was secured, arrangements were made in February 1958 to move CLEF&#x27;s offices to the Pederson Ranch in order to begin the campus development. To help develop the master plan, CLEF employed the services of the Los Angeles architectural firm of Mann, Daniel, Johnson, and Mendenhall. The plan was designed with a Centrum which included motel-type dormitories, a book shop, post office, and administrative offices. Centrum would eventually be converted into a shopping center in order to provide an endowment for permanent buildings to be constructed on campus. Another top priority was to find a name for the new college. Names such as Los Angeles University and Ventura Lutheran University were suggested, and the &quot;Lutheran Herald&quot; reported on December 30, 1958, that the $15 million college was to be named Ventura University. CLEF officials claimed newspapers had been premature and a name was announced before it had been agreed upon. CLEF reached a final agreement on the name California Lutheran College (CLC) after some CLEF members felt it would be presumptuous to name a college in Ventura County “Los Angeles University”, which some members opted for.

The development program was formulated when the board of governors met on campus for the first time on March 7, 1958. The opening of the college had been unofficially set for fall of 1961. CLEF developed a summary of immediate needs for a total amount of $2,135,000. This basic plan would allow for the enrollment of 400 students, 200 of whom were to be residing at the college. CLEF decided that in order to secure the funds, each church body were to share the investment proportionately. With the exception of the site, no gifts larger than $400,000 were responsible for the college. Large donations included a $25,000 gift received from Lutheran Brotherhood, a fraternal insurance society. With the first $300,000 secured, work began on the college library, science building, and student center. Construction on the two dormitories, Alpha and Omega (today known as Thompson and Pederson), was to begin if $500,000 were collected by February 1, 1961. To ensure that the college reached this goal, it sold Investment Trust Certificates as the new college was ineligible for government loans. Certificates were sold in $100 denominations enabling participation from small investors.

The CLEF Board of governors held its last meeting on February 27, 1959. The Articles of Incorporation were adopted and the same meeting reconvened the same day as the board of regents of California Lutheran College. The college regents had been elected by a convocation with representatives proportionately assigned to the five participating bodies. The first action of the regents was determining the college&#x27;s start date to be September 1961. A secret ballot took place in order to select the first college president. The ballots were opened by the board&#x27;s executive committee on June 5, 1959, with 21 members voting to elect Dahl. California Lutheran College was formally incorporated on August 4, 1959, and soon the site was bursting with activity such as bulldozers and ongoing construction. Carpenter John Beyer was given the task of remodeling the brooder houses into classrooms. At the time, Thousand Oaks was an unincorporated community with a population of around 3,000. Much of Thousand Oaks’ development was undertaken by the Janss Corporation, which later paid for engineering site analysis of the Pederson Ranch and later gave donations to various CLC projects. Dahl was convinced that without a strong church connection, the school would never become reality. He quickly established an outdoor place of worship and also constructed a swimming pool to entice congregations to come out to the future campus.

The joint operation and ownership of CLC opened the way for further cooperative institutional relationships, and Lutheran Church in America synods consequentially became participants in the governance of two ALC institutions: Texas Lutheran College and Pacific Lutheran University.

===Foundation and early years===

California Lutheran College opened its doors in the fall of 1961. Church contributions of $400,000, along with individual gifts and loans, had made the completion of a new campus center possible, which consisted of eight buildings. In addition to those eight, the old Pederson House and chicken coops were remodeled into classrooms and offices. The new college was planted in a fertile setting, rimmed by rolling hills, and home to Kingsmen Creek. Orange and walnut groves from the old Pederson Ranch were still seen on campus. The college&#x27;s formal dedication was held on Reformation Sunday at the end of October 1961. A highlight of this service was &quot;A Mighty Fortress Is Our God&quot; performed by the newly formed college orchestra and choir. About 4,000 Lutherans came to witness the service.

All the first faculty members were of Lutheran faith, often recruited from other Lutheran colleges. There was an understanding during its first two years that only Lutherans should be hired. Of the 302 students enrolled during its first year, almost all were Lutheran. 92 percent of the second year freshman class came from Lutheran congregations.

The college was accredited by the Western Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools in March 1962. Dahl served as president until 1962, bringing the university&#x27;s first football coach, Robert Shoup, to the campus in his final year.

The &quot;Dallas Cowboys&quot; brought their summer training camp to the campus in 1963 and kept it there until 1989.

On February 20, 1967, about 200 students instituted a sit-down in front the gymnasium while the chapel was in service to protest things that they believed needed to be changed such as the attendance policy, and operating hours of the library, bookstore, and coffee shop — all of which were closed during chapel services. On April 19, 1968, three hundred Cal Lutheran students commemorated the life of assassinated civil rights activist Martin Luther King Jr. by marching down Moorpark Boulevard in his memory.

Another march was held as part of the National Vietnam War Moratorium Rally. Both marches went from California Lutheran College to downtown Thousand Oaks. President Raymond Olson was among those marching with the students and speaking out against the Vietnam War.

In the mid-1960s, the WASC Accrediting Committee had expressed concern over indebtedness in excess of $1,731,000 and a deficit in current funds of over $350,000. President Olson inherited the debt, and further deficit budgets during his tenure added to the college&#x27;s indebtedness. Donations and grants were insufficient to balance the budget, and the board of regents complained they had difficulty getting exact amounts on income versus expenditures. In spite of its economic turmoil, the college grew in number of students, academic reputation, and in number of faculty members. In the fall of 1963, the college had 550 students and in 1964 reached a total of 736 students, originating from 24 U.S. states, Sweden, and China. Although Lutherans still made up a majority of 78%, seventeen other denominations were also represented at the college. The percentage of Lutheran faculty and administration workers was 69 percent. From 1963 to 1966, full-time faculty grew from 38 to 69 persons, where Methodists and Presbyterians were the most represented non-Lutheran faculty. A 1965 survey conducted by the Lutheran Students Association of America reported a total count of three African American students at California Lutheran.

===Early finances===

The school&#x27;s total debt reached a staggering $3,600,000 in 1970, and the university was facing bankruptcy. Marine Knutson, a Lutheran layman who had experience within crisis management, was hired by the national church as a financial troubleshooter for the college. By applying austere measures that included cutting the facility by seven work positions, Knutson managed to end the year 1970 with an $80,000 budget surplus and was also successful in reducing the debt by $800,000 by the end of the year. National church bodies made a guaranteed commitment for a loan of $1,000,000. Olson resigned as president in May 1971, after eight years as president during a tenure of a financial crisis and social upheaval. However, Olson had tripled the college&#x27;s size, and the school was now home of 1,000 students.

When the search for a new president failed to produce a candidate from outside campus, the board of regents was advised by Knutson to appoint Mark A. Mathews, the chair of the business administration and economics department. As Mathews was a Presbyterian, the institution&#x27;s by-laws had to be changed in order to permit him to hold the office. Mathews became acting college president in 1972. Under his fiscal management, the college reversed the deficit trend and a longer period of financial stability and growth followed his tenure. Also in 1972, he developed the award-winning Business Management Forum which was designed to build bridges to the business community. The Forum, which is now named the Mathews Leadership Forum in honor of President Mathews, brought a large number of business leaders to the campus. After a decade of financial deficits, one of the first steps of Mathews&#x27; administration was to install a budget planning process which involved the input from all segments of faculty departments. He chose A. Dean Buchanan to guide the school&#x27;s financial program. Buchanan, who had guided the financial program at Pacific Lutheran University for eleven years, was a graduate of University of California, Berkeley and noted in the field of college fiscal management. President Mathews later formed the Committee for New Dimensions which reached into the business community in nearby Los Angeles. Efforts were also made at recruiting corporate leadership to the board of regents.

In 1971, the college football team won the NAIA Football National Championship. A celebration was held at the Hollywood Palladium in conjunction with the Dallas Cowboys who won their first Super Bowl in January 1972.

===New expansion===
Increased diversity in religious affiliation took place in the 1970s. In the first year of that decade, Lutherans represented 60% of the faculty, but by the 1978–1979 school year made up only 45% of the faculty. That year, &quot;other Christians&quot; for the first time in school history outnumbered Lutherans. Mathews resigned as president in 1980, and in 1981 Reverend Jerry H. Miller, director of National Lutheran Campus Ministry, became the fourth college president. The fiscal year 1983–1984 recorded grants and donations at $3,250,000, including an individual gift of $1 million, the single largest donation to that date. With the new funds in hand, the school was able to construct three major buildings: The Pearson Library was erected in 1985, the Ahmanson Science Center in 1988, and the Samuelson Chapel in 1990. Construction of the Ahmanson Science Center meant that all sciences for the first time had adequate equipment and space to initiate significant research programs. The new library housed 100,000 books as of 1985.

During Miller&#x27;s first academic year in 1981–82, Peters Hall was dedicated on October 23, 1981. In 1983, Hansen Business Center was dedicated. Student publications &quot;The Echo&quot; and &quot;The Morning Glory&quot; received top national awards. &quot;The Echo&quot; received the All American Award in 1982 and &quot;The Morning Glory&quot; won the Pacemaker Award in 1983.

The Landry Medal, named for Dallas Cowboys&#x27; coach Tom Landry, was created with the help of Bob Shoup in 1980. The medal was awarded each year from 1980 to 2002. The NFL team was involved in the development of the university&#x27;s athletic facilities and coaching of the Cal Lutheran football team. Coaches Landry and Shoup put on two annual summer events: a coaching clinic and a charity function known as Christian Businessmen&#x27;s Club Day.

===Increased diversity===

In the early 1980s, the college was committed to the establishment of an environment supportive of cultural and ethnic pluralism. In 1981, the college established four-year working relations with a study group from Japan. With a peak enrollment of 45 Japanese students, the college was further encouraged by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges in 1983 to be more multiculturally diverse. The college&#x27;s report to WASC in 1988 consisted of a revised mission statement which affirmed that the college is welcome to &quot;students of all ages as well as all cultural, religious and ethnic backgrounds&quot;. The school began a determined effort in 1986 based on recruiting international students from Scandinavia, and in one year it was seventy international students from Norway attending the college. Furthermore, a grant from the Irvine Foundation helped the college recruit and offer financial aid to minorities. The effort became successful and the college soon attracted a significant Hispanic-American population from Ventura County. An Office of Multicultural Services was established to facilitate various ethnic organizations and their events. Another accommodation the university made to promote diversity includes the Prayer Room located in the Samuelson Chapel. This is a place that is welcome to all faiths where anyone can freely go and practice.

===University status===

In the fall of 1985, the board of regents agreed with the administration that California Lutheran College was ready to receive university status. Not all agreed; those opposing the change felt it could mean sacrificing CLC&#x27;s focus on liberal arts. Some also argued that the college did not have an adequate university library, or that the college in other ways was not ready. Those favoring the change noted that CLC already had graduate programs at the master&#x27;s level in five distinct areas, and also noted that despite being the only four-year college in Ventura County, CLC kept being compared to the state&#x27;s two-year community colleges. Some were persuaded that turning into a university would force the administrators to take more seriously the scholarly quests for academic excellence. On January 1, 1986, the college became California Lutheran University (CLU).

===Modern history===

On November 3, 1990, President George H. W. Bush planted a tree on the campus. Around 1,400 students and visitors showed up to hear him speak.

In 1994, KCLU-FM, a non-commercial public radio station, was established and housed on the Cal Lutheran campus. Academy award-winning screenwriter Norman Corwin held a presentation during the &quot;Sign-On&quot; party, which took place on October 20, 1994. The CLUnet data network was also installed in 1994.

On October 22, 2004, work began on the north campus athletics complex. MLB manager Sparky Anderson and Tommy Lasorda were among those participating in the opening ceremony for the $80 million facilities.

The first doctoral degrees were granted in 2006.

In 2009, tryouts by the Olympic USA Team Handball was held at CLU. Also in 2009, the Thousand Oaks Community Pool was dedicated on February 21, and the nearby Poulson Tennis Center was dedicated the following day. Groundbreaking was held on June 4 for the Swenson Center for Academic Excellence, and in the fall, the 220-bed Trinity residence hall was completed.

In 2007, the Samuelson Aquatic Center was completed. It served as the official training site of the 2008 and 2012 US Olympic Men&#x27;s Water Polo teams.

In 2011, William Rolland Stadium, which was named for its benefactor, was completed and opened. The stadium replaced the 1963 Mt. Clef Stadium and has a seating capacity of 3,000. The first game was played at the $8.9 million stadium on October 1, 2011.

Beginning in 2016, the school is hosting the temporary headquarters and regular season training facilities of the Los Angeles Rams of the NFL. The Rams paid for two practice fields, paved parking, and modular buildings constructed on the northwestern corner of the campus.

In 2016, CLU applied for and received Hispanic-serving institution (HSI) status from the U.S. Department of Education.

In 2017, Cal Lutheran&#x27;s Kingsmen baseball team won the Division III College World Series.

On May 4, 2018, former secretary of state Condoleezza Rice held a speech at the Gilbert Sports and Fitness Center.

In 2018, Steve Dorfman, former vice-chairman of Hughes Electronics, made the largest single gift in university history. Dorfman donated $6 million toward the construction of a building for the School of Management. The 27,000 sq. ft. Steven D. Dorfman Center, an $18 million project, will be located at the former location of Nygreen Hall on Memorial Parkway.

On January 25, 2019, Los Angeles Dodgers attended a ceremony and luncheon at the Lundring Event Center in order to honor those affected by the 2018 Thousand Oaks shooting. The Cal Lutheran Choir performed the National Anthem at the L.A. Memorial Coliseum during the Los Angeles Rams&#x27; game against the Kansas City Chiefs on November 19, 2018.

===University presidents===

* Orville Dahl, 1959–1962
* Raymond Olson, 1963–1971
* Mark A. Mathews, 1972–1980
* Jerry H. Miller, 1981–1992
* Luther Luedtke, 1992–2006
* John R. Sladek, 2006–2007
* Chris Kimball, 2008–2020
* Lori E. Varlotta, 2020–2024
* John A. Nunes (interim), 2024–

==Rankings==
In 2012, Cal Lutheran was ranked number 14 among regional universities in the Western United States by U.S. News &amp; World Report. As of 2022, CLU ranked No. 6. The same rating, &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; published by &quot;America&#x27;s Best Colleges Guide&quot;, has rated CLU among the top 25 universities in Western United States for over ten consecutive years. In 2013 it ranked CLU as the 4th best university for veterans in the West, and 3rd as of 2014. In 1988, its 29th year, the university first appeared on the &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot;″s list of “best small comprehensive colleges.” In the 1988 rankings, &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranked CLU as one of the best comprehensive colleges in the United States. It ranked CLU 18th out of 167 American institutions with between 1,500 and 2,500 students.

Forbes ranked CLU number 276 out of 650 &quot;Top Colleges&quot; in the U.S. in 2015. In 2017 Forbes ranked CLU as the 55th best university in the West.

The Economist ranked CLU number 19 in the U.S. in its first college rankings released in 2015. The ranking measured the economic value of universities by estimating &quot;the gap between how much money its students subsequently earn, and how much they might have made had they studied elsewhere.&quot;

The company Niche ranked CLU 47th among the &quot;Best Christian Colleges in America&quot; in 2017, and 78th in &quot;Best College Dorms in America&quot;. It also ranked the campus as the 101st best college campus in the U.S. The university also appeared in the 2015 &quot;America&#x27;s Top Colleges&quot; by Forbes and Money.com&#x27;s &quot;Best Colleges For Your Money 2017&quot;. It has also appeared on PayScale&#x27;s College Salary Report and Washington Monthly&#x27;s Master Universities.

The university&#x27;s MBA program was ranked 66th in North America by the 2010 &quot;QS World University Rankings&quot;. The Master of Science (M.S.) in Quantitative Economics was ranked fourth in the United States by the &quot;Financial Engineer Times&quot; in its 2018 Financial Economics Programs Rankings of graduate programs.

The student-faculty ratio is 15:1, and 98.4% of its classes have 49 students or fewer. 86 percent of its full-time faculty (118 persons) hold PhDs. As of 2016, there are 193 full-time and 244 part-time professors.

==Accreditations and affiliations==

CLU is accredited by the Accrediting Commission for Senior Colleges and Universities, a commission of the Western Association of Schools and Colleges (WASC). It is also accredited by the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CCTC) and the National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE). The Financial Planning Program has been registered with the Certified Financial Planner Board of Standards. The Doctorate Program in Clinical Psychology, within the Graduate School of Psychology, is accredited by the American Psychological Association (APA). The Pacific Lutheran Theological Seminary (PLTS) is accredited by the Commission on Accrediting of the Association of Theological Schools (ATS).

It is a member of the National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities, Association of Independent California Colleges and Universities, and Council of Independent Colleges. CLU&#x27;s intercollegiate athletic programs compete in the Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference and in NCAA Division III. CLU is one of 28 colleges and universities affiliated with the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA). It was the first Lutheran college to be established in California. It is the only ELCA-affiliated university in California and is one of two ELCA universities in Western United States, with Pacific Lutheran University being the other one. The M.P.P.A. program is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP).

==Campus==

The main campus is located in Thousand Oaks, a city in southern Ventura County, California, comprising 41 buildings, four fields, two stadiums, two swimming pools, a tennis court, botanic gardens, as well as undeveloped chaparral hillsides. It lies 45 miles northwest of Los Angeles.

The university has a athletics complex, the Gilbert Sports and Fitness Center. Adjacent to the complex is the 50-meter Samuelson Aquatic Center and a community pool.

===Campus layout===


The campus of CLU is primarily organized by the four cardinal directions, with the north side, located across Olsen Road and backed up against Mount Clef Ridge, serving as the primary center for athletics. Some North Campus facilities include Gilbert Sports and Fitness Center, Samuelson Aquatic Center, Ullman Baseball Stadium and George Sparky Anderson Baseball Field, Hutton Softball Field, William Rolland Stadium (opened Fall 2011), Facilities Building and Yard, and a community pool for the City of Thousand Oaks.

The east side is the primary location for freshman residence halls and some administrative offices. Some east side facilities include Mt. Clef Residence Hall, Thompson Residence Hall, Pederson Residence Hall, Student Union, Alumni Hall, Centrum Café, Hanson Business Center, and Pederson Administration Building.

The south side, also known as the Academic Core, is the primary location for the academic buildings on campus. Southside facilities include Soiland Humanities Building, Ahmanson Science Center, Spies-Bornemann Center for Education and Technology, Nygreen Hall, Peters Hall (School of Business), and Swenson Center for the Social and Behavioral Sciences (opened Fall 2010). A Jamba Juice location and Starbucks store are also situated on the south side of the CLU campus.

The west side contains upperclassman housing. Westside facilities include Grace Hall Apartments, Mogen Hall Apartments (with the Mogen Market facility), Old West Complex (Afton, Janss, Rasmussen, and Conejo residence halls), New West Complex (North, South, West and Potenberg residence halls), and Trinity Hall (completed in 2009).

The center of the campus primarily features the Pearson Library as well as the Ullman Commons. Pearson Library holds 132,744 titles and 1,497 serial subscriptions. In addition to its 136,000 titles, the library housed 72,316 e-books, 2,378 audiovisuals and 550 current serials as of 2010. Dedicated in 1985, Pearson Library is a selective depository for government documents and also provides typewriters, video-recorders, microcomputers, and audiovisual equipment. Through the Online Computer Library Center, it has access to resources at over 3,000 additional libraries. The library is adjacent to the 250-seat Preus-Brandt Forum Theatre. It is located at 135 Chapel Lane. Pearson Library is staffed by nine employees: a library director, a collection development librarian, an information literacy librarian, an acquisitions librarian, an interlibrary loan librarian, a public services coordinator, and two circulation coordinators.

The former chicken coops of the Pederson Ranch were converted into classrooms by Jefferson A. Elmendorf, the same architect who worked with Orville Dahl in planning the campus and designed The Centrum and other campus buildings.

CLU&#x27;s first LEED Certified building, the Swenson Center for the Social and Behavioral Sciences, opened in fall 2010.

===Landmarks===
* Enormous Luther (&quot;Gumby&quot;) is a abstract bronze statue of Martin Luther at Falde Plaza, immediately in front of Pearson Library. It is tall and has a wide cast. It was a gift of the first graduating class at California Lutheran College in 1964 and is the work of Bernardus Weber, CLU art professor emeritus. It has become an unofficial mascot of the university. Gumby was painted gold to commemorate CLU&#x27;s 50th anniversary in 2009.
* Pederson House and Water Tower is located on the corner of Regent Ave. and Faculty St. on the university campus. Originally built by Norwegian settlers who first arrived here in 1890, the 1913 house is Ventura County Historic Landmark No. 45 and City of Thousand Oaks Historical Landmark No. 3. It was originally located at the present location of Ahmanson Science Center, where a statue has been erected in honor of Richard Pederson. The structure was later relocated to its current location.
* Samuelson Chapel is a towering cross-topped landmark, which was established in 1990. The chapel has stained glass windows and a 39-rank, racker-action pipe organ.
* CLU Rocks on Mount Clef: Sometime during the college&#x27;s second academic year in the early 1960s, students arranged pained white rocks spelling out &quot;CLC&quot; atop Mount Clef Ridge. For over a decade, the rocks were visible at night and used as a beacon for airline pilots due to lights being rigged to shine on them. Due to vandalism and the 1973 energy crisis, the college eventually decided to permanently turn off the lights. Periodically through the school&#x27;s history, students have rearranged the rocks to spell out their displeasure over various campus issues. The rocks are annually repainted as part of a freshman orientation tradition for new students.

===Kwan Fong Gallery of Art and Culture===
The Kwan Fong Gallery in the Soiland Humanities Center was established by the Kwan Fong Charitable Foundation, co-founded by Maria Lee and Katie Yang, with the participation of Ed Tseng, Professor Emeritus of Political Science of CLU and Dean of International Education. The foundation, which supported hospitals, schools, and homes for the elderly and mentally challenged, dissolved in 2006.

The gallery has residencies by artists, the first in 2007 by Dallas–Fort Worth-based figurative painter Cyn McCurry.

===William Rolland Gallery of Fine Art===
The William Rolland Gallery of Fine Art was established by philanthropist William Rolland on the university&#x27;s campus in 2011. The gallery provides free public programming including lectures, foreign-language tours, and concerts. Exhibitions rotate approximately five times per year and have featured works from artists such as Andy Warhol, Chuck Close, David Hockney, Fernando Botero, Diego Lasansky, and Picasso.

In October 2017, the nearby William Rolland Art Center was dedicated. The $8-million facility is the third building donated by the philanthropist. Rollan was the 2017 Ventura County philanthropist of the year and has donated numerous times to CLU with the intent of making Cal Lutheran one of the leading schools in California.

===Barbara Collins Arboretum===

The grounds of the campus is dubbed the Barbara Collins Arboretum. Named after Barbara J. Collins, who taught microbiology and botany at CLU for 50 years, the arboretum selected and cataloged much of the campus flora. Many of the trees flank a natural creek that bisects the campus. Many native species to Southern California can be found on campus, including Campus Gardens, Garden flowers, Canadian flowers, and California wildflowers. The arboretum opened in 2007 and Collins collected and identified over 100 species for the arboretum. Barbara J. Collins was a professor of biology for fifty years at Cal Lutheran. Besides the founder of the arboretum, she was the department chair and the sole member of the Interdisciplinary Major Committee for thirty years. President John Sladek made the announcement during his inauguration in 2006 that the campus had been recognized as an Arboretum.

===Off-campus facilities===

Cal Lutheran operates additional locations in Woodland Hills (Los Angeles), Westlake Village, Oxnard, Santa Maria, and Berkeley. As of January 2019, seven classes are offered at its Oxnard Center and three at the Woodland Hills Center. While the Pacific Lutheran Theological Seminary is located at the Berkeley campus, the 18,000 sq. ft. Westlake Village facilities house Cal Lutheran Center for Innovation and Entrepreneurship / Hub101. The Westlake Center, which opened in 2014, also houses expanded facilities for the Community Counseling Center and School of Management. The graduate programs in both entrepreneurship and economics have been relocated to the center, which is made up of four classrooms and five offices. It is the third center for the Community Counseling Center, which also operates at the Thousand Oaks and Oxnard campuses.

The Woodland Hills Center, which makes up 13,000 sq. ft. opened in 2011 and has eight classrooms and two computer labs. Several of the university&#x27;s undergraduate and graduate programs are offered in Woodland Hills, including the MBA program and master&#x27;s degrees in counseling and guidance. Over 100 students were enrolled in programs at the center in 2011.

The Central Coast program was launched in 2012 and houses the Educational Leadership Program in Santa Maria, California.

==Academic==


California Lutheran University has five academic divisions:

* College of Arts and Sciences
* School of Management
* Graduate School of Education
* Graduate School of Psychology
* Bachelor&#x27;s Degree for Professionals
Across all divisions, class sizes are kept small—16 students on average. CLU offers undergraduate students either a Bachelor of Arts or a Bachelor of Science degree, depending on their field of study, in 36 academic majors and 36 minors, with the ability to double-major. Additionally, a program for working professionals returning to college enables students to complete bachelor&#x27;s degrees via evening and online courses.

The university&#x27;s Graduate and Continuing Education Program had a modest beginning in 1970 but grew under the direction of John Cooper. At its beginning, the graduate program offered degrees in Administration of Justice, Business Administration, Education, and later Educational Psychology, Marriage and Family Counseling, and Public Administration. As of 2016, 1,300 graduate students were pursuing master&#x27;s degrees in information technology, business, education, psychology, and public policy. There are 30 graduate programs offering credentials, certifications, and doctorate degrees.

The following degrees are offered:

* Baccalaureate: Bachelor of Arts (B.A.), Bachelor of Science (B.S.) 
* Master&#x27;s: Master of Arts (M.A.), Master of Business Administration (M.B.A.), Master of Education (M.Ed.), Master of Public Policy and Administration (M.P.P.A.), Master of Science (M.S.) 
* Doctoral: Doctor of Education (Ed.D.), Doctor of Psychology (Psy.D.)

Additionally, master&#x27;s and doctoral programs in theology and divinity are offered at the Berkeley facilities through the Pacific Lutheran Theological Seminary (PLTS).

===College of Arts and Sciences===

A vast majority of the school&#x27;s academic departments are in the College of Arts and Sciences, with 33 majors.

====Graduate programs====
For graduate students, the College of Arts and Sciences contains master&#x27;s degree programs in psychology, computer science, clinical psychology, counseling psychology (MFT), and public policy and administration. Some undergraduate students who intend to enter one of these programs upon completion of their undergraduate studies can choose to enroll in some graduate courses as an undergraduate and obtain graduate-level course credits.

===School of Management===
California Lutheran University&#x27;s first graduating class included students with degrees in Business Administration and Economics. Then, the Department of Business was housed within the College of Arts and Sciences until 1986, when it finally became a separate School of Business. In 2011, the university&#x27;s Board of Regents formally approved changing the name of the School of Business to the School of Management. Containing all of CLU&#x27;s business-related programs, the California Lutheran University School of Management employs many professors who have earned respect in their chosen fields prior to becoming professors. In addition, some professors have come from senior executive backgrounds and offer real-world experiences. Students in the School of Management can major in Business Administration, Economics, Accounting, Hospitality and Tourism Management, and Sports Management. The School of Management has several locations on campus, including Peters Hall, dedicated on Founders Day, October 23, 1981, during the first academic year of CLU President Jerry H. Miller. A substantial bequest to the college was given by Mrs. Magda Peters in memory of her late husband Rev. John Peters, a pioneering minister.

In 2018, the School received a substantial gift from Steven D. Dorfman, the former CEO of Hughes Space and Communications Company and Vice-Chairman of Hughes Electronics. The School of Management at CLU offers a range of graduate programs as well as a variety of certificate programs. All programs are accredited by WASC. Many foreign students come to CLU take the graduate IMBA Program. California Lutheran University School of Management&#x27;s MBA program was ranked 66th in North America by The 2010 QS World University Rankings. Besides various Masters of Business Administration (MBA) degrees, other School of Management graduate programs include an Executive MBA, a Master in Management, Master of Science (MS) in Financial Planning, Management, Quantitative Economics, and Information Technology. The School of Management also has a Master of Public Policy and Administration (MPPA) degree, which is a multidisciplinary master&#x27;s program. In addition to its programs, the School of Management operates a Center for Economic Research and Forecasting, which is part of the Wall Street Journal&#x27;s panel of economic forecasters, a Center for Economic Research and Forecasting, as well as a Center for Innovation and Entrepreneurship that houses Hub101, a community cowork and incubation space.

===Graduate School of Education===
California Lutheran University&#x27;s School of Education trains teachers at the elementary, secondary, and post-secondary levels of instruction. It is based in the Spies-Bornemann Center for Education and Technology in the Academic Quarter. While primarily a graduate school, CLU undergraduate students can major in Liberal Studies, which qualifies them to teach elementary school and prepares them for the multiple-subject examinations (the CBEST and CSET) required by the State of California. While in this major, students take a Career Decisions in Education course that expose them to various facets of the education world and allows them to participate in field studies at local elementary schools.

There are multiple master&#x27;s degree programs within the School of Education, as well as the Teacher Preparation program for California teachers. Students are able to obtain a teaching credential while at the same time earning credit toward their Master of Education (M.Ed.) degree. In addition to the Teacher Preparation program, students can obtain a Master of Science in counseling and guidance or educational psychology, and a Master of Arts in a wide variety of education-related administrative career fields, including educational technology, educational leadership, or school site leadership. Graduate students can also obtain a Doctor of Education (Ed.D) degree in educational leadership from the School of Education. This program requires extensive fieldwork and a dissertation defense.

===Graduate School of Psychology===
The Graduate School of Psychology has three academic programs and two counseling centers. The school offers an APA-accredited doctorate in clinical psychology (Psy.D) and Master of Science degrees in clinical psychology and counseling psychology (MFT). The counseling centers provide low-fee services to residents of Ventura and Los Angeles counties and are located in Oxnard and Westlake Village. Graduate students provide the clinical services at the counseling centers and are overseen by a clinic director, assistant clinic director, and 15 licensed supervisors.

===Bachelor&#x27;s Degree for Professionals===
Formally named the Adult Degree Evening Program (ADEP), the bachelor&#x27;s degree for Professionals is aimed at working professionals who want to earn a bachelor&#x27;s degree in a compressed timeline. Courses are offered in the evenings at the main Thousand Oaks campus as well as at satellite campuses in Woodland Hills and Oxnard.

===Special programs===

Special academic programs include an honors program, cooperative (work-study) education, accelerated degree programs, study abroad, advanced placement credit, self-designed majors, part-time degrees, adult education programs, internships, weekend programs, summer sessions, independent studies, double majors, and more. Study abroad programs, internships and exchange programs are offered in countries such as Australia, Belgium, Germany, Hong Kong, India, Mexico, Sweden, Tanzania, and Thailand. The university has an arrangement for off-campus studies at Wagner College, American University (&quot;Washington, D.C. Semester&quot;). The Washington, D.C., program is open for students in every field of study and allows students to live, work and study for one semester in Washington. While completing a professional internship and taking academic night courses, they also participate in various field trips, seminars, orientation sessions, etc. Students are housed in furnished condominiums situated across the Potomac River in the Rosslyn area of Arlington, Virginia.

Amgen, the world&#x27;s largest biotechnology company, and Baxalta are located near Cal Lutheran and hire graduates each year. As of 1995, CLU had 65 Amgen employees enrolled in its adult education program. Amgen and Cal Lutheran have also held partnership lecture series.

==Creative arts==
===Music Department===

Creative arts have been an important part of the college since its first opening in the fall of 1961. The college&#x27;s first music department was set up by choir director C. Robert Zimmerman. Joining the staff early on to provide orchestral direction was Walter Birkedahl, who stayed until 1965. Another pioneer faculty member was violinist Betty Shirley, who rehearsed and built string sections of the college orchestra. As the founding conductor of the Youth Symphony Orchestra, Shirley was also the founding concertmistress of the CLC Conejo Symphony Orchestra. Others included Art Moorefield, a teacher of music history and former instructor at Cincinnati Conservatory of Music, and Carl Swanson, a graduate of Augustana College, Rock Island, and Gert Muser, a voice teacher trained in Germany. The concert and chapel choirs had their first performance during the CLC&#x27;s dedication in October 1961. A highlight of the dedication was “A Mighty Fortress Is Our God” performed by the newly formed orchestra and choir. The premiere performance of the orchestra was held in December 1961 at the Newbury Park Academy in neighboring Newbury Park, CA. The 37-member choir performed shortly thereafter at the Holy Trinity Lutheran Church on the college campus. The first choir tour was held in early 1962 and began the tradition of annual tours, first and foremost to the Southwest, but also in the Pacific Northwest and Hawai’i. In the early 1970s, the orchestra and choir held their initial appearance at the Music Center in Los Angeles where they performed in the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion. During the 1970s, guest artists such as Roger Williams, Myron Floren, Gordon MacRae, Marni Nixon, Florence Henderson, and others made their appearance on CLC concert tours.

Elmer Ramsey formed the Conejo Pops Orchestra, which is made up of alumni. The orchestra has performed with Tex Beneke, Harry James and Glenn Miller orchestras. Ramsey also founded and was the conductor of Conejo Symphony Orchestra, which was a precursor to the present-day New West Symphony.

Some early musicals included &quot;H.M.S. Pinafore&quot;, &quot;South Pacific&quot;, &quot;Pirates of Penzance&quot;, &quot;Man of La Mancha&quot;, &quot;The Music Man&quot;, &quot;Oklahoma!&quot;, and &quot;Fiddler on the Roof&quot;. Although the CLC-Conejo Symphony Orchestra had operated as an independent organization with its own board of directors, the orchestra had many student members and presented its concerts in the college auditorium for many decades.

Besides tours throughout the United States, the choir has also arranged international tours to England, Italy, Norway, and Sweden. They have performed at venues such as St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica in Rome, Bergen Cathedral in Norway, the Coventry and York Minster cathedrals in the UK, and the Avery Fisher Hall at Lincoln Center and Carnegie Hall in New York. Notable performers with the choir have included composer David Lang, Esa-Pekka Salonen, Steven Stucky, Henry Brant, Morten Lauridsen, Richard Elliott, and Grammy Award winners Eric Whitacre and Hila Plitmann.

===Drama Department===

The CLC Drama Department has been an integral part of the Creative Arts Division since the first semester. Every spring and fall, plays were presented and the Drama Department joined the Music- and Art Departments to present the Creative Arts Festivals, often performing plays from Shakespeare. Dale Melsness designed and directed one of the first productions, known as &quot;The Rivalry&quot;, a 1964 play based on the Lincoln-Douglas debates. One of the first plays produced was also “Knock Knock, Who’s Dead?”, which ran for three nights in October 1964. Richard Adams joined the staff in 1965 and began training students in children&#x27;s productions in 1966. Plays would be introduced at the campus Little Theatre before touring local Conejo Valley elementary schools. The first children&#x27;s theatre production was “Land of the Dragon.” Among the other plays in the early years were “Kind Lady” and “Death of a Salesman.” A high school drama was held on campus in February 1967 starring Buddy Ebsen, an actor known for his role in &quot;The Beverly Hillbillies&quot;. Another 1967 highlight was the celebration of the 500th anniversary for the Lutheran Reformation which was held in Los Angeles. Professor Powers scripted a program which was presented for 15,000 spectators. The CLC&#x27;s Little Theatre was later transformed in the 1970s and became the headquarters for the college drama. A performer in the 1970s was Don Haskell, who later returned to CLC as an instructor and manager for the Audio Visual Department and television station. Another notable performer was Mike Eichman who in 1971 wrote “Caged”, and later went on to write new plays after leaving CLC.

Other notable drama performers at CLC included professor Elmer Ramsey&#x27;s children, Janine Jessup and Douglas. Douglas would later work for a variety of Walt Disney productions, while Janine would later manage the Roscoe Dye Center in New York. A notable play at CLC was “I. Berlin,” which was directed by Don Haskell and staged in 1978. Another famous play was “The Glass Menagerie,” which was directed by Adams, a professor who helped stage over a hundred productions during his time at the college. A year prior to Adams’ retirement in 1984, Michael Arndt of Pacific Lutheran University was hired to run the Drama Department.

In 2003, the Mainstage Theatre production of Noël Coward’s &quot;Hay Fever&quot; was selected for performance at the Kennedy Center American College Theater Festival, which was held at Utah State University in February. As one of the eight productions selected from Region VIII, Hay Fever was automatically submitted for consideration for a performance at the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C. CLU won its first national awards in 2019, when the school play &quot;Columbinus&quot; won two awards during the 2019 festival: a Distinguished Performance and Production Ensembles Award and a Citizen Artist Award. The play was one of seven picked for the festival among 200 plays from Southern California, Guam, Hawai&#x27;i, Arizona, Nevada, and Utah. It was also performed three times at the Los Angeles Theatre Center.

Actor Lane Davies has co-founded the Kingsmen Shakespeare Company in cooperation with the university. Kingsmen Shakespeare Company was listed, in 2004, as a Major Festival in the book &quot;Shakespeare Festivals Around the World&quot; by Marcus D. Gregio.

===Visual Arts===
The college&#x27;s first art classes were held by art professor Gladys Hendricks in the remodeled Pederson garage adjacent to the Pederson Ranch house. Hendricks operated an art studio in Los Angeles and came to CLC from the Los Angeles City School system and had also taught at University of Kansas and Bethany College. During the CLC&#x27;s second academic year, Bernardus &quot;Ben&quot; Weber and Jerald Slattum were hired in order to teach drawing, painting, pottery, and sculpture. Slattum, a graduate of Pacific Lutheran University, came to CLC after having had successful exhibitions at the Los Angeles County Museum as well as in New York and Tucson, Arizona, where he had received the Purchase Award. Weber worked in his own Thousand Oaks studio when approached and hired by President Dahl. Some of Weber&#x27;s students continued their studies in the Netherlands through a special internship program initiated by Weber with glass and porcelain manufacturers. Some of these students later gained national reputations, including John Luebtow, Bill Payne, Bill Olson, Mark Gulsrud, and John Merkel.

Art exhibits by senior students are traditionally held each spring in the Art Department and is a requirement for receiving a bachelor&#x27;s degree in art. In earlier years, exhibits were held monthly in the Student Union Building. The Art Department has for long played an important role in the Creative Arts Festival. It was through the work and efforts of art historian professor Jerald Slattum that the college acquired a collection of primitive New Guinea art through Ernest LaBoyteaux of Santa Barbara. Slattum annually took art students on international tours to countries such as Mexico, Bolivia, Peru, and Chile. In the early 1980s, the Art Department expanded to also include photography and hired an instructor to teach both beginning and advanced photography. A dark room was first created in the 1980s in order to handle photography student needs.

The Communication Department has a concentration in television and film productions, which offers courses such as Politics in Film and Film Theory. CLU also offers a bachelor&#x27;s degree in multimedia, which includes a track for “high definition digital cinema.” Beginning in the fall of 2019, CLU is adding a film and television major with the choice of concentrating in production or film studies.

==Residence life==
California Lutheran University maintains a policy of guaranteed on-campus housing for all four years if students elect to do so. On-campus housing or living at home is required for freshmen and sophomores; however, juniors and seniors may elect to live off-campus with friends. 63% of the student body reside on campus as of 2011, while 88% of all freshmen students reside on campus. Alcohol is prohibited on campus.

===Freshmen housing===
Freshmen students living on-campus are eligible to live in one of three residence halls: Mount Clef, Pederson &amp; Thompson, or New West Complex. Mount Clef, Pederson, and Thompson are located on the east side of campus, while New West is located on the west side. Mount Clef features a shared two-suite configuration, where two rooms are connected with a shared bathroom between them. Pederson &amp; Thompson both have open courtyards in the center of the building. Each suite includes two bedrooms, a shared bathroom, and a living room. New West Complex suites include two bedrooms, a shared bathroom, and a living room. All freshmen residence halls include a kitchen which is shared by the building. Meal plans are required for freshmen, and meals are provided at the Ullman Dining Commons on campus.

===Upperclassmen housing===
Sophomore, junior and senior students are allowed to choose to live in a residence hall on the west side of campus. This area contains the New West Complex (comprising four buildings: North, South, West, and Potenberg halls), the Old West Complex (comprising four buildings: Afton, Janss, Rasmussen, and Conejo halls), the Mogen Hall Apartments, Grace Hall, and Trinity Hall. Traditionally, New West attracts much of the sophomore student body, Old West the juniors, and Mogen and Grace the seniors. However, in recent years there has been a virtual complete mixing of sophomores, juniors, and seniors all throughout Old West, New West, Mogen, Grace, and Trinity.

====Special housing options and graduate housing====
Kramer Court is a special housing option for undergraduate students. It is located on the east side of campus and each unit includes a living room, two bedrooms, a backyard, and many other features not common to other on-campus housing. These units are application-based and are usually occupied by sophomores, juniors and seniors. The third floor of Grace Hall has been converted to graduate student housing.

==Student body==

The CLU student body consists of approximately 3,499 students as of 2009, originating from 43 U.S. states and U.S. territories, and 47 countries. 80 percent were from California, and 56 percent of students were female. In 2018, 54 percent of incoming freshman students were from Ventura and Los Angeles counties.

As of 2011, 60% the student body were Caucasian-American, 16.4% Hispanic-American, 5.5% Asian-American, 3.6% African-American, and 0.9% Native-American. 62% of students were female, while 38% were male. 6.7 percent of the student body were international students. There were 90 international undergraduate students representing 20 countries as of 2010. From 2008 to 2016, the percentage of Hispanic undergraduate students increased from 14% to 29%.

The average class size is 16 students. The university has 75 registered organizations, 11 honor societies, and 3 religious organizations. Student clubs include Asian Club and Friends, Brothers &amp; Sisters United, Latin American Student Organization, United Students of the World, Chinese Students Association, among others.

Cal Lutheran had 150 Jewish students as of 2016. A Rabbi is a member of the campus ministry and participates in weekly chapel services. The Hillel Club is an on-campus organization for Jewish students advised by campus Rabbi Belle Michael. The club is run by a team of students with support from the university&#x27;s Hillel Advisory Board, made up of community leaders, alumni, faculty, staff and parents.

It is located in an area with a conservative political nature. A large number of students have organized a Republican Club which has gained national prominence by having &quot;the highest ratio of club members to number of students of any College Republican club in California.&quot; Some of their 1997 missions included adding an American flag to every classroom and having Christian prayers at student senate meetings. CLU&#x27;s College Republicans doubled its membership in the fall of 2008.

The freshman retention rate was 80% as of 2011. 65 percent of graduates go on to further study within 1 year of graduation. 78 percent of freshmen return for sophomore year.

===Admission===

The university has an admission rate of 62 percent (2010). Enrolled students had an SAT Critical Reading range of 490–580, SAT Math range of 510–610, and a SAT Writing range of 490–590. The average high school GPA was 3.8. For admission, the university requires an interview, essay, previous school transcripts, GPA and SAT or ACT scores, as well as TOEFL scores for international students. The university assesses its own entrance difficulty level as moderately difficult.

===ASCLU-G Student Government===

As of the 2009–2010 academic year, the student government of California Lutheran University is divided into three branches, each possessing different responsibilities. The ASCLU-G (Associated Students of California Lutheran University Government) comprises the Senate, Programs Board, and Executive Cabinet. For Senate and Programs Board, there are four elected positions available per class level as well as a transfer student, recorder, and commuter student position. The Executive Cabinet is made up largely of students who have served on ASCLU-G for one or more years and contains the offices of the ASCLU President, Programs Board Director, Senate Director, Executive Recorder, and ASCLU Controller. Meetings are held Monday nights, and the entire student body is welcome to attend. Elections are held in the spring semester for all positions for the next academic year and in the fall semester to elect the four freshmen positions and any unfilled spots from the spring election.

==== Senate ====
The ASCLU Senate is primarily responsible for the financial needs of the students. Some of their duties include (but are not limited to): approving and allocating funds to new campus clubs, purchasing equipment for residence halls, and discussing and/or changing campus dining policies. The Senate is usually divided into three or four committees, headed by a committee chair (who has usually served on Senate for one or more years), and each has a specific jurisdiction regarding campus policies.

==== Programs Board ====
The ASCLU-G Programs Board is primarily responsible for planning, organizing, financing, and running many of the on- and off-campus events that go on throughout each academic year. The principal event that Programs Board is responsible for is known as &quot;Club Lu&quot;, a free event for traditional undergraduate students every Friday night. Each Club Lu event is different; previous events include rollerskating, on-campus dances, ice skating, bowling, movie nights, the Homecoming carnival, Christmas festivals, and talent shows. Programs Board is also responsible for planning larger off-campus events such as the Homecoming Dance and Spring Formal. Like Senate, Programs Board is divided into three or four committees, each headed by a committee chair (who has usually served on Programs Board for one or more years), and each is assigned specific events to plan throughout the academic year.

==Norwegian roots==
California Lutheran University is located on land which was donated by the Pedersons from the Norwegian Colony. The road which it is located on, Olsen Road, is named for Norwegian pioneer Nils Olsen of the Norwegian Colony. The nearby 7-acre Spring Meadow Park, which is located on Olsen Road east of CLU, is dedicated to the early Norwegians who settled the area.

The university&#x27;s ties to Norway remain strong. In 2017, twenty percent of the international undergraduate students were from Norway. CLU gave $15,000 in scholarships to its Norwegian students in 2014. As of 2015, the university gave $18,000 in scholarships to its forty Norwegian students. CLU is among the most popular U.S. universities for Norwegian undergraduate students. CLU is a partnership school with the Norway-America Association.

The Scandinavian influence can continue to be seen in the spring Scandinavian Cultural Festival and in the names of buildings on campus and local streets, many named for prominent Norwegians who helped establish CLU. An example is Lars Pederson&#x27;s original home which has been relocated to Faculty Street on campus. It is known as Pederson House and Water Tower and is designated Ventura County Historic Landmark number 45 and Thousand Oaks Historical Landmark number 3. A bronze statue of Richard Pederson was dedicated on April 18, 2015, next to the flagpoles near the Soiland Humanities Center. Nearby Pederson Road is also named for the Pederson family.

===Scandinavian Festival===

The Scandinavian Festival (“Scan Fest”) is an annual weekend spring festival which takes place at the university campus. Founded by Swedish-American professor Armour Nelson and Norwegian-American John Nordberg, the festival began as a celebration of the history of the college and the surrounding area, which was settled by Norwegians in the 1890s. The first festival was held in 1974 and attracted 600 visitors. Consuls from Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Iceland, and Finland also participated. While the first Scandinavian Festival took place in the college gymnasium, the festival is currently held across the university campus. The festival stage and children&#x27;s craft activities are located in Kingsmen Park, vendor booths can be found along Memorial Parkway, and exhibits and specialty programs often take place in Samuelson Chapel. The event celebrates the cultures of the Nordic countries – Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Iceland, Finland, as well as the Arctic&#x27;s indigenous Sami people of northernmost Scandinavia. The festival features folk dancing, traditional music, lectures, local cuisine, vendors, demonstrations, and more. Previous festivals have included puppet shows of Hans Christian Andersen stories, authentic Viking village replicas, Dala horse croquet, the ancient Viking game kubb, and more. Food served often includes Danish aebleskiver, Norwegian lefse, Swedish pancakes, Swedish meatballs, open-faced sandwiches as well as Scandinavian snacks, pastries, and ice cream. Vendors on site sell various authentic and traditional Scandinavian merchandise. The festival has received much assistance from the Sons of Norway, the Vasa Lodge, and the CLC Women&#x27;s League and the Guild. The Ingeborg Estergren Scholarship has also been awarded at the event.

The festival is produced by the Scandinavian American Cultural and Historical Foundation with support from California Lutheran University. Scandinavian American Cultural and Historical Foundation is located in a house on Faculty Street. The Scandinavian Cultural Center houses Scandinavian artifacts, literature, and oral history recorded on tapes.

==Student research and publications==
CLU houses two annual undergraduate research events: the Festival of Scholars and the Student Research Symposium. The Festival of Scholars is a week-long presentation of scholarly work, presented by the undergraduate and graduate students from the College of Arts and Sciences, the Graduate School of Education and the School of Management. Student researchers participate in oral presentations, art exhibitions, panel discussions, teaching demonstrations, poster sessions, multimedia displays, and recitals.

===University Press===
California Lutheran College University Press has published books such as &quot;California Lutheran College: The First Quarter Century&quot; (1984), &quot;The Temescals of Arroyo Conejo&quot; (1982), &quot;Voyages&quot; (1977), &quot;Gaylerd Falde: A Bishop For His Time&quot; (1993), &quot;Hiking In Wildwood Regional Park: Natural History, Folklore, and Trail Guide&quot; (2000), &quot;The Art Of TRAC2015&quot; (2015), and several books by Barbara J. Collins.

==Athletics==


The California Lutheran (Cal Lutheran) athletic teams are called the Kingsmen and Regals. The university is a member of the Division III level of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), primarily competing in the Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (SCIAC) since the 1991–92 academic year. The Kingsmen and Regals previously competed in the Golden State Athletic Conference (GSAC) of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA) 1986–87 to 1988–89; and as an NAIA Independent from 1989–90 to 1990–91.

Cal Lutheran competes in 22 NCAA-sanctioned intercollegiate varsity sports: Men&#x27;s sports (Kingsmen) include baseball, basketball, cross country, golf, football, soccer, swimming &amp; diving, tennis, track &amp; field, volleyball and water polo; while women&#x27;s teams (Regals) include basketball, cross country, golf, lacrosse, soccer, softball, swimming &amp; diving, tennis, track and field, volleyball and water polo.

===Club sports and intramurals===
Rugby, ice hockey, handball, and frisbee are offered as club sports, while intramural sports include dodgeball, flag football, bowling, softball, and more.

===Accomplishments===
From 1991 to 2002, the university won 26 SCIAC championships, averaging more than five per season. , CLU has won 55 league championships. Twenty-five percent of students participate in the university&#x27;s intercollegiate sports. As a Division III member, the university does not offer athletic scholarships.

===Kingsmen football===


The football team won the NAIA National Championship in 1971, its only national championship to date. Head coach Robert Shoup was named NAIA Coach of the Year that season. He led the Kingsmen to 13 NAIA District 3 Championships and the 5 playoffs in his 17 years as coach. The current head coach is Anthony Lugo.

CLU joined the NCAA in 1991 and began playing at the Division II level as a member of the Western Football Conference. As a SCIAC member, the Kingsmen won the conference championship in 2007, 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012. Running back Brian Stuart received the Player of the Year award in 2009. The team has a SCIAC rivalry with the Redlands Bulldogs where the teams battle each other annually for the trophy known as the Smudge Pot, a perpetual trophy introduced to the rivalry in 2012.

Notable players have included Brian Kelley and Sam Cvijanovich, who were drafted after the 1971 NAIA Championship win. Other notable players include Hank Bauer, who retired from the San Diego Chargers in 1982, and Jerry Palmquist who played for the Denver Broncos. Gary Loyd was drafted by the New Orleans Saints, William “Robbie” Robinson by the Pittsburgh Steelers, Gary Hamm by the Toronto Argonauts, Charlie McShane by the Seattle Seahawks, and Russ Jensen by the Los Angeles Express. Other notable football players and coaches of CLU include Tom Herman, Rod Marinelli, Eric Rogers, Cory Undlin, Phil Frye, and Dave Aranda. Ralph Miller became a founding member of the National Football League Players Association and has played for the New Orleans Saints, Houston Oilers, Philadelphia Eagles, San Diego Chargers, New York Giants, and San Francisco 49ers.

====History====
Luther Schwich made plans to establish the school&#x27;s first football team in 1962. This was also the same year the sports’ moniker &quot;Kingsmen&quot; was chosen, which was a compromise between those favoring &quot;Condors&quot; and &quot;Shepherds&quot;. Schwich selected Shoup to start the team, a recruiter who had garnered fame at University of California, Santa Barbara, in the mid-1950s. Shoup had also compiled an impressive record at North High School in Torrance prior to his career at CLU. His first assignment was to create a team and recruit players, as well as developing a schedule and securing facilities. The home games were first played at Camarillo High School field. Their first win soon followed, 20–12 over Los Angeles-Pacific. After having played at Thousand Oaks High School for a limited time, Kingsmen football was playing at their own Mount Clef field starting in 1963, a football field on campus which had been readied for the Dallas Cowboys&#x27; summer camp. The first game took place in 1964 against University of La Verne where the Kingsmen jumped to a 13–8 victory.

A winning streak began in 1965 and lasted for several years, bringing in an 8–1 record in 1965 (&quot;Year of the Champions&quot;), 8–2 in 1966 (&quot;Year of the Victors&quot;), and 7–2 in 1967 (&quot;Year of the Conquerors&quot;). In 1968, punter Gary Loyd was named an NAIA All-America and the college appeared for the first time in the national rankings, coming in 9th. Robbie Robinson&#x27;s seventeen field goals in 1969 (&quot;Year of the Warriors&quot;) set an NAIA record and the team moved up to 7th place. From its 8–1 record in 1970, the team moved into its greatest season to date in 1971, and captured the NAIA Division II National Championship, winning against Montana Tech and Westminster College in the playoffs. A college celebration was staged in conjunction with the Dallas Cowboys that won Super Bowl VI of January 1972. Shoup was named NAIA Coach of the Year and also Lutheran Coach of the Year. Following the championship, numerous players were drafted by professional teams, including Brian Kelley by the New York Giants and Sam Cvijanovich who played in the Canadian Football League. Another key performer in the championship game was Mike Sheppard, who later became a professional player at various NFL teams and head coach at California State University Long Beach. Successful years followed the championship, and the team soon appeared three times in the NAIA playoffs: in 1975, 1977 and 1982. As of 1984, Kingsmen football was among the top small college teams in the U.S.

====Cradle of Coaches====

Cal Lutheran has been called the West Coast&#x27;s “Cradle of Coaches”; nearly 1 in 4 of football coach Bob Shoup’s players would go on to coach at some level. 144 players have become football coaches, and several have been drafted to the NFL.

List of notable coaches:

===Kingsmen baseball===

On May 30, 2017, the Kingsmen won their first NCAA Division III baseball title under coach Marty Slimak. Cal Lutheran defeated Washington &amp; Jefferson College 12–4 and 7–3 in the final two games of a best-of-three series, marking the team&#x27;s sixth appearance in the championship round. Slimak has been the head coach since 1994 and is the winningest coach in CLU&#x27;s history. The team has earned seven Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (SCIAC) titles during his tenure and has never placed lower than fourth in the league standings. The team has recorded over twenty wins all but one time and has not had a single losing season during Marty Slimak&#x27;s tenure. He has guided three of his teams to the Division III College World Series where they were the runner-up in 1996 and third-place finishers in 1999. The Kingsmen have played in three West Regionals. Eleven players have been drafted by Major League Baseball (MLB) organizations during Slimak&#x27;s tenure. Besides the NCAA Division III national championship, Slimak has guided CLU to twelve conference championships, thirteen regional appearances and four World Series appearances. He was selected as the American Baseball Coaches Association/Diamond National Division III Coach of the Year in 2017. As of 2014, 24 players have been drafted for MLB organizations.

Baseball Hall of Famer Sparky Anderson helped raise money for the baseball team. Anderson, the first manager to win World Series championships in both the American and National Leagues, was approached by the team&#x27;s coach in 1979 and came up with the idea of golf tournaments to raise money for scholarships. Anderson visited the campus regularly and the university baseball team plays their home games at George Lee &quot;Sparky&quot; Anderson Field, named in honor of the MLB coach. The university was a five-minute walk from Anderson&#x27;s residence in Thousand Oaks. After his retirement, he became a frequent visitor to CLU games.

Anderson has also used his influence to attract top names in the sport to the team. Several CLU players have been drafted for professional teams, including Kevin Gross who was drafted by the Philadelphia Phillis in 1983. Jason Hirsh was drafted by the Houston Astros in the second round of the 2003 Major League Baseball Draft. MLB baseball player Ron Stillwell was the baseball coach from 1972 to 1978, and had a record of 139–100–1 (.581) and was named &quot;NAIA Coach of the Year&quot; in 1976. Rich Hill was the head coach from 1983 to 1985, and Lindsay Meggs was the assistant baseball coach in 1988–89.

The Kingsmen baseball team has played international games, including in Panama City, Panama and San Jose, Costa Rica. A local baseball team, Conejo Oaks, which competes in the California Collegiate League (CCL), play their home games at the university&#x27;s Ullman Stadium (George Lee &quot;Sparky&quot; Anderson Field).

===Regals volleyball===
In 2015, Regals volleyball won the national championship in NCAA Division III women&#x27;s volleyball, defeating Wittenberg University 3–0 on November 21 in the team&#x27;s third appearance in the final round. They were led by head coach Kellee Roesel. In 2016 the team made their ninth straight appearance in the NCAA Tournament and the 17th in school history. The team was ranked number two in the nation as of 2016.

The women&#x27;s volleyball team has for decades periodically been the strongest competitive women&#x27;s sport at CLU. Already in the early 1960s, the team played schools such as UC Santa Barbara, Westmont College and Cal State-Northridge. Handling most of the coaching for women until 1970 was Nena Amundson, who joined the faculty in 1961, hired by Orville Dahl to organize the women&#x27;s athletic programs. California Lutheran College (CLC) joined the Association of Intercollegiate Athletics for Women (AIAW) when formed in 1971, and was a member until 1982 when women joined the men in the NAIA. In 1970, the female athletes adopted the name Regals for all women&#x27;s sports. The team was the runner-up for the 1995 NCAA Division III women&#x27;s volleyball tournament.

Notable players include Joyce Parkel, who was the captain of the volleyball team when it became a runner-up in Southern California in the late 1960s. Olympic Gold Medal swimmer Patty Kempner was the team captain when they qualified for the AIAW Regionals in 1976. The coach while Kempner played was Diana Hoffman, a volleyball player who played on six national volleyball teams and was a member of the 1964 and 1968 U.S. Olympic teams. Guiding the team from last in the league to an AIAW qualifier in two years, Hoffman is recognized for having laid the foundation for continued success for the Regals volleyball team.

===Kingsmen basketball===

Luther Schwich coached the CLC basketball team from 1961 to 1963 before John R. Siemens of Westmont College became the college basketball coach and also assumed the role of Athletic Director upon Schwich&#x27;s resignation. The first doctorate member of the department was Robert Campbell in 1966, who helped the academic status of the Physical Education Department. Notable individual contributions to the sport have included Al Kempfert in the 1960s, who held a 1967 record that stood for years before being toppled by Steve Jasper during the 1972–73 season. Don Bielke, a former professional NBA player from the San Francisco Bay Area and a standout at Valparaiso, joined the staff as an instructor and coach in the 1970s. Two winning years are attributed to him: the 1977–78 and 1979–80 seasons. CLC hired Ed Anderson in 1983, a coach from Pacific Lutheran University. Mike Dunlap was the head coach from 1989 to 1994 and guided the Kingsmen to an 80–55 record. Notable CLU players include Derrick Clark, Tim LaKose, and Jason Smith.

Tim Fusina, former head coach at Centenary University in Hackettstown, New Jersey, became head coach for the team in 2017. Fusina took over after Geoff Dains, who was named interim head coach after the resignation of Rich Rider, the winningest basketball coach in CLU history. Rider had a record of 345–207 in 22 seasons at Cal Lutheran. In the 2016 season, the Kingsmen basketball team went 20–7 past season and placed second in the Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference with a 12–4 record, advancing to the Postseason Tournament for the seventh time.

The Los Angeles Lightning is a professional basketball team based at the Gilbert Sports Arena.

===Kingsmen wrestling===
In the mid-1960s, the college became known throughout the NAIA District III as a wrestling power. Coach Don Garrison had a group of nineteen wrestlers who in 1969 won 12 and lost 3 matches and thereby capturing the NAIA District III championship. Upon Garrison&#x27;s resignation, the team began losing more than it won, the sport subsided and funding became uncertain. Former Olympic wrestler Buck Deadrich took over as coach in 1975 and the team consequentially began to move upwards again. Deadrich, who also served as the Sports Information Director, began recruiting wrestlers to the college. During his tenure, several of the CLC wrestlers competed in national events. Ed Fleming won silver in the Pan American Games in 1980. Kim Coddington won 16 of 20 matches in 1977 and qualified for the national champion. Upon Deadrich’ resignation, the wrestling program struggled for about two years before being eliminated as a competitive sport. Football player Brian Kelley was named the NAIA District III heavyweight wrestling champion in 1970.

===Kingsmen track and field===

Under the coaching of Don Green, men&#x27;s track and field remained a perennial winner in the NAIA. A former coach at Pomona High School, Don Green joined CLC staff in 1970 as both a track coach and defensive football coach. In 1981, the team won the NAIA District III championship, and the track runners annually competed in nationwide events. 1984 was one of the college&#x27;s best years in the national championship: Matt Carney finished sixth in the decathlon and earned an All American honor with 6,269 points. In sprint relays, the team finished in sixth place with a time of 42,2 fielding a team of Ken Coakley, Roger Nelson, Maurice Hamilton and Troy Kuretich all earning All American honors. Green coached 44 All-Americans during his 21 years as coach of the track and field team. He has been inducted into the Mt. San Antonio Relays and Southern Section halls of fame. Besides a coach, he was also the college athletic director for five years in the 1970s. He retired in 1991.

Under the guidance of three different head coaches from 2000 to 2010, Kingsmen track and field has sent multiple representatives to compete at the NCAA national championships. Over that decade, five athletes have earned individual SCIAC titles and sixteen have made All-SCIAC with a top-six finish at conference finals.

===Other sports===
The men&#x27;s volleyball team experienced one of its best years in 1978 when it recorded a 15–3 season and entered the NAIA national playoffs, where the team captured fourth place in the nation under Coach Bob Ward and his assistant Don Hyatt. In men&#x27;s tennis, Coach John Siemens Jr. helped the team achieve a number two ranking in the NAIA District III race, the highest tennis achievements for the college. One of the best seasons for the men&#x27;s golf team was in the 1982–83 season when CLC finished seventeenth in the national competition in Texas. During the next season, Coach Bob Shoup was able to send Greg Osbourne to compete in the national competition in Michigan, where he ultimately finished fourth. Osbourne captured the NAIA District III individual championship in 1984 and picked up All-America honors, and raised the bar for the program. He later became a member of the PGA and president of United States Golf Corporation.

Men&#x27;s soccer, which began as a club sport in the 1970s, was organized by Rolf Bell who wanted soccer to become an official sport at CLC. The team first gained recognition when Peter Schraml took over the program in 1978 and the team first recorded their 10–8 victory. Among the standout soccer players were Bruce Myhre, NAIA All Far West Honorable Mention and All District Second Team. Jack Carroll made All District First Team in 1984, while Chris Doheny earned Second Team All District Honors. Another notable player was Foster Campbell, who was named to the SCISA Northern League First Team. Per Ivar Roald, a former member of the Norwegian national youth team, played soccer for the Kingsmen in 1993. In the fall, he led the team with nine goals and seven assists. Another Kingsmen player, Dave Salzwedel, later played in Major League Soccer and the American Professional Soccer League. In women&#x27;s soccer, the Regals have won ten straight league championships.

In women&#x27;s cross-country, Cathy Fulkerson set a school record in 1982 and was the captain of the team for three years and a national AIAW qualifier for three years. Fulkerson won All-American honours at the AIAW nationals of 1979, and the women&#x27;s team won the AIAW Regionals in 1981. Another standout in track and field was Beth Rockliffe who in 1981 won several school records, including in the high jump and javelin. The women&#x27;s softball team hosted the NAIA District III championships in 1984 and Kim Peppi won All District honors for her pitching. The head coach for the softball team is Debby Day, who also is the pitching coach for the Israeli National Team. A Regals lacrosse team will be added in the spring of 2020, making CLU the seventh university in SCIAC to compete in women&#x27;s lacrosse.

A tryout by the Olympic USA Team Handball was held at the university in 2009. With over sixty athletes attending, it was the fourth such tryout organized by the sport&#x27;s governing body and saw the biggest turnout.

==Student media==

&quot;The Echo&quot; is the student news outlet. It has received numerous awards, including a first place in the 2018 California College Media Association Award for Excellence in Student Media. &quot;The Echo&quot; was awarded the highest commendation possible in 1982, the All-American award. &quot;The Morning Glory&quot;, a literary magazine which has been published since 1971, was one of six in the country to receive the Pacemaker Award in 1983. After having won All-American awards for 10 consecutive years, the magazine was inducted into the All American Hall of Fame by the Associated Collegiate Press in 1990. &quot;Morning Glory&quot; won the All-American award for the 19th consecutive year in 1999. It has been named an Associated College Press winner of the All-American and National Pacemaker Awards.

CLUTV is a student made TV station operating at Cal Lutheran. It features programs such as news, collegiate sports, and soap operas. The television station has acquired a news van which is frequently used for broadcasting of sporting events.

===KCLU-FM===
KCLU-FM is a non-commercial radio station located on the campus of California Lutheran University. The National Public Radio-member station broadcasts to 130,000 weekly listeners in Ventura County at 88.3 FM, in southern Santa Barbara County at 102.3 FM and 1340 AM, on the Central Coast at 89.7 FM, and in San Luis Opispo at 92.1 FM. KCLU purchased KIST-AM 1340 for $1.44 million in April 2008, becoming the only NPR station on AM radio in Southern California. As of 2008, KCLU has won over 100 major journalism awards, including numerous awards from the Associated Press and the Radio and Television News Association of Southern California. Between 2001 and 2010 KCLU has won more than 60 Golden Mike Awards. Between 2001 and 2010 KCLU also won 18 Edward R. Murrow Awards for journalistic excellence.

The Thousand Oaks City Council approved a special use permit in 1993 which allowed California Lutheran University to construct a radio tower and FM antenna on top of Mountclef Ridge.

==Professional football==
===Dallas Cowboys===
Tex Schramm, the general manager of the Dallas Cowboys, was searching for a California summer home for his NFL team in the early 1960s. Schramm made a meeting with Orville Dahl, the president of California Lutheran College, in 1962. Dahl told Schramm that the college would expand the following year by adding a gymnasium, practice fields, training facilities, and dormitory accommodations for football players. The team was then among the newest expansion teams in the National Football League. The college functioned as the team&#x27;s training camp for 27 years: from 1963 to 1989. The relationship between the school and the team has been described as one of the friendliest relationships between a professional sports organization and a college. CLU football coach Bob Shoup was instrumental in helping to bring the Dallas Cowboys to Cal Lutheran. President Tex Schramm liked the CLU campus due to the weather being cooler than in Dallas, and due to its isolated location and relatively close proximity to a major airport.

The university benefited greatly from the Cowboys’ presence. Coach Bob Shoup has been described as “de facto host” for the NFL team, and he was able to pick up techniques from the team by spending time around its players and coaches. Tom Landry welcomed college coaches who wanted to observe him and his staff, and he reached out to the coaches at CLU. Landry and Shoup also put together two major events each summer: a coaching clinic which drew as many as 500 people and a charity function known as the Christian Businessmen&#x27;s Club Day. From its beginning, CLU held an annual “Welcome Cowboys” dinner, which was sponsored by the Community Leaders Club at Mount Clef Stadium. The Dallas Cowboys helped build locker rooms, donated weights to CLU and, from 1980 to 2002, the university awarded the Landry Medal named after the team&#x27;s coach to honor those who have been an inspiration to youth. The medal was given to Nancy Reagan, Roger Staubach, Bob Hope, Charles Schulz, Sparky Anderson, Jim Murray, Gene Stallings, John Wooden, and others. Although university officials claimed CLU financially broke even by housing the team each summer, they also pointed out the benefits of the team&#x27;s presence, including the nationwide media attention.

The Dallas Cowboys first settled at their CLC training camp in the 1963 season. Bob Lilly, a defensive tackle for fourteen seasons (1961–1974), described his time at CLC in his memoir &quot;A Cowboy’s Life&quot; (2008): “The mountainous terrain surrounding the college was beautiful. Every day in the late afternoon we would jog over the mountains. Behind them stood a large ranch that was home to many movie sets. As a matter of fact, the TV series &quot;Gunsmoke&quot; was filmed there as well as the reenactment of the historic flag-raising on Iwo Jima.” The summers at CLC originally consisted of two daily practices – one at 9 am and another at 3 pm.

In the 1970s, Cal Lutheran was noted for its strong football program and the college was home to three athletic fields, a weight-lifting yard, and a couple of running tracks. Cliff Harris, who played safety for the Cowboys through the 1970s, was the roommate of defensive end Pat Toomay at CLC. Harrison described his experiences at the college in his book &quot;Captain Crash and the Dallas Cowboys: From Sideline to Goal Line with Cliff Harris&quot; (2014).

Bill Bates’s sleepwalking reached its peak during his first Cal Lutheran summer camp in 1983, where he knocked a dresser on top of roommate John Warren while they were both asleep. They were also roommates of Mark Tuinei and Chris Schultz during their summers at CLC.

The building that once housed the team has been transformed into family homes. In 1987, Tom Landry told &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; that the facilities at Cal Lutheran had become one of the best in the NFL.

===Los Angeles Rams===

The Los Angeles Rams have used the university as their year-round training facilities since 2016. California Lutheran University was deemed the best place available when the Rams returned to Southern California after 21 years in St. Louis, Missouri. On March 30, 2016, the president of CLU announced that the NFL team would construct a training facility on the north side of campus. 

At an annual priority-setting meeting held by the Thousand Oaks City Council in 2018, the council made finding the team a permanent home in the city a number one priority. The original contract between the Rams and CLU was a two-year deal, but an extension was made allowing the team to practice at CLU until at least 2022. The training facilities are located off of Campus Drive and is a fenced-in area that is not open to the public. Although temporary buildings will be removed when the Rams construct their permanent training complex in Los Angeles, the university&#x27;s athletic teams will use the fields after the team departs, and the university will be able to utilize the infrastructure for future athletic facilities.

Following the November 2018 Thousand Oaks shooting, members of the CLU Choir performed the National Anthem at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum before the start of the Rams’ game against the Kansas City Chiefs.

==Recreation==

The northern section of the university campus contains trail access to Mount Clef Ridge Trail in Mount Clef Open Space. This trail later becomes Santa Rosa Trail, which enters Wildwood Regional Park and follows Mount Clef Ridge. Wildflower Butte Trail is another hiking trail which connects to Wildwood, with a trailhead from the parking area on Campus Drive, north of Olsen Road. This is an ancient Chumash trail which connects to Chumash sites such as Ven-37, Ven-6, and former Chumash village sites within Wildwood.

Mount Clef Ridge Open Space, which borders the university on the north, totals and supports fauna such as mountain lion, coyote, deer, and gray fox. The open space surrounds Mount Clef Ridge, a volcanic ridge named for the California Lutheran Education Foundation (CLEF), which worked to establish CLU in the 1950s. The ridgeline extends from the Norwegian Grade to Wildwood Regional Park.

Besides the rock formation that spells out “CLU” atop Mount Clef Ridge, a cross is located immediately east from the landmark letters on the hilltop. The 30-foot tall cross is made from old telephone poles. This site on Mount Clef is known as Dr. Rudy Edmund Living Laboratory and was dedicated on May 5, 2003, in order to enhance student research in biology and geology. The trailhead is found at the north end of Mountclef Boulevard (corner of Mountclef Blvd. and Magellan Street).

Woken Walk is a hiking trail along the riparian corridor behind the university&#x27;s athletics complex. It was dedicated in October 2009 and goes from Mountclef Boulevard to the Riparian Building.

==In popular culture==

Scenes from the film &quot;Spartacus&quot; (1960) were shot directly behind the university, where an army can be seen storming off Mount Clef Ridge.

A Western village was erected on campus during the filming of &quot;Welcome to Hard Times&quot; (1967).

The Dodge City set in &quot;Gunsmoke&quot; (1955–1975) was located on a back lot at CLU, and &quot;Wuthering Heights&quot; (1939) was filmed on land which later became the university campus (Olsen Ranch).

Scenes from &quot;Lassie&quot; (1954) were shot on and around the university campus. Furthermore, an episode (&quot;The Good Doctor&quot;) of the television series &quot;Highway to Heaven&quot; (1984–1989) was partially filmed here and features the university football team. A horror movie, &quot;The Clonus Horror&quot; (1979), was partially filmed at CLU.

An episode of &quot;Behind the Lights: the Coolest Jobs Behind the Biggest Sports&quot; (2012), a series BBC Worldwide is co-producing with Break Media, was filmed at CLU and featured the captain of the United States men&#x27;s national water polo team.

The documentary series &quot;All or Nothing: A Season with the Los Angeles Rams&quot; (2017) also features scenes from CLU.

Members of the Theater Department were featured in an episode of the HBO program &quot;Vice News Tonight&quot; on November 19, 2018, where they discussed the CLU play &quot;Columbinus&quot; based on the Columbine High School massacre.

==Notable people==

===Alumni===

*Catherine Byrne – politician serving as the Nevada State Controller
*Desta Hagos – Ethiopian painter
* Eric Dever fine artist, painter
* Jason Dolley – actor
* Jacquelynne Fontaine – 2006 Miss California
*Joe Fuca – businessman and CEO of Reputation.com 
*Ray Haynes – former California State Senator and Assemblyman
* Carol Heyer – author and illustrator
*Diop Kamau – civil rights activist
*Cortney Palm – actress
*Bianca Santos – actress
*Carly Schroeder – actress
*Michael Dean Shelton – actor
* Alison Viktorin – voice actress for &quot;Adult Swim&quot;
* Talon Warburton – actor and voice actor 
* Anna Wikland – Country Director for Google Sweden
* James Ware – retired federal judge of the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California
* Moe Set Wine – Miss Universe Myanmar 2013

===Faculty===

*Barbara J. Collins – author, ecologist, geologist, botanist, and professor
*Roland Dille – president of Minnesota State University Moorhead from 1968 to 1994
*Paul Egertson – clergyman and Bishop of the Southwest California Synod of the ELCA
* Guy Erwin – first Native-American and first openly gay bishop in the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America; first full-time holder of CLU&#x27;s first endowed chair, the Gerhard and Olga J. Belgum Chair of Lutheran Confessional Theology.
*Elwin D. Farwell – sixth president of Luther College, Iowa
*William Gartner – professor of entrepreneurship
*Jeff Gorell – deputy mayor of the City of Los Angeles for Homeland Security and Public Safety; former state assemblyman
* James Kallas – former NFL player for the Chicago Bears
*Paul Orfalea – founder of Kinko&#x27;s (FedEx Office)
*Dru Pagliassotti – author and editor of &quot;The Harrow&quot;
* Michael Pearce – figurative painter and author
*Elmer Ramsey – conductor of Conejo Symphony Orchestra
*Bernardus Weber – Dutch sculptor, draughtsman, and pastellist
* Cynthia Wyels – mathematician

==References==
==External links==
* Athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1026831" start="0" end="30" title="California Lutheran University" label="California Lutheran University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026831" start="32" end="35" title="California Lutheran University" label="CLU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026831" start="37" end="49" title="California Lutheran University" label="Cal Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026831" start="54" end="60" title="California Lutheran University" label="Cal Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="67" end="85" title="private university" label="private university"/>
<link wikidata="Q208447" start="89" end="114" title="Thousand Oaks, California" label="Thousand Oaks, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="166" end="204" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026831" start="248" end="275" title="California Lutheran University" label="California Lutheran College"/>
<link wikidata="Q108127" start="382" end="396" title="Ventura County, California" label="Ventura County"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="513" end="524" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337818" start="780" end="794" title="Woodland Hills, Los Angeles" label="Woodland Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q474655" start="810" end="826" title="Westlake Village, California" label="Westlake Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q209338" start="828" end="834" title="Oxnard, California" label="Oxnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q643953" start="836" end="847" title="Santa Maria, California" label="Santa Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="853" end="861" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542329" start="978" end="987" title="Bob Shoup" label="Bob Shoup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="1124" end="1127" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q22019811" start="1182" end="1199" title="1971 NAIA Division II football season" label="NAIA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4244839" start="1245" end="1264" title="Hollywood Palladium" label="Hollywood Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064741" start="1325" end="1335" title="Super Bowl VI" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="1419" end="1440" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q208447" start="1565" end="1578" title="Thousand Oaks, California" label="Thousand Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="1646" end="1655" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q48785335" start="1687" end="1703" title="Norwegian Colony" label="Norwegian Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="2725" end="2738" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="2751" end="2762" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q94081" start="2772" end="2780" title="Bob Hope" label="Bob Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="2790" end="2799" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q114142" start="2811" end="2838" title="Violeta Barrios de Chamorro" label="Violeta Barrios de Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="2858" end="2875" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q47216" start="2915" end="2931" title="Condoleezza Rice" label="Condoleezza Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="3032" end="3041" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555617" start="3072" end="3085" title="Conejo Valley" label="Conejo Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q382109" start="3172" end="3187" title="Leland Stanford" label="Leland Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q47265" start="3211" end="3232" title="Palo Alto, California" label="Palo Alto, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203174" start="3388" end="3401" title="Del Rey Hills, Los Angeles" label="Del Rey Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q275098" start="3497" end="3509" title="Harry Culver" label="Harry Culver"/>
<link wikidata="Q51133" start="3560" end="3570" title="King Vidor" label="King Vidor"/>
<link wikidata="Q115103611" start="3576" end="3589" title="Joseph Mesmer" label="Joseph Mesmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q200334" start="3646" end="3655" title="campanile" label="campanile"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="3790" end="3807" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786078" start="3935" end="3962" title="Loyola Marymount University" label="Loyola Marymount University"/>
<link wikidata="Q18374220" start="4094" end="4118" title="American Lutheran Church (1930)" label="American Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q995043" start="4486" end="4506" title="downtown Los Angeles" label="downtown Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656611" start="4599" end="4626" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church (United States)" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="4647" end="4669" title="Minneapolis, Minnesota" label="Minneapolis, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888239" start="4899" end="4932" title="United Lutheran Church in America" label="United Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887733" start="4945" end="4979" title="United Evangelical Lutheran Church" label="United Evangelical Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569330" start="4996" end="5011" title="Augustana Synod" label="Augustana Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5019" end="5031" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484269" start="5048" end="5065" title="GI Bill of Rights" label="GI Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105227" start="5748" end="5760" title="Orville Dahl" label="Orville Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569330" start="5922" end="5947" title="Augustana Lutheran Church" label="Augustana Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6002" end="6015" title="Gaylerd Falde" label="Gaylerd Falde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319697" start="6134" end="6149" title="North Hollywood" label="North Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="6997" end="7014" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7271" end="7299" title="Hollywood First National Bank Building" label="First National Bank Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="7360" end="7369" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q61946670" start="7375" end="7388" title="Raymond Olson" label="Raymond Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577959" start="7896" end="7920" title="San Bernardino Mountains" label="San Bernardino Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754304" start="7925" end="7952" title="Lake Norconian Club" label="abandoned military hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q494707" start="7958" end="7964" title="Corona, California" label="Corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q852638" start="7983" end="7993" title="Dana Point, California" label="Dana Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q212991" start="8032" end="8042" title="Santa Rosa, California" label="Santa Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555617" start="8177" end="8190" title="Conejo Valley" label="Conejo Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="8470" end="8479" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q48785335" start="8579" end="8595" title="Norwegian Colony" label="Norwegian Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="8667" end="8680" title="Sears Roebuck" label="Sears Roebuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641407" start="8712" end="8742" title="Pederson House and Water Tower" label="Pederson House and Water Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773576" start="8832" end="8847" title="Norwegian Grade" label="Norwegian Grade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9080" end="9101" title="First Lutheran Church of Glendale" label="First Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q485716" start="9105" end="9125" title="Glendale, California" label="Glendale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q208447" start="9430" end="9443" title="Thousand Oaks, California" label="Thousand Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q108127" start="10551" end="10565" title="Ventura County, California" label="Ventura County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798301" start="11263" end="11283" title="Lutheran Brotherhood" label="Lutheran Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12855" end="12872" title="Janss Corporation" label="Janss Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705673" start="13352" end="13378" title="Lutheran Church in America" label="Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301911" start="13465" end="13487" title="Texas Lutheran College" label="Texas Lutheran College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439925" start="13492" end="13519" title="Pacific Lutheran University" label="Pacific Lutheran University"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641407" start="13824" end="13838" title="Pederson House and Water Tower" label="Pederson House"/>
<link wikidata="Q153093" start="14133" end="14151" title="Reformation Sunday" label="Reformation Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q855575" start="14218" end="14246" title="A Mighty Fortress Is Our God" label="A Mighty Fortress Is Our God"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987478" start="14747" end="14800" title="Western Association of Schools and Colleges" label="Western Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542329" start="14906" end="14918" title="Bob Shoup" label="Robert Shoup"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="14964" end="14978" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147337" start="15127" end="15135" title="Sit-in" label="sit-down"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="15509" end="15531" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6909299" start="15631" end="15659" title="Vietnam War Moratorium Rally" label="Vietnam War Moratorium Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q61946670" start="15749" end="15762" title="Raymond Olson" label="Raymond Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="15835" end="15846" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="16563" end="16569" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="16575" end="16580" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="16851" end="16861" title="Methodists" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="16866" end="16879" title="Presbyterians" label="Presbyterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="17032" end="17048" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="17205" end="17215" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17217" end="17231" title="Marine Knutson" label="Marine Knutson"/>
<link wikidata="Q61951572" start="18065" end="18080" title="Mark A. Mathews" label="Mark A. Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="18166" end="18178" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439925" start="19069" end="19096" title="Pacific Lutheran University" label="Pacific Lutheran University"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="19133" end="19167" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="19337" end="19348" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q22019811" start="19477" end="19512" title="1971 NAIA Division II football season" label="NAIA Football National Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4244839" start="19544" end="19563" title="Hollywood Palladium" label="Hollywood Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="19588" end="19602" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064741" start="19623" end="19633" title="Super Bowl VI" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q61947927" start="20044" end="20059" title="Jerry H. Miller" label="Jerry H. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374361" start="21148" end="21158" title="Tom Landry" label="Tom Landry"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542329" start="21189" end="21198" title="Bob Shoup" label="Bob Shoup"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="21787" end="21792" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987478" start="21884" end="21927" title="Western Association of Schools and Colleges" label="Western Association of Schools and Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="22286" end="22297" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="22358" end="22364" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136593" start="22418" end="22435" title="Irvine Foundation" label="Irvine Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="22576" end="22593" title="Hispanic-American" label="Hispanic-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q108127" start="22610" end="22624" title="Ventura County, California" label="Ventura County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="23100" end="23110" title="university" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="23212" end="23224" title="liberal arts" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q856234" start="23285" end="23303" title="university library" label="university library"/>
<link wikidata="Q108127" start="23540" end="23554" title="Ventura County, California" label="Ventura County"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="23911" end="23928" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326940" start="24033" end="24040" title="KCLU-FM" label="KCLU-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145784" start="24044" end="24058" title="Non-commercial educational" label="non-commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="24059" end="24071" title="public radio" label="public radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251336" start="24171" end="24184" title="Norman Corwin" label="Norman Corwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133919" start="24417" end="24432" title="Sparky Anderson" label="Sparky Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071896" start="24437" end="24450" title="Tommy Lasorda" label="Tommy Lasorda"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="24549" end="24564" title="doctoral degree" label="doctoral degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q16324878" start="24621" end="24638" title="USA Team Handball" label="USA Team Handball"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24966" end="24990" title="Samuelson Aquatic Center" label="Samuelson Aquatic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q693231" start="25067" end="25105" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national water polo team" label="US Olympic Men&amp;#x27;s Water Polo teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="25477" end="25493" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5772674" start="25675" end="25703" title="Hispanic-serving institution" label="Hispanic-serving institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="25726" end="25754" title="U.S. Department of Education" label="U.S. Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q38806918" start="25817" end="25850" title="2017 NCAA Division III baseball tournament" label="Division III College World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q47216" start="25895" end="25911" title="Condoleezza Rice" label="Condoleezza Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561213" start="25933" end="25966" title="Gilbert Sports and Fitness Center" label="Gilbert Sports and Fitness Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q33127619" start="26017" end="26035" title="Hughes Electronics" label="Hughes Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="26351" end="26370" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q58345424" start="26473" end="26500" title="2018 Thousand Oaks shooting" label="2018 Thousand Oaks shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q849784" start="26562" end="26584" title="L.A. Memorial Coliseum" label="L.A. Memorial Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="26596" end="26612" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="26636" end="26654" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105227" start="26709" end="26721" title="Orville Dahl" label="Orville Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q61946670" start="26735" end="26748" title="Raymond Olson" label="Raymond Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q61951572" start="26762" end="26777" title="Mark A. Mathews" label="Mark A. Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q61947927" start="26791" end="26806" title="Jerry H. Miller" label="Jerry H. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q15439145" start="26820" end="26834" title="Luther Luedtke" label="Luther Luedtke"/>
<link wikidata="Q61948247" start="26876" end="26889" title="Chris Kimball" label="Chris Kimball"/>
<link wikidata="Q94340660" start="26903" end="26919" title="Lori E. Varlotta" label="Lori E. Varlotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="27056" end="27077" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="27081" end="27109" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="27835" end="27841" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="27989" end="28002" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146526" start="28304" end="28309" title="Niche (company)" label="Niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q825316" start="28613" end="28622" title="Money (magazine)" label="Money.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156560" start="28701" end="28709" title="PayScale" label="PayScale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972062" start="28743" end="28761" title="Washington Monthly" label="Washington Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="28813" end="28816" title="MBA" label="MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="28844" end="28857" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="28876" end="28904" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987478" start="29481" end="29524" title="Western Association of Schools and Colleges" label="Western Association of Schools and Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065168" start="29749" end="29795" title="Certified Financial Planner Board of Standards" label="Certified Financial Planner Board of Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="29906" end="29940" title="American Psychological Association" label="American Psychological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013367" start="29952" end="29989" title="Pacific Lutheran Theological Seminary" label="Pacific Lutheran Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4071515" start="30051" end="30085" title="Association of Theological Schools" label="Association of Theological Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970684" start="30116" end="30177" title="National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities" label="National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176420" start="30248" end="30279" title="Council of Independent Colleges" label="Council of Independent Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569720" start="30341" end="30396" title="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="30404" end="30421" title="NCAA Division III" label="NCAA Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="30486" end="30524" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439925" start="30723" end="30750" title="Pacific Lutheran University" label="Pacific Lutheran University"/>
<link wikidata="Q107324715" start="30776" end="30784" title="Master of Public Policy and Administration" label="M.P.P.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q2867925" start="30814" end="30869" title="Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs" label="Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q208447" start="30922" end="30935" title="Thousand Oaks, California" label="Thousand Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q108127" start="30956" end="30982" title="Ventura County, California" label="Ventura County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q842123" start="31112" end="31121" title="chaparral" label="chaparral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561213" start="31221" end="31254" title="Gilbert Sports and Fitness Center" label="Gilbert Sports and Fitness Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048326" start="31509" end="31525" title="Mount Clef Ridge" label="Mount Clef Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561213" start="31609" end="31642" title="Gilbert Sports and Fitness Center" label="Gilbert Sports and Fitness Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133919" start="31698" end="31720" title="George Sparky Anderson" label="George Sparky Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13883551" start="31929" end="31937" title="freshman" label="freshman"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="31938" end="31953" title="Dormitory" label="residence halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088784" start="32576" end="32587" title="Jamba Juice" label="Jamba Juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q37158" start="32601" end="32610" title="Starbucks" label="Starbucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q48282" start="32696" end="32709" title="upperclassman" label="upperclassman"/>
<link wikidata="Q128093" start="33231" end="33237" title="e-book" label="e-book"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641407" start="33975" end="33989" title="Pederson House and Water Tower" label="Pederson Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105227" start="34083" end="34095" title="Orville Dahl" label="Orville Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521623" start="34190" end="34213" title="Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design" label="LEED Certified building"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="34381" end="34394" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q62566002" start="34586" end="34601" title="Bernardus Weber" label="Bernardus Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641407" start="34762" end="34792" title="Pederson House and Water Tower" label="Pederson House and Water Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q188779" start="34895" end="34904" title="Norwegians" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958901" start="34964" end="34996" title="Ventura County Historic Landmarks &amp;amp; Points of Interest" label="Ventura County Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048326" start="35595" end="35611" title="Mount Clef Ridge" label="Mount Clef Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="35774" end="35792" title="1973 energy crisis" label="1973 energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8958004" start="36281" end="36291" title="Yim Fun Fong" label="Katie Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q713223" start="36552" end="36574" title="artist-in-residence" label="residencies by artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="36597" end="36614" title="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex" label="Dallas–Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="37028" end="37039" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q453883" start="37041" end="37052" title="Chuck Close" label="Chuck Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q159907" start="37054" end="37067" title="David Hockney" label="David Hockney"/>
<link wikidata="Q272877" start="37069" end="37084" title="Fernando Botero" label="Fernando Botero"/>
<link wikidata="Q23887615" start="37086" end="37100" title="Diego Lasansky" label="Diego Lasansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="37106" end="37113" title="Picasso" label="Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q62567531" start="37557" end="37575" title="Barbara J. Collins" label="Barbara J. Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q272231" start="38361" end="38370" title="Arboretum" label="Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337818" start="38448" end="38462" title="Woodland Hills, Los Angeles" label="Woodland Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q474655" start="38478" end="38494" title="Westlake Village, California" label="Westlake Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q209338" start="38496" end="38502" title="Oxnard, California" label="Oxnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q643953" start="38504" end="38515" title="Santa Maria, California" label="Santa Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="38521" end="38529" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013367" start="38648" end="38685" title="Pacific Lutheran Theological Seminary" label="Pacific Lutheran Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="39484" end="39487" title="MBA" label="MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="40092" end="40108" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="40114" end="40133" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="41056" end="41072" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="41081" end="41100" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="41126" end="41140" title="Master of Arts" label="Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="41149" end="41182" title="Master of Business Administration" label="Master of Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787220" start="41193" end="41212" title="Master of Education" label="Master of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q107324715" start="41222" end="41264" title="Master of Public Policy and Administration" label="Master of Public Policy and Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="41277" end="41294" title="Master of Science" label="Master of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q837184" start="41315" end="41334" title="Doctor of Education" label="Doctor of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121417" start="41344" end="41364" title="Doctor of Psychology" label="Doctor of Psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="41428" end="41436" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379405" start="41441" end="41449" title="divinity" label="divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="41469" end="41477" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013367" start="41501" end="41538" title="Pacific Lutheran Theological Seminary" label="Pacific Lutheran Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q61947927" start="43269" end="43284" title="Jerry H. Miller" label="Jerry H. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="44012" end="44015" title="MBA" label="MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="44121" end="44138" title="Master of Science" label="Master of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785253" start="44167" end="44177" title="Master of Science in Management" label="Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785250" start="44207" end="44229" title="Master of Science in Information Technology" label="Information Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q107324715" start="44267" end="44309" title="Master of Public Policy and Administration" label="Master of Public Policy and Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862829" start="44336" end="44353" title="multidisciplinary" label="multidisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020261" start="45211" end="45216" title="California Basic Educational Skills Test" label="CBEST"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021117" start="45221" end="45225" title="California Subject Examinations for Teachers" label="CSET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849974" start="45653" end="45672" title="teaching credential" label="teaching credential"/>
<link wikidata="Q837184" start="46113" end="46132" title="Doctor of Education" label="Doctor of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="46421" end="46424" title="American Psychological Association" label="APA"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="46436" end="46445" title="doctorate" label="doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q209338" start="46679" end="46685" title="Oxnard, California" label="Oxnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q474655" start="46690" end="46706" title="Westlake Village, California" label="Westlake Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337818" start="47233" end="47247" title="Woodland Hills, California" label="Woodland Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q209338" start="47252" end="47258" title="Oxnard, California" label="Oxnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="47695" end="47704" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="47706" end="47713" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="47715" end="47722" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="47724" end="47733" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="47735" end="47740" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="47742" end="47748" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="47750" end="47756" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="47758" end="47766" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="47772" end="47780" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605513" start="47842" end="47856" title="Wagner College" label="Wagner College"/>
<link wikidata="Q168000" start="47858" end="47877" title="American University" label="American University"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="47885" end="47901" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="48297" end="48310" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369880" start="48318" end="48325" title="Rosslyn, Arlington, Virginia" label="Rosslyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="48334" end="48353" title="Arlington, Virginia" label="Arlington, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q470517" start="48356" end="48361" title="Amgen" label="Amgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q21970569" start="48415" end="48422" title="Baxalta" label="Baxalta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="48672" end="48685" title="Creative arts" label="Creative arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q10590700" start="49284" end="49297" title="music history" label="music history"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083671" start="49323" end="49355" title="Cincinnati Conservatory of Music" label="Cincinnati Conservatory of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298337" start="49389" end="49419" title="Augustana College, Rock Island Illinois" label="Augustana College, Rock Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="49464" end="49471" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q855575" start="49616" end="49644" title="A Mighty Fortress Is Our God" label="A Mighty Fortress Is Our God"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49772" end="49792" title="Newbury Park Academy" label="Newbury Park Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017236" start="49808" end="49824" title="Newbury Park, CA" label="Newbury Park, CA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49882" end="49910" title="Holy Trinity Lutheran Church (Thousand Oaks)" label="Holy Trinity Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="50045" end="50054" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="50072" end="50089" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="50094" end="50101" title="Hawai’i" label="Hawai’i"/>
<link wikidata="Q981112" start="50184" end="50196" title="Los Angeles Music Center" label="Music Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="50200" end="50211" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250287" start="50240" end="50265" title="Dorothy Chandler Pavilion" label="Dorothy Chandler Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q391591" start="50307" end="50321" title="Roger Williams" label="Roger Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948435" start="50323" end="50335" title="Myron Floren" label="Myron Floren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153004" start="50337" end="50350" title="Gordon MacRae" label="Gordon MacRae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087644" start="50352" end="50363" title="Marni Nixon" label="Marni Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q452749" start="50365" end="50383" title="Florence Henderson" label="Florence Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q62129793" start="50441" end="50453" title="Elmer Ramsey" label="Elmer Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q488352" start="50549" end="50559" title="Tex Beneke" label="Tex Beneke"/>
<link wikidata="Q163861" start="50561" end="50572" title="Harry James" label="Harry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q103651" start="50577" end="50589" title="Glenn Miller" label="Glenn Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956319" start="50715" end="50732" title="New West Symphony" label="New West Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197244" start="50770" end="50785" title="H.M.S. Pinafore" label="H.M.S. Pinafore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535240" start="50799" end="50812" title="South Pacific (musical)" label="South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215463" start="50826" end="50845" title="Pirates of Penzance" label="Pirates of Penzance"/>
<link wikidata="Q559584" start="50859" end="50875" title="Man of La Mancha" label="Man of La Mancha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457220" start="50889" end="50902" title="The Music Man" label="The Music Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364648" start="50916" end="50925" title="Oklahoma!" label="Oklahoma!"/>
<link wikidata="Q487330" start="50943" end="50962" title="Fiddler on the Roof" label="Fiddler on the Roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="51296" end="51303" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="51305" end="51310" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="51312" end="51318" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="51324" end="51330" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="51370" end="51395" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q819531" start="51405" end="51421" title="Bergen Cathedral" label="Bergen Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138070" start="51437" end="51445" title="Coventry Cathedral" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q252575" start="51450" end="51462" title="York Minster" label="York Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q790654" start="51493" end="51510" title="Avery Fisher Hall" label="Avery Fisher Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="51514" end="51528" title="Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts" label="Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="51533" end="51546" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018260" start="51617" end="51627" title="David Lang (composer)" label="David Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q314587" start="51629" end="51646" title="Esa-Pekka Salonen" label="Esa-Pekka Salonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535299" start="51648" end="51661" title="Steven Stucky" label="Steven Stucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606553" start="51663" end="51674" title="Henry Brant" label="Henry Brant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355103" start="51676" end="51692" title="Morten Lauridsen" label="Morten Lauridsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325485" start="51694" end="51709" title="Richard Elliott (organist)" label="Richard Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q726206" start="51736" end="51749" title="Eric Whitacre" label="Eric Whitacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q282560" start="51754" end="51767" title="Hila Plitmann" label="Hila Plitmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="52076" end="52087" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q622354" start="52214" end="52237" title="Lincoln-Douglas debates" label="Lincoln-Douglas debates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555617" start="52535" end="52548" title="Conejo Valley" label="Conejo Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q48808261" start="52687" end="52696" title="Kind Lady (play)" label="Kind Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q820862" start="52703" end="52722" title="Death of a Salesman" label="Death of a Salesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001214" start="52790" end="52801" title="Buddy Ebsen" label="Buddy Ebsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q941737" start="52840" end="52863" title="The Beverly Hillbillies" label="The Beverly Hillbillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="52947" end="52967" title="Lutheran Reformation" label="Lutheran Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="52986" end="52997" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q62129793" start="53531" end="53543" title="Elmer Ramsey" label="Elmer Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="53630" end="53641" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53691" end="53708" title="Roscoe Dye Center" label="Roscoe Dye Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="53712" end="53720" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q678832" start="53840" end="53859" title="The Glass Menagerie" label="The Glass Menagerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q705156" start="54022" end="54035" title="Michael Arndt" label="Michael Arndt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439925" start="54039" end="54066" title="Pacific Lutheran University" label="Pacific Lutheran University"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="54152" end="54163" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485466" start="54172" end="54181" title="Hay Fever (play)" label="Hay Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851929" start="54224" end="54272" title="Kennedy Center American College Theater Festival" label="Kennedy Center American College Theater Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052614" start="54292" end="54313" title="Utah State University" label="Utah State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631981" start="54467" end="54481" title="Kennedy Center" label="Kennedy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="54485" end="54501" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="54788" end="54807" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="54809" end="54813" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="54815" end="54827" title="Hawai&amp;#x27;i" label="Hawai&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="54829" end="54836" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="54838" end="54844" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="54850" end="54854" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407979" start="54897" end="54923" title="Los Angeles Theatre Center" label="Los Angeles Theatre Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403035" start="54932" end="54943" title="Lane Davies" label="Lane Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641407" start="55331" end="55351" title="Pederson House and Water Tower" label="Pederson Ranch house"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="55389" end="55400" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320340" start="55426" end="55449" title="Los Angeles City Schools" label="Los Angeles City School"/>
<link wikidata="Q52413" start="55480" end="55500" title="University of Kansas" label="University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897733" start="55505" end="55520" title="Bethany College (Kansas)" label="Bethany College"/>
<link wikidata="Q62566002" start="55566" end="55597" title="Bernardus Weber" label="Bernardus &amp;quot;Ben&amp;quot; Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439925" start="55712" end="55739" title="Pacific Lutheran University" label="Pacific Lutheran University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641836" start="55800" end="55825" title="Los Angeles County Museum of Art" label="Los Angeles County Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="55840" end="55848" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="55853" end="55868" title="Tucson, AZ" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q208447" start="55936" end="55949" title="Thousand Oaks" label="Thousand Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="56063" end="56074" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="56760" end="56770" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q159288" start="56804" end="56817" title="Santa Barbara, California" label="Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="56898" end="56904" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="56906" end="56913" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="56915" end="56919" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="56925" end="56930" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="56996" end="57007" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765" start="57364" end="57374" title="multimedia" label="multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660187" start="57560" end="57572" title="film studies" label="film studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="60126" end="60142" title="Territories of the United States" label="U.S. territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="60368" end="60386" title="Caucasian-American" label="Caucasian-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="60394" end="60411" title="Hispanic-American" label="Hispanic-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="60418" end="60432" title="Asian-American" label="Asian-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="60439" end="60455" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="60466" end="60481" title="Native-American" label="Native-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="61128" end="61134" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="61158" end="61163" title="Rabbi" label="Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="61622" end="61632" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="61781" end="61791" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="61846" end="61859" title="American flag" label="American flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="61890" end="61899" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146913" start="63124" end="63140" title="transfer student" label="transfer student"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630069" start="63142" end="63150" title="Recorder of deeds" label="recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q48785335" start="65256" end="65272" title="Norwegian Colony" label="Norwegian Colony"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65404" end="65422" title="Spring Meadow Park" label="Spring Meadow Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="65558" end="65564" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11991995" start="65946" end="65972" title="Norway-America Association" label="Norway-America Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641407" start="66310" end="66340" title="Pederson House and Water Tower" label="Pederson House and Water Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958901" start="66359" end="66391" title="Ventura County Historic Landmarks &amp;amp; Points of Interest" label="Ventura County Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q188779" start="66991" end="67001" title="Norwegians" label="Norwegians"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="67093" end="67099" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="67101" end="67107" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="67109" end="67116" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="67118" end="67125" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="67131" end="67138" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="67546" end="67562" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="67648" end="67659" title="Sami people" label="Sami people"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="67676" end="67687" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673" start="67853" end="67876" title="Hans Christian Andersen" label="Hans Christian Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501493" start="67965" end="67969" title="kubb" label="kubb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395567" start="68015" end="68026" title="aebleskiver" label="aebleskiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q888720" start="68038" end="68043" title="lefse" label="lefse"/>
<link wikidata="Q44541" start="68045" end="68060" title="Swedish pancake" label="Swedish pancake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831844" start="68063" end="68080" title="Swedish meatballs" label="Swedish meatballs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642901" start="68293" end="68307" title="Sons of Norway" label="Sons of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916294" start="68313" end="68323" title="Vasa Order of America" label="Vasa Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68476" end="68532" title="Scandinavian American Cultural and Historical Foundation" label="Scandinavian American Cultural and Historical Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182832" start="69331" end="69339" title="recitals" label="recitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q479716" start="69365" end="69409" title="University press" label="California Lutheran College University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q62567531" start="69807" end="69825" title="Barbara J. Collins" label="Barbara J. Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="69968" end="69980" title="NCAA Division III" label="Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="69994" end="70034" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569720" start="70070" end="70125" title="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579825" start="70218" end="70250" title="Golden State Athletic Conference" label="Golden State Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="70265" end="70314" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952247" start="70352" end="70368" title="NAIA independent schools" label="NAIA Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q382647" start="70934" end="70951" title="intramural sports" label="intramural sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q22019811" start="71401" end="71427" title="1971 NAIA Division II football season" label="NAIA National Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542329" start="71488" end="71500" title="Bob Shoup" label="Robert Shoup"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="71573" end="71577" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="NAIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="71704" end="71708" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987842" start="71779" end="71806" title="Western Football Conference (United States)" label="Western Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569720" start="71813" end="71818" title="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="SCIAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270831" start="72020" end="72037" title="Redlands Bulldogs" label="Redlands Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546587" start="72109" end="72119" title="Smudge Pot" label="Smudge Pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964310" start="72206" end="72218" title="Brian Kelley (American football)" label="Brian Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407379" start="72223" end="72238" title="Sam Cvijanovich" label="Sam Cvijanovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q22019811" start="72267" end="72289" title="1971 NAIA Division II football season" label="1971 NAIA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648284" start="72325" end="72335" title="Hank Bauer (American football)" label="Hank Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015216" start="72358" end="72376" title="San Diego Chargers" label="San Diego Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72390" end="72405" title="Jerry Palmquist" label="Jerry Palmquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="72425" end="72439" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="72470" end="72488" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="72523" end="72542" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q142349" start="72561" end="72578" title="Toronto Argonauts" label="Toronto Argonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q61876752" start="72580" end="72595" title="Charles McShane" label="Charlie McShane"/>
<link wikidata="Q221878" start="72603" end="72619" title="Seattle Seahawks" label="Seattle Seahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23017042" start="72625" end="72636" title="Russ Jensen" label="Russ Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q640756" start="72644" end="72663" title="Los Angeles Express (USFL)" label="Los Angeles Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816168" start="72723" end="72733" title="Tom Herman (American football)" label="Tom Herman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438090" start="72735" end="72748" title="Rod Marinelli" label="Rod Marinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975773" start="72750" end="72761" title="Eric Rogers (gridiron football)" label="Eric Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173659" start="72763" end="72774" title="Cory Undlin" label="Cory Undlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181895" start="72776" end="72785" title="Phil Frye" label="Phil Frye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228244" start="72791" end="72802" title="Dave Aranda" label="Dave Aranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q65029154" start="72804" end="72816" title="Ralph Miller (football)" label="Ralph Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336879" start="72849" end="72893" title="National Football League Players Association" label="National Football League Players Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="72917" end="72935" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439096" start="72937" end="72951" title="Houston Oilers" label="Houston Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="72953" end="72972" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015216" start="72974" end="72992" title="San Diego Chargers" label="San Diego Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="72994" end="73009" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="73015" end="73034" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="73392" end="73431" title="UCSB" label="University of California, Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055611" start="73499" end="73516" title="North High School (Torrance, California)" label="North High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q489197" start="73520" end="73528" title="Torrance, California" label="Torrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684208" start="73714" end="73735" title="Camarillo High School" label="Camarillo High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259700" start="73785" end="73804" title="Los Angeles-Pacific" label="Los Angeles-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797060" start="73829" end="73854" title="Thousand Oaks High School" label="Thousand Oaks High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="74011" end="74025" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q8214783" start="74087" end="74109" title="University of La Verne" label="University of La Verne"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="74433" end="74444" title="All-America" label="All-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948702" start="74625" end="74629" title="NAIA Football National Championship" label="NAIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948702" start="74776" end="74814" title="NAIA Division II National Championship" label="NAIA Division II National Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904341" start="74832" end="74844" title="Montana Tech" label="Montana Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989148" start="74849" end="74868" title="Westminster College (Pennsylvania)" label="Westminster College"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="74943" end="74957" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064741" start="74967" end="74980" title="Super Bowl VI" label="Super Bowl VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448217" start="75019" end="75036" title="Coach of the Year" label="Coach of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964310" start="75165" end="75177" title="Brian Kelley (American football)" label="Brian Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="75185" end="75200" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407379" start="75205" end="75220" title="Sam Cvijanovich" label="Sam Cvijanovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="75239" end="75263" title="Canadian Football League" label="Canadian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q14951153" start="75316" end="75329" title="Mike Sheppard (American football)" label="Mike Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="75381" end="75384" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026926" start="75409" end="75447" title="California State University Long Beach" label="California State University Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948702" start="75539" end="75543" title="NAIA Football National Championship" label="NAIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q22019819" start="75557" end="75561" title="1975 NAIA Division II football season" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q22019823" start="75563" end="75567" title="1977 NAIA Division II football season" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q22019832" start="75572" end="75576" title="1982 NAIA Division II football season" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542329" start="75790" end="75799" title="Bob Shoup" label="Bob Shoup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="75925" end="75928" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75931" end="75954" title="Cal Lutheran Kingsmen and Regals#Cradle of Coaches" label="List of notable coaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q38806918" start="76028" end="76060" title="2017 NCAA Division III baseball tournament" label="NCAA Division III baseball title"/>
<link wikidata="Q61960894" start="76073" end="76085" title="Marty Slimak" label="Marty Slimak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971639" start="76109" end="76143" title="Washington &amp;amp; Jefferson Presidents" label="Washington &amp;amp; Jefferson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569720" start="76394" end="76449" title="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q787505" start="76730" end="76750" title="College World Series" label="College World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="76910" end="76931" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="76993" end="77010" title="NCAA Division III" label="NCAA Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743143" start="77180" end="77217" title="American Baseball Coaches Association" label="American Baseball Coaches Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448217" start="77248" end="77265" title="Coach of the Year" label="Coach of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77287" end="77297" title="Cal Lutheran Kingsmen and Regals#Baseball" label="24 players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133919" start="77363" end="77378" title="Sparky Anderson" label="Sparky Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="77456" end="77468" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="77495" end="77503" title="American League" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="77508" end="77523" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="77818" end="77821" title="MLB" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q208447" start="77901" end="77914" title="Thousand Oaks" label="Thousand Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195707" start="78138" end="78149" title="Kevin Gross" label="Kevin Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="78173" end="78193" title="Philadelphia Phillis" label="Philadelphia Phillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6162714" start="78203" end="78214" title="Jason Hirsh" label="Jason Hirsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="78234" end="78248" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601563" start="78276" end="78308" title="2003 Major League Baseball Draft" label="2003 Major League Baseball Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364432" start="78330" end="78343" title="Ron Stillwell" label="Ron Stillwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323297" start="78481" end="78490" title="Rich Hill (baseball coach)" label="Rich Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6552758" start="78533" end="78546" title="Lindsay Meggs" label="Lindsay Meggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306" start="78665" end="78684" title="Panama City, Panama" label="Panama City, Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070" start="78689" end="78709" title="San Jose, Costa Rica" label="San Jose, Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020342" start="78734" end="78745" title="Conejo Oaks" label="Conejo Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020342" start="78769" end="78797" title="California Collegiate League" label="California Collegiate League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133919" start="78868" end="78906" title="George Lee &amp;quot;Sparky&amp;quot; Anderson" label="George Lee &amp;quot;Sparky&amp;quot; Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154204" start="79000" end="79041" title="NCAA Division III women&amp;#x27;s volleyball tournament" label="NCAA Division III women&amp;#x27;s volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028571" start="79053" end="79074" title="Wittenberg University" label="Wittenberg University"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="79540" end="79556" title="UC Santa Barbara" label="UC Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444458" start="79558" end="79574" title="Westmont College" label="Westmont College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026939" start="79579" end="79599" title="Cal State-Northridge" label="Cal State-Northridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105227" start="79712" end="79724" title="Orville Dahl" label="Orville Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809458" start="79818" end="79868" title="Association of Intercollegiate Athletics for Women" label="Association of Intercollegiate Athletics for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952256" start="79958" end="79962" title="NAIA Volleyball Championship" label="NAIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154204" start="80086" end="80138" title="NCAA Division III women&amp;#x27;s volleyball tournament" label="NCAA Division III women&amp;#x27;s volleyball tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q406039" start="80291" end="80309" title="Olympic Gold Medal" label="Olympic Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q839819" start="80318" end="80331" title="Patty Kempner" label="Patty Kempner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809458" start="80381" end="80395" title="AIAW" label="AIAW Regionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297366" start="80557" end="80574" title="United States women&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team" label="U.S. Olympic team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809458" start="80624" end="80628" title="AIAW" label="AIAW"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444458" start="80879" end="80895" title="Westmont College" label="Westmont College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292227" start="81349" end="81359" title="Don Bielke" label="Don Bielke"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="81403" end="81425" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912570" start="81444" end="81454" title="Valparaiso Crusaders men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Valparaiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439925" start="81632" end="81659" title="Pacific Lutheran University" label="Pacific Lutheran University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759621" start="81661" end="81672" title="Mike Dunlap" label="Mike Dunlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q18043680" start="81782" end="81795" title="Derrick Clark (basketball)" label="Derrick Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q21174068" start="81797" end="81807" title="Tim LaKose" label="Tim LaKose"/>
<link wikidata="Q977034" start="81813" end="81824" title="Jason Smith (basketball, born 1974)" label="Jason Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059073" start="81860" end="81880" title="Centenary University" label="Centenary University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085981" start="81884" end="81908" title="Hackettstown, New Jersey" label="Hackettstown, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q61968835" start="82044" end="82054" title="Rich Rider" label="Rich Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569720" start="82261" end="82316" title="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3837316" start="82403" end="82424" title="Los Angeles Lightning" label="Los Angeles Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561213" start="82472" end="82492" title="Gilbert Sports Arena" label="Gilbert Sports Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="82578" end="82595" title="NCAA Division III" label="NAIA District III"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998940" start="82914" end="82927" title="Burke Deadrich" label="Buck Deadrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q230186" start="83224" end="83242" title="Pan American Games" label="Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964310" start="83481" end="83493" title="Brian Kelley (American football)" label="Brian Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q62858782" start="83621" end="83630" title="Don Green (basketball coach)" label="Don Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="83694" end="83698" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="NAIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227393" start="83718" end="83736" title="Pomona High School (Pomona, California)" label="Pomona High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="84079" end="84097" title="All-American honours" label="All American honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011674" start="84448" end="84464" title="Southern Section" label="Southern Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591077" start="84736" end="84763" title="NCAA national championships" label="NCAA national championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569720" start="84820" end="84825" title="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="SCIAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="85049" end="85053" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="NAIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542329" start="85521" end="85530" title="Bob Shoup" label="Bob Shoup"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122723" start="85548" end="85561" title="Greg Osbourne" label="Greg Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="85737" end="85748" title="All-America" label="All-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363321" start="85825" end="85828" title="Professional Golfers&amp;#x27; Association of America" label="PGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566606" start="86445" end="86450" title="SCISA" label="SCISA"/>
<link wikidata="Q65030899" start="86479" end="86493" title="Per Ivar Roald" label="Per Ivar Roald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229760" start="86678" end="86692" title="Dave Salzwedel" label="Dave Salzwedel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="86710" end="86729" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185898" start="86738" end="86773" title="American Professional Soccer League" label="American Professional Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809458" start="86993" end="86997" title="AIAW" label="AIAW"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="87039" end="87059" title="All-American honours" label="All-American honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757641" start="87275" end="87282" title="javelin" label="javelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18210986" start="87512" end="87533" title="Israel women&amp;#x27;s national softball team" label="Israeli National Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q185851" start="87544" end="87552" title="lacrosse" label="lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569720" start="87632" end="87637" title="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="SCIAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16324878" start="87700" end="87717" title="USA Team Handball" label="USA Team Handball"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87920" end="87928" title="The Echo (California Lutheran University)" label="The Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="88188" end="88206" title="All-American award" label="All-American award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974720" start="88341" end="88356" title="Pacemaker Award" label="Pacemaker Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809175" start="88497" end="88524" title="Associated Collegiate Press" label="Associated Collegiate Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="88568" end="88586" title="All-American award" label="All-American award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974720" start="88703" end="88727" title="National Pacemaker Award" label="National Pacemaker Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88731" end="88736" title="CLUTV" label="CLUTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326940" start="88988" end="88995" title="KCLU-FM" label="KCLU-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145784" start="89001" end="89015" title="Non-commercial educational" label="non-commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="89016" end="89029" title="radio station" label="radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="89091" end="89112" title="National Public Radio" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q108127" start="89170" end="89184" title="Ventura County, California" label="Ventura County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108106" start="89209" end="89229" title="Santa Barbara County, California" label="Santa Barbara County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413435" start="89262" end="89275" title="Central Coast (California)" label="Central Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q49012" start="89295" end="89310" title="San Luis Obispo, California" label="San Luis Opispo"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="89544" end="89560" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q116443562" start="89679" end="89696" title="Golden Mike Award" label="Golden Mike Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344950" start="89738" end="89760" title="Edward R. Murrow Award (Corporation for Public Broadcasting)" label="Edward R. Murrow Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048326" start="89958" end="89973" title="Mountclef Ridge" label="Mountclef Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407557" start="90023" end="90034" title="Tex Schramm" label="Tex Schramm"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="90063" end="90077" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="90130" end="90133" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105227" start="90187" end="90199" title="Orville Dahl" label="Orville Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="90493" end="90517" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542329" start="90793" end="90802" title="Bob Shoup" label="Bob Shoup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="90959" end="90965" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374361" start="91286" end="91296" title="Tom Landry" label="Tom Landry"/>
<link wikidata="Q193426" start="91978" end="91990" title="Nancy Reagan" label="Nancy Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q736932" start="91992" end="92006" title="Roger Staubach" label="Roger Staubach"/>
<link wikidata="Q94081" start="92008" end="92016" title="Bob Hope" label="Bob Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q298920" start="92018" end="92032" title="Charles Schulz" label="Charles Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133919" start="92034" end="92049" title="Sparky Anderson" label="Sparky Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497300" start="92051" end="92061" title="Jim Murray (sportswriter)" label="Jim Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531465" start="92063" end="92077" title="Gene Stallings" label="Gene Stallings"/>
<link wikidata="Q551032" start="92079" end="92090" title="John Wooden" label="John Wooden"/>
<link wikidata="Q250725" start="92389" end="92398" title="Bob Lilly" label="Bob Lilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101137" start="93141" end="93153" title="Cliff Harris" label="Cliff Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4107967" start="93242" end="93252" title="Pat Toomay" label="Pat Toomay"/>
<link wikidata="Q861929" start="93427" end="93437" title="Bill Bates" label="Bill Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q21932296" start="93567" end="93578" title="John Warren (American football)" label="John Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900482" start="93636" end="93647" title="Mark Tuinei" label="Mark Tuinei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108002" start="93652" end="93665" title="Chris Schultz" label="Chris Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="93806" end="93823" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="93934" end="93950" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="94159" end="94178" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q116257510" start="94826" end="94852" title="Kroenke Warner Center complex" label="permanent training complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q58345424" start="95073" end="95095" title="Thousand Oaks shooting" label="Thousand Oaks shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q849784" start="95159" end="95188" title="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum" label="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="95236" end="95254" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q22026284" start="95449" end="95471" title="Wildwood Regional Park" label="Wildwood Regional Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048326" start="95484" end="95500" title="Mount Clef Ridge" label="Mount Clef Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q24251468" start="95673" end="95680" title="Chumash people" label="Chumash"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="95899" end="95912" title="mountain lion" label="mountain lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="95914" end="95920" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="95922" end="95926" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215250" start="95932" end="95940" title="gray fox" label="gray fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773576" start="96140" end="96155" title="Norwegian Grade" label="Norwegian Grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q108297" start="96919" end="96928" title="Spartacus (1960 film)" label="Spartacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048326" start="97023" end="97039" title="Mount Clef Ridge" label="Mount Clef Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421670" start="97110" end="97131" title="Welcome to Hard Times (film)" label="Welcome to Hard Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641" start="97175" end="97183" title="Gunsmoke (TV series)" label="Gunsmoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140611" start="97246" end="97263" title="Wuthering Heights (1939 film)" label="Wuthering Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q289537" start="97371" end="97377" title="Lassie (1954 TV series)" label="Lassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304435" start="97523" end="97540" title="Highway to Heaven" label="Highway to Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030808" start="97650" end="97667" title="The Clonus Horror" label="The Clonus Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071905" start="97817" end="97830" title="BBC Worldwide" label="BBC Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959279" start="97852" end="97863" title="Break Media" label="Break Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q693231" start="97915" end="97964" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national water polo team" label="United States men&amp;#x27;s national water polo team"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="98161" end="98164" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q27536802" start="98179" end="98196" title="Vice News Tonight" label="Vice News Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q473845" start="98295" end="98325" title="Columbine High School massacre" label="Columbine High School massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q58416700" start="98363" end="98378" title="Catherine Byrne (Nevada politician)" label="Catherine Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16908466" start="98407" end="98430" title="Nevada State Controller" label="Nevada State Controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q98314894" start="98432" end="98443" title="Desta Hagos" label="Desta Hagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q111364292" start="98466" end="98476" title="Eric Dever" label="Eric Dever"/>
<link wikidata="Q311678" start="98500" end="98512" title="Jason Dolley" label="Jason Dolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120277" start="98523" end="98543" title="Jacquelynne Fontaine" label="Jacquelynne Fontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q61698447" start="98568" end="98576" title="Joe Fuca" label="Joe Fuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314762" start="98602" end="98616" title="Reputation.com" label="Reputation.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297600" start="98619" end="98629" title="Ray Haynes" label="Ray Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526814" start="98639" end="98663" title="California State Senator" label="California State Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044373" start="98682" end="98693" title="Carol Heyer" label="Carol Heyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279416" start="98720" end="98730" title="Diop Kamau" label="Diop Kamau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135627" start="98756" end="98768" title="Cortney Palm" label="Cortney Palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560463" start="98780" end="98793" title="Bianca Santos" label="Bianca Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q265109" start="98805" end="98820" title="Carly Schroeder" label="Carly Schroeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829773" start="98832" end="98852" title="Michael Dean Shelton" label="Michael Dean Shelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727206" start="98863" end="98878" title="Alison Viktorin" label="Alison Viktorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="98905" end="98915" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q55080958" start="98924" end="98939" title="Talon Warburton" label="Talon Warburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q45025305" start="98967" end="98979" title="Anna Wikland" label="Anna Wikland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145144" start="99019" end="99029" title="James Ware (judge)" label="James Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889830" start="99061" end="99120" title="U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California" label="U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q15044094" start="99123" end="99135" title="Moe Set Wine" label="Moe Set Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q62567531" start="99182" end="99200" title="Barbara J. Collins" label="Barbara J. Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157508" start="99258" end="99270" title="Roland Dille" label="Roland Dille"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868559" start="99286" end="99321" title="Minnesota State University Moorhead" label="Minnesota State University Moorhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150470" start="99341" end="99354" title="Paul Egertson" label="Paul Egertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417109" start="99426" end="99435" title="Guy Erwin" label="Guy Erwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="99495" end="99533" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q52852849" start="99666" end="99682" title="Elwin D. Farwell" label="Elwin D. Farwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705538" start="99704" end="99718" title="Luther College (Iowa)" label="Luther College"/>
<link wikidata="Q19957856" start="99726" end="99741" title="William Gartner" label="William Gartner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6173918" start="99775" end="99786" title="Jeff Gorell" label="Jeff Gorell"/>
<link wikidata="Q66692101" start="99897" end="99909" title="James Kallas" label="James Kallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q205033" start="99938" end="99951" title="Chicago Bears" label="Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354547" start="99953" end="99965" title="Paul Orfalea" label="Paul Orfalea"/>
<link wikidata="Q474379" start="99979" end="99991" title="Kinko&amp;#x27;s" label="Kinko&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308759" start="100008" end="100024" title="Dru Pagliassotti" label="Dru Pagliassotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738941" start="100054" end="100064" title="The Harrow" label="The Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196208" start="100073" end="100087" title="Michael Pearce (artist)" label="Michael Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q62129793" start="100121" end="100133" title="Elmer Ramsey" label="Elmer Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956319" start="100149" end="100174" title="New West Symphony" label="Conejo Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q62566002" start="100176" end="100191" title="Bernardus Weber" label="Bernardus Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q52359746" start="100240" end="100253" title="Cynthia Wyels" label="Cynthia Wyels"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407740" wikidata="Q3044511" url="?curid=407740" title="Relief Society">
<text>The Relief Society is a philanthropic and educational women&#x27;s organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church). It was founded in 1842 in Nauvoo, Illinois, United States, and has more than 7 million members in over 188 countries and territories. The Relief Society is often referred to by the church and others as &quot;one of the oldest and largest women&#x27;s organizations in the world.&quot;

==Mission==
The motto of the Relief Society, taken from 1 Corinthians 13:8, is &quot;Charity never faileth.&quot; The purpose of Relief Society reads, “Relief Society helps prepare women for the blessings of eternal life as they increase faith in Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ and His Atonement; strengthen individuals, families, and homes through ordinances and covenants; and work in unity to help those in need.”

==History==


===Nauvoo Period===
In the spring of 1842 Sarah Granger Kimball and her seamstress, Margaret A. Cook, discussed combining their efforts to sew clothing for workers constructing the Latter Day Saints&#x27; Nauvoo Temple. They determined to invite their neighbors to assist by creating a Ladies&#x27; Society. Kimball asked Eliza R. Snow to write a constitution and by-laws for the organization for submission to President of the Church Joseph Smith for review. After reviewing the documents, Smith called them &quot;the best he had ever seen&quot; but said, &quot;this is not what you want. Tell the sisters their offering is accepted of the Lord, and He has something better for them than a written constitution. ... I will organize the women. .. after a pattern of the priesthood.&quot;

Twenty Latter Day Saint women gathered on Thursday, March 17, 1842, in the second-story meeting room over Smith&#x27;s Red Brick Store in Nauvoo to discuss the formation of a Ladies&#x27; Society with Smith, John Taylor, and Willard Richards. Joseph Smith proposed the society elect a presiding officer and allow that officer to choose two counselors to aid her. Emma Smith was elected as president and then chose her two counselors, Sarah M. Cleveland and Elizabeth Ann Whitney. The three members of the Presidency were then ordained and blessed by Taylor. At the meeting Joseph Smith stated &quot;the object of the Society—that the Society of Sisters might provoke the brethren to good works in looking to the wants of the poor—searching after objects of charity, and in administering to their wants—to assist; by correcting the morals and strengthening the virtues of the female community, and save the Elders the trouble of rebuking; that they may give their time to other duties, &amp;c., in their public teaching.&quot;

After discussion, it was unanimously agreed that the fledgling organization be named &quot;The Female Relief Society of Nauvoo&quot;. 
The new organization was popular and grew so rapidly that finding a meeting place for such a large group proved difficult. Under Emma Smith&#x27;s direction, the Society was &quot;divided for the purpose of meeting&quot; according to each of the city&#x27;s four municipal wards. Visiting committees were appointed to determine needs in each ward. By March 1844, membership totaled 1331 women. The last recorded meeting of the Relief Society in Nauvoo was held on March 16, 1844. Smith had often used the Relief Society as a pulpit to express her opposition to plural marriage. However, several of the society&#x27;s members and leaders were themselves secretly in plural marriages, including to Smith&#x27;s own husband, who himself counseled the society against exposing iniquity. These inner conflicts led Joseph Smith to suspend all meetings of the organization. After the death of Joseph Smith in June 1844, Brigham Young assumed leadership of the majority of Latter Day Saints. Desiring to continue plural marriage, Young disbanded the Relief Society before leaving Nauvoo for the Salt Lake Valley.

=== Moving west ===

When Relief Society secretary Eliza R. Snow joined the Latter Day Saints in their exodus west in 1846, she carried the Relief Society Book of Records with her. Although they no longer met in an official capacity, women continued to assemble informally; the care and nurture of the needy continued without a formal Relief Society organization.

As Saints established homes in the Salt Lake Valley and surrounding settlements, formal meetings for women gradually emerged. A Female Council of Health was established in 1851. In early 1854, in response to Brigham Young’s call to Saints to assist neighboring Native Americans, women from several Salt Lake City wards decided to organize an &quot;Indian Relief Society&quot; with the purpose of &quot;making clothing for Indian women and children.&quot; In June 1854, Brigham Young encouraged women to form societies in their individual wards. Members of the first Indian Relief Society disbanded to help establish organizations in their own wards, many of them becoming leaders. Records are limited but show that by 1858 over two dozen organizations had formed in some twelve Salt Lake City wards and in other outlying settlements such as Ogden, Provo, Spanish Fork, and Manti, Utah. 

Each Relief Society operated independently within its ward in cooperation with the local bishop. Ward societies were not interconnected by central women&#x27;s leadership, though many of them engaged in similar activities such as sewing clothing for Indians, caring for the poor, especially emigrants, and weaving carpets for local meetinghouses. Interrupted by the 1858 Utah War, no more than three or four of these independent ward organizations survived the temporary move of much of the Latter-day Saint population south of Salt Lake County.

=== Reorganization and expansion ===
In December 1867 church president Brigham Young publicly called for the reorganization of Relief Society in every ward. Eliza R. Snow was assigned to assist local bishops in organizing permanent branches of the Relief Society. Using the minutes recorded in the early Nauvoo meetings as a Constitution, Snow created a standard model for all local wards that united women in purpose and provided a permanent name and structure to their organization. She and nine other sisters began visiting wards and settlements in 1868, and at the end of the year, organizations existed in all twenty Salt Lake City congregations and in congregations in nearly every county in Utah. Women helped the bishop of the ward assist the poor by collecting and disbursing funds and commodities. They nursed the sick, cleaned homes, sewed carpet rags for local meeting houses, planted and tended gardens, promoted home industry, and shared doctrinal instruction and testimony.

Snow provided central leadership both before and after her call as General President in 1880. She emphasized spirituality and self-sufficiency. The Relief Society sent women to medical school, trained nurses, opened the Deseret Hospital, operated cooperative stores, promoted silk manufacture, saved wheat, and built granaries. In 1872, Snow provided assistance and advice to Louisa L. Greene in the creation of a woman&#x27;s publication, the &quot;Woman&#x27;s Exponent&quot;, which was loosely affiliated with the Relief Society. Emmeline B. Wells succeeded Greene and continued as editor until its final issue in 1914.

Snow, Mary Isabella Horne, and others established the Ladies&#x27; Cooperative Retrenchment Association from which the Young Ladies&#x27; Department of the Ladies&#x27; Cooperative Retrenchment was formed (later called the Young Ladies&#x27; Mutual Improvement Association and now the Young Women). Snow also worked with Aurelia Spencer Rogers to establish the first ward Primary Association in 1878. By 1888, the Relief Society had more than 22,000 members in 400 local wards and branches. In 1891, the Relief Society became a charter member of the National Council of Women of the United States and it was called the National Women&#x27;s Relief Society.

Early Relief Society meetings were generally held semi-monthly. One meeting per month was devoted to sewing and caring for the needs of the poor. At meetings members might receive instruction, discuss elevating and educational topics, and bear testimony. The women were also encouraged to explore and develop cultural opportunities for their community.

===The 20th century===
The Relief Society Magazine became the official publication of the Relief Society from 1915 to 1970. By 1942, membership in the organization was approximately 115,000 women, growing to 300,000 members in 1966. In June 1945, the General Board changed the organization&#x27;s official name to &quot;Relief Society of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints&quot;.

The church-wide implementation of Priesthood Correlation in the 1960s &quot;radically transformed&quot; the Relief Society. These changes assisted in preparing the Relief Society for an era of a worldwide church; correlated lessons and materials were easier to translate and applicable to a broader audience. A side-effect of these changes was that the Relief Society lost much of the autonomy that it once enjoyed, notably around its budget. The &quot;Relief Society Magazine&quot;&#x27;s last edition was December 1970, after which it and several other church magazines were replaced with the &quot;Ensign&quot;.

==Structure and meetings==
In the LDS Church today, every Latter-day Saint woman, on her eighteenth birthday or within the following year, and women under 18 who are married, move into Relief Society from the Young Women. Additionally, unwed teenage mothers who are seventeen or older and who choose to keep the child are advanced into Relief Society. There are no fees or membership dues for joining the Relief Society.

In each local congregation of the church, a member of the Relief Society serves as the local president of the organization. The president selects two other women from the congregation to assist her as counselors; together the three women make up the local Relief Society presidency. The Relief Society presidency acts under the direction of the bishop or branch president in presiding over and serving the women in the congregation. Additionally, stake or district Relief Society presidencies exist to supervise five or more local Relief Society presidencies.

Following changes made in 2019, Relief Society holds meetings twice per month that last approximately fifty minutes. During these meetings, an educational lesson is presented by a member of the Relief Society presidency or another woman who has been asked to serve as the instructor. From 1997 to 2016, the curriculum was composed primarily of &quot;Teachings of Presidents of the Church&quot;. As of 2019, recent general conference messages largely comprise the curriculum. The Relief Society also leads the LDS Church&#x27;s efforts to teach basic literacy skills to those members and non-members that lack them.

According to the church, as of February 2020, the Relief Society has over 7 million members in 188 countries and territories, having grown from about 6 million in 170 territories in 2009.

===Governance===
Three women are selected by the First Presidency to serve the entire LDS Church as the General Relief Society Presidency. Although these women are not considered general authorities, they are based in Salt Lake City and are considered to be &quot;general officers&quot; of the church and are the highest ranking women in the LDS Church&#x27;s hierarchy. Similar to other general authorities and officers in the church, they serve under the direction of the church&#x27;s First Presidency. Since August 2022, the General Relief Society Presidency has been composed of Camille N. Johnson, president; J. Anette Dennis, first counselor; and Kristin M. Yee, second counselor. They are assisted and advised by a Relief Society Advisory Council drawn from women in the church.

From the 1970s to 2013, the Relief Society held a general meeting in Salt Lake City, annually in late September, which was broadcast around the world via television and radio, and later the Internet. This meeting was an opportunity for the General Relief Society Presidency to address the entire body of the Relief Society. Typically, a member of the church&#x27;s First Presidency also spoke to the women of the church.

In 2014, such meetings (along with the March General Young Women Meeting) were replaced by a biannual women&#x27;s meeting held in March and September, one week before the other sessions of general conference. The meeting is for all women of the church ages eight and older. The first of these meetings was held in March 2014 and the general presidents of the Primary, Young Women, and Relief Society General Presidencies spoke along with Henry B. Eyring of the First Presidency. Beginning in 2018, the annual Women&#x27;s Session of the church&#x27;s general conference is held in October, in the evening, as part of the regular Saturday schedule.

==Relief Society Building==

In Salt Lake City, the Relief Society occupies its own headquarters building known as the Relief Society Building, which is separate from the other administrative offices of the LDS Church. While the Quorum of the Seventy had a building in Nauvoo in the 1840s, the Relief Society is the only auxiliary organization in the LDS Church today which has a completely separate facility. This building is also the closest of any building to the door of the Salt Lake Temple.

==Programs==

===Ministering sisters===
In every LDS congregation, each member of the Relief Society is paired with another member; this companionship is then assigned by the Relief Society Presidency to be ministering sisters of one or more other members of the Relief Society. Ministering sisters strive to make regular contacts with the women assigned to them. Sometimes this contact is a personal visit in the member&#x27;s home. If this is not possible, the member may be contacted by telephone, letter, e-mail, or a visit in a location other than the member&#x27;s home. Ministering sisters are encouraged to look for opportunities to serve the individuals to whom they minister.

On April 1, 2018, during the church&#x27;s general conference, church president Russell M. Nelson announced that the similar program of visiting teaching, along with the priesthood&#x27;s home teaching, would be retired, to be replaced with the &quot;ministering&quot;-brethren-and-sisters program, with its dual components under the direction of the ward&#x27;s elders quorum and Relief Society&#x27;s respective leaderships.

===Compassionate service===
Along with the bishop or branch president, the Relief Society President is the key person in the ward in ensuring that the temporal and emotional needs of the members of the congregation are met. The Relief Society Presidency is responsible for helping the women of the congregation learn welfare principles such as work, self-reliance, provident living, personal and family preparedness, and compassionate service of others. In many congregations, the Relief Society will ask a woman to serve as the Compassionate Service Leader, who is responsible for organizing service activities and responses to members&#x27; needs in times of emergency or hardship.

===Activity/enrichment meetings===
An evening Relief Society meeting is usually held quarterly on a week-night in each congregation of the church. At this meeting women learn a variety of skills, participate in service projects, and enjoy time together. Local congregations may also choose to hold monthly or weekly meetings for women with similar needs and interests. These extra meetings are informal, and local congregations have a wide discretion in determining what activities will be part of these meetings. These meetings were originally called &quot;Homemaking&quot;, and on January 1, 2000, the name changed to &quot;Home, Family, and Personal Enrichment&quot;, or &quot;Enrichment&quot; for short. In September 2009, due to the complexity of the name and different interpretations of the meeting&#x27;s purpose, the separate name for the extra weekday meetings was discontinued and all meetings of the Relief Society began to be referred to simply as &quot;Relief Society meetings&quot;.

==See also==

*Family Services
*Mormon feminism
*Worship services of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Derr, Jill Mulvay, Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, and Janath Cannon, &quot;Women of Covenant: The Story of Relief Society&quot;. Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1992.
* Derr, Jill Mulvay et al. (eds.) &quot;The First Fifty Years of Relief Society: Key Documents in Latter-day Saint Women&#x27;s History.&quot; Salt Lake City, UT: Church Historian&#x27;s Press, 2016.
* Nielson, Carol Holindrake. &quot;The Salt Lake City 14th Ward Album Quilt, 1857: Stories of the Relief Society Women and Their Quilt.&quot; University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City, Utah, 2004.
* Peterson, Janet and LaRene Gaunt. &quot;Elect Ladies: Presidents of the Relief Society.&quot; Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Books, 1990.
* Relief Society, &quot;Charity Never Faileth: History of Relief Society, 1842–1966&quot;, Deseret Book: Salt Lake City, Utah, 1966.
* Scott, Patricia Lyn and Linda Thatcher, editors. &quot;Women in Utah History: Paradigm or Paradox?&quot; Utah State University Press, Logan, Utah, 2005. .

==External links==
*Nauvoo Relief Society Minute Book at Joseph Smith Papers website
*Relief Society General Presidents, Relief Society, Serving in the Church, LDS Church – a list of biographies available about each of the General Presidents of the Relief Society of the LDS Church</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3044511" start="4" end="18" title="Relief Society" label="Relief Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827314" start="67" end="79" title="Auxiliary organization (LDS Church)" label="organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="83" end="130" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q576110" start="171" end="187" title="Nauvoo, Illinois" label="Nauvoo, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="189" end="202" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422348" start="907" end="928" title="Sarah Granger Kimball" label="Sarah Granger Kimball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="1046" end="1062" title="Latter Day Saint" label="Latter Day Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829432" start="1070" end="1083" title="Nauvoo Temple" label="Nauvoo Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051180" start="1187" end="1200" title="Eliza R. Snow" label="Eliza R. Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q596458" start="1276" end="1299" title="President of the Church" label="President of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="1300" end="1312" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849286" start="1773" end="1788" title="Red Brick Store" label="Red Brick Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q576110" start="1792" end="1798" title="Nauvoo, Illinois" label="Nauvoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q540244" start="1862" end="1873" title="John Taylor (Mormon)" label="John Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003479" start="1879" end="1895" title="Willard Richards" label="Willard Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348210" start="2017" end="2027" title="Emma Smith" label="Emma Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422548" start="2088" end="2106" title="Sarah M. Cleveland" label="Sarah M. Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362318" start="2111" end="2132" title="Elizabeth Ann Whitney" label="Elizabeth Ann Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968929" start="3089" end="3094" title="Ward (Mormonism)" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459202" start="3377" end="3392" title="plural marriage" label="plural marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247467" start="3693" end="3714" title="death of Joseph Smith" label="death of Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q203559" start="3729" end="3742" title="Brigham Young" label="Brigham Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q377106" start="3903" end="3919" title="Salt Lake Valley" label="Salt Lake Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968929" start="4825" end="4830" title="ward (LDS Church)" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="5065" end="5079" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q52471" start="5128" end="5133" title="Ogden, Utah" label="Ogden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23443" start="5135" end="5140" title="Provo, Utah" label="Provo"/>
<link wikidata="Q482552" start="5142" end="5154" title="Spanish Fork, Utah" label="Spanish Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q130158" start="5160" end="5171" title="Manti, Utah" label="Manti, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917468" start="5264" end="5270" title="bishop (Latter Day Saints)" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501025" start="5546" end="5554" title="Utah War" label="Utah War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000892" start="5783" end="5792" title="President of the Church (LDS Church)" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q203559" start="5793" end="5806" title="Brigham Young" label="Brigham Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702756" start="7088" end="7104" title="Louisa L. Greene" label="Louisa L. Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030645" start="7162" end="7183" title="Woman&amp;#x27;s Exponent" label="Woman&amp;#x27;s Exponent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373425" start="7245" end="7262" title="Emmeline B. Wells" label="Emmeline B. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q778344" start="7559" end="7608" title="Young Ladies&amp;#x27; Mutual Improvement Association" label="Young Ladies&amp;#x27; Mutual Improvement Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q778344" start="7621" end="7632" title="Young Women (organization)" label="Young Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822226" start="7657" end="7679" title="Aurelia Spencer Rogers" label="Aurelia Spencer Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243054" start="7708" end="7727" title="Primary Association" label="Primary Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971949" start="7886" end="7932" title="National Council of Women of the United States" label="National Council of Women of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413218" start="8375" end="8398" title="Relief Society Magazine" label="Relief Society Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242903" start="8776" end="8798" title="Priesthood Correlation Program" label="Priesthood Correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379994" start="9343" end="9349" title="Ensign (LDS magazine)" label="Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q778344" start="9567" end="9578" title="Young Women (organization)" label="Young Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968929" start="9794" end="9806" title="Ward (LDS Church)" label="congregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917468" start="10125" end="10131" title="Bishop (Latter Day Saints)" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845843" start="10135" end="10151" title="branch president" label="branch president"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388229" start="10227" end="10232" title="Stake (Mormonism)" label="stake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283223" start="10236" end="10244" title="District (LDS Church)" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691334" start="10691" end="10728" title="Teachings of Presidents of the Church" label="Teachings of Presidents of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q917486" start="10755" end="10773" title="General Conference (LDS Church)" label="general conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019322" start="11195" end="11211" title="First Presidency (LDS Church)" label="First Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532323" start="11325" end="11344" title="general authorities" label="general authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q106413397" start="11730" end="11748" title="Camille N. Johnson" label="Camille N. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q917486" start="12546" end="12564" title="General conference (LDS Church)" label="general conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q949425" start="12795" end="12810" title="Henry B. Eyring" label="Henry B. Eyring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116657" start="13183" end="13205" title="Church Office Building" label="administrative offices"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150153" start="13235" end="13256" title="Seventy (LDS Church)" label="Quorum of the Seventy"/>
<link wikidata="Q576110" start="13275" end="13281" title="Nauvoo, Illinois" label="Nauvoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122206" start="13485" end="13501" title="Salt Lake Temple" label="Salt Lake Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q11872832" start="13711" end="13730" title="ministering sisters" label="ministering sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027523" start="14271" end="14288" title="Russell M. Nelson" label="Russell M. Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11872832" start="14379" end="14392" title="home teaching" label="home teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917468" start="14662" end="14668" title="Bishop (Latter Day Saints)" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845843" start="14672" end="14688" title="branch president" label="branch president"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480525" start="16318" end="16333" title="Family Services" label="Family Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512374" start="16335" end="16350" title="Mormon feminism" label="Mormon feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036992" start="16352" end="16419" title="Worship services of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="Worship services of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451681" start="16461" end="16478" title="Jill Mulvay Derr" label="Derr, Jill Mulvay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792764" start="16480" end="16505" title="Maureen U. Beecher" label="Maureen Ursenbach Beecher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150845" start="16511" end="16524" title="Janath R. Cannon" label="Janath Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845315" start="16608" end="16620" title="Deseret Book" label="Deseret Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451681" start="16630" end="16647" title="Jill Mulvay Derr" label="Derr, Jill Mulvay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896519" start="16970" end="16994" title="University of Utah Press" label="University of Utah Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845315" start="17252" end="17264" title="Deseret Book" label="Deseret Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894892" start="17401" end="17428" title="Utah State University Press" label="Utah State University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407742" wikidata="Q6953394" url="?curid=407742" title="NEA Four">
<text>The &quot;NEA Four&quot;, Karen Finley, Tim Miller, John Fleck, and Holly Hughes, were performance artists whose proposed grants from the United States government&#x27;s National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) were vetoed by John Frohnmayer in June 1990. Grants were overtly vetoed on the basis of subject matter after the artists had successfully passed through a peer review process. John Fleck was vetoed for a performance comedy with a toilet prop. The artists won their case in court in 1993 and were awarded amounts equal to the grant money in question, though the case would make its way to the United States Supreme Court in &quot;National Endowment for the Arts v. Finley&quot;, which ruled in favour of the NEA&#x27;s decision making process. In response, the NEA, under pressure from Congress, stopped funding individual artists.

== Lead up to the controversy ==

=== Peer review process within the NEA ===

The NEA has used peer review panels since 1966 (one year after its inception). The NEA&#x27;s Founding Chairperson Roger L. Stevens did not want to use panels, preferring that staff members review applications. Due to the increase of funds and applications, Stevens turned to peer review panels. Nancy Hanks (the next chairperson appointed by President Richard M. Nixon in 1969) expanded panels and created a list of three criteria: appointments must be merit-based; appointees must serve the panel as individuals, and may not make decisions based on any particular interest group, institution or viewpoint; the panels must be insulated from external pressures. The last criterion became more difficult to enforce as the budget of the NEA grew, and public interest in how the money was spent mounted.

In 1979, &quot;Report: a Study of the Panel System at the National Endowment for the Arts&quot; recommended that the panels be split into a policy panel that reviewed policies within the NEA panel process and a review panel that only made granting decisions. Once adopted this split panel allowed for more review panelists to be engaged who represented more diverse art practices. Also in 1979, a House report found that the NEA was failing to establish a coherent system of review and had not established a uniform system of review.

=== The NEA and President Ronald Reagan ===

Ronald Reagan began his presidency in 1981 and by the end of his two terms in office in 1989 the NEA&#x27;s funding had dropped by 50% based on inflation. After his election in 1980 the &quot;New York Times&quot; ran an article by Hilton Kramer stating that Reagan arts policy advisors believed that both the NEA and the National Endowment for the Humanities had strayed from their original intent, and that their standards of artistry had been lowered to an unacceptable level. Kramer stated that there were opposing views within the group of Reagan&#x27;s policy makers on how to deal with the perceived issues of the two Endowments. One solution offered was the adoption of narrower programs and renewing an emphasis on high art and scholarly practice, the other solution reported by Kramer was the abolishment of the Endowments entirely. Kramer&#x27;s reportage was subsequently corroborated by Livingston L. Biddle, Jr. the third NEA chairman in his 1988 book &quot;Our Government and the Arts&quot; (American Council for the Arts, 1988).

In 1981 President Reagan convened a Special Presidential Task Force on the Arts and Humanities to assess the endowment process and its policies for awarding federal funds for culture. The task force reported that the agencies were basically sound and in need of only minor improvements. The task force also supported the peer review process as fair and able to act effectively. Despite this finding, pressure to decentralize NEA funding – funneling it through state and local agencies – mounted during the 80s and into the 90s from both conservative and liberal interest groups. In June 1985 Representative Steve Bartlett (R-Texas) proposed an amendment to a 1986 appropriations bill that would not allow the NEA to fund artwork considered to be &quot;patently offensive to the average person&quot;. The amendment was struck down but laid the groundwork for future debate on what makes an artwork obscene. In October 1985 the United States House of Representatives passed two amendments to the budget that limited the NEA to funding artistic work with &quot;significant literary, scholarly, cultural or artistic merit&quot; and requiring that recipients file financial reports within 90 days of the end of their grant period. The NEA was also pressured to rely on formulas for arts assessment. Frank Hodsoll (chairperson from 1981 to 1989) and John Frohnmayer (chairperson from 1989 to 1992 during the heart of the NEA Four controversy) both had to fight such political pressure to retain the peer review model as well as their own roles within the NEA.

=== Additional events ===

In 1989 two art pieces drew controversy to the NEA, Andres Serrano&#x27;s &quot;Piss Christ&quot; and Robert Mapplethorpe&#x27;s &quot;The Perfect Moment&quot; (which was canceled at The Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington, DC due to political pressure). The controversy around these two art pieces led to increased interest in how the NEA was spending its money from conservative lawmakers.

In June 1989, prompted by Andres Serrano&#x27;s &quot;Piss Christ&quot;, Senators Alfonse D&#x27;Amato and Jesse Helms, joined by twenty-five members of the Senate, co-signed a letter written to the NEA requesting reforms to its grant making policies. A month later the House passed an amendment that no NEA funds may be re-granted by other organizations, therefore only work that the NEA sponsored itself will receive its funding.⁠ In March 1990 NEA grantees began receiving a new clause in their agreements that states:

==References==
== Further reading ==

* Hughes, Holly and Richard Elovich. &quot;Homophobia at the NEA,&quot; &quot;New York Times&quot; (July 28, 1990), p. 21.
* Noriega, Jimmy A. and Jordan Schildcrout. &quot;The NEA Four&quot; in &quot;50 Key Figures in Queer US Theatre&quot;. Routledge, 2022, pp. 179-183.

== External links ==

* Timeline Of NEA 4 Events </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6953394" start="10" end="18" title="NEA Four" label="NEA Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369637" start="26" end="38" title="Karen Finley" label="Karen Finley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803980" start="40" end="50" title="Tim Miller (performance artist)" label="Tim Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333606" start="52" end="62" title="John Fleck (actor)" label="John Fleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882082" start="68" end="80" title="Holly Hughes (performance artist)" label="Holly Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q213156" start="87" end="102" title="performance art" label="performance art"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="138" end="151" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967116" start="170" end="201" title="National Endowment for the Arts" label="National Endowment for the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6234297" start="223" end="238" title="John Frohnmayer" label="John Frohnmayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160408" start="363" end="374" title="peer review (disambiguation)" label="peer review"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="600" end="627" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972439" start="637" end="678" title="National Endowment for the Arts v. Finley" label="National Endowment for the Arts v. Finley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="793" end="801" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358497" start="1033" end="1049" title="Roger L. Stevens" label="Roger L. Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="1271" end="1287" title="Richard M. Nixon" label="Richard M. Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="2300" end="2313" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="2492" end="2506" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q478050" start="2621" end="2658" title="National Endowment for the Humanities" label="National Endowment for the Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659658" start="3199" end="3224" title="Livingston L. Biddle, Jr." label="Livingston L. Biddle, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q185480" start="3952" end="3966" title="Steve Bartlett" label="Steve Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="4271" end="4309" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487280" start="4639" end="4652" title="Frank Hodsoll" label="Frank Hodsoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q503335" start="4979" end="5000" title="Andres Serrano" label="Andres Serrano&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417715" start="5007" end="5018" title="Piss Christ" label="Piss Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q312786" start="5029" end="5055" title="Robert Mapplethorpe" label="Robert Mapplethorpe&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064037" start="5404" end="5424" title="Alfonse D&amp;#x27;Amato" label="Alfonse D&amp;#x27;Amato"/>
<link wikidata="Q503426" start="5429" end="5440" title="Jesse Helms" label="Jesse Helms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407748" wikidata="Q215076" url="?curid=407748" title="Vanessa-Mae">
<text>Vanessa-Mae (; born 27 October 1978), also called Vanessa-Mae Vanakorn Nicholson, is a British violinist with album sales reaching several million, having made her the wealthiest entertainer under 30 in the United Kingdom in 2006. She competed under the name Vanessa Vanakorn (; her father&#x27;s surname) for Thailand in alpine skiing at the 2014 Winter Olympics. She was initially banned from skiing by the International Ski Federation (FIS) after participating in a qualifying race allegedly organised to enable her to qualify for the Winter Olympics. An appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport led to the ban being nullified, citing lack of evidence for her own wrongdoing or any manipulation. The FIS later issued an apology to her.

==Early life and education==

Vanessa-Mae was born on 27 October 1978 in Singapore, to Singaporean mother Pamela Soei Luang Tan and Thai father Vorapong Vanakorn. After adoption by a British father, she moved to London at the age of 4 where she began playing the violin. At the age of 8 Vanessa-Mae embarked upon a period of study with Professor Lin Yao Ji at the Central Conservatory of Music in Beijing.

==Musical career==
Vanessa-Mae made her professional debut when she was ten at a music festival in Germany.

At age thirteen, Vanessa-Mae became the youngest soloist to record both the Beethoven and Tchaikovsky violin concertos, according to &quot;Guinness World Records&quot;.

Her first pop-style album, &quot;The Violin Player&quot;, produced and mainly written by Mike Batt and selling four million copies, was released in 1995. She appeared on the 1997 Janet Jackson album &quot;The Velvet Rope&quot; playing a violin solo on the song &quot;Velvet Rope&quot;.

Vanessa-Mae appeared in producer George Martin&#x27;s compilation and covers album &quot;In My Life&quot; in 1998. She is featured on Track #5 with her violin rendition of the 1969 Beatles song &quot;Because&quot;.

She was managed by her mother until Vanessa-Mae fired her in 1999.

In May 1998, she was part of the interval act at the Eurovision Song Contest taking part in Birmingham at the National Indoor Arena.

In June 1999 she played at the Michael Jackson &amp; Friends concerts in Seoul and Munich.

On 7 March 2002 Vanessa-Mae performed a variation of Antonio Vivaldi: &quot;The Four Seasons&quot; – &quot;Summer: III. Presto&quot; during the opening ceremonies of the 2002 Winter Paralympics.

In April 2006, Vanessa-Mae was ranked as the wealthiest young entertainer under 30 in the UK in the &quot;Sunday Times&quot; Rich List 2006, having an estimated fortune of about £32 million.
In October 2011, Vanessa Mae performed for Chechnya&#x27;s leader Ramzan Kadyrov during his birthday celebration in Grozny reportedly receiving for her appearance.

===Composition===
Vanessa-Mae has occasionally recorded her own compositions. Her 1997 album &quot;China Girl: The Classical Album 2&quot; included two pieces in which she shared a writing credit: &quot;Violin Fantasy on Puccini&#x27;s &#x27;Turandot″&quot; and &quot;Reunification Overture&quot;, marking the reunification of China and Hong Kong.

In 2017, Classic FM compiled a list of the 300 best selling classical albums in the 25 years it has been running. Vanessa-Mae entered three times. &quot;The Classical Album 1&quot; reached 244, &quot;Storm&quot; reached 135 and her debut mainstream album &quot;The Violin Player&quot; is the 76th best selling. The site claims that her total album sales make &quot;her the biggest-selling solo violinist in the chart&quot;.

==Skiing career==
Vanessa-Mae stated that she &quot;started skiing around the same time as I began playing the piano, at around four, before moving to the violin at five&quot;, and that it had been her &quot;dream to be a ski bum since I was 14.&quot; In 2009 Vanessa-Mae took up residence in the Swiss alpine resort of Zermatt. In August 2010, she told &quot;The Telegraph&quot;, &quot;I am British, but realistically there is no way I could represent my own country, but because my natural father is Thai, they have accepted me.&quot; She registered as a Thai alpine skier.

===Qualifying event===
In 2014, Thailand had no Alpine skiers in the top 500, and Olympic rules allowed such countries to send one man and one woman to the Olympics slalom and giant slalom, based on alternative criteria: the skier must have 140 points or less, smaller scores being better under the International Ski Federation (FIS) system, while starting at least five internationally recognised slalom or giant slalom events.

At the request of Vanessa-Mae&#x27;s management and the Thai Olympic Committee, a giant slalom competition was organised by the Alpine Ski Club Triglav and took place on 18 and 19 January 2014 at Krvavec in Slovenia, and would be the last chance for Vanessa-Mae to achieve the FIS-recognised score to qualify for the February 2014 Olympics. The event included a national junior championship, in which she was 14 years older than any of the competition.

The event put her score under the 140-point average, dropping it from 269.44 on 11 January to 131.15 at the end of 19 January. Her manager Giles Holland said &quot;It would appear that she&#x27;s done it. She&#x27;s done it by a whisker, but she&#x27;s done it.&quot; FIS confirmed her eligibility to compete in the 2014 Olympics, with Ana Jelusic of the FIS mentioning that the Krvavec results &quot;ticks all the boxes&quot;.

A Swiss race on 3 and 4 February raised her score to 171.09.

===Olympics===

She was one of two alpine skiers who represented Thailand at the 2014 Winter Olympics, where she competed under the name of &quot;Vanessa Vanakorn&quot; (วาเนสซ่า เมย์ ตัน วรรณกร; Vanessa May Tan Vanakorn).

On 18 February 2014, Vanakorn finished 67th of 90 skiers, with a time of 1:44.86 on her first run at giant slalom, 26.98 seconds behind the leader and 7.83 seconds to Xia Lina, who finished ahead of her. She started in the 87th position, representing her relative ranking in the world giant slalom rankings. In run 2, she had a time of 1:42.11, 24.21 seconds behind the leader of run 2 and 11:35 seconds behind Xia, also ahead of Vanakorn. She started 74th in run 2, the last starter for run 2. At the end of the event, she had a total time of 3:26.97, 50.10 seconds behind the gold medal winner, Tina Maze of Slovenia. She was last of the 67 racers who finished, although 23 other racers failed to complete the race.

====Olympic results====
==== Investigation and appeal ====
On 10 July 2014 four Slovenian ski competition organisers were reported to have each been given four-year bans on working with Slovenian Ski Union (Smučarska zveza Slovenije) and FIS competitions because of supposedly fixed Sochi Winter Olympics qualifications for the Thai ski team at Krvavec in January 2014 – with the only goal to successfully qualify Vanessa Mae. However, no formal bans were ever handed out.

On 11 November 2014, the FIS Hearing Panel issued its own findings about the Krvavec event less than 10 months earlier: The weather was such that no regular race could be held; the competition&#x27;s referee said that &quot;any comparable competition in Slovenia would have been cancelled&quot;. A previously retired competitor took part in the alleged competition solely to lower (improve) the scores of the participants. The official results of &quot;approximately 23 competitors&quot; for the two races on 18 January included results at least two people who in fact did not attend. The official results for two giant slalom races on 19 January also included results for a person who was not even present at the Krvavec competition. One competitor who fell was given an official timing 10 seconds better than reality, and put in second place in the official results. At least one participant started outside the starting wand; afterward, the starter manually triggered the starting wand.

The Hearing Panel issued a worldwide four-year ban against Vanessa-Mae, two-year ban against the Chief of Race Borut Hrobat, and one-year bans against the FIS Technical Delegate, Chief of Timing, Referee, and Starter. FIS president Gian-Franco Kasper commented to Associated Press concerning the violations: &quot;Those who have been sanctioned have been sanctioned for good reason. At first we were laughing when we heard it. But then we realised it&#x27;s quite a serious thing.&quot;

As two or more participants worked in combination to violate the rules, the FIS Hearing Panel recommended that all four events during the Krvavec competition be annulled. The Hearing Panel noted that, if the results were to be annulled by the FIS Council, it will mean that Vanessa-Mae, Federica Selva of San Marino, and Ieva Januškevičiūtė of Lithuania will have not qualified for the 2014 Olympic Games. Vanessa-Mae issued a statement calling the ban &quot;nonsensical&quot; and saying &quot;we will&quot; appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport.

The FIS Council met on 18 November and cancelled the results of &quot;all four giant slalom races&quot; at Krvavec and issued a press release saying that &quot;Vanessa Vanakorn (THA) who competed in the Sochi 2014 Olympic Winter Games therefore did not qualify and should not have been participating in the Sochi 2014 Games.&quot; The FIS Council was of the opinion that Federica Selva and Ieva Januškevičiūtė &quot;were victims of the manipulated races&quot;, and forwarded the information to the International Olympic Committee. Vanessa-Mae filed appeals with the Court of Arbitration for Sport on 4 December 2014 against both the FIS Hearing Panel and the FIS Council.

On 19 June 2015 the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) voided Vanessa-Mae&#x27;s four-year ban, saying there was a lack of evidence that she herself manipulated the races; but the CAS dismissed her appeal to restore the qualifying results, confirming that the qualifying races &quot;were so defective that their results and qualification points gained therefrom could not stand&quot;, and therefore &quot;Vanessa Vanakorn remains ineligible to compete in the Sochi 2014 Olympic Winter Games&quot;. The CAS&#x27;s decision also awarded an amount of money to be paid by the FIS to Vanessa-Mae.

Despite Vanessa-Mae&#x27;s successful result in nullifying the FIS race ban at the CAS appeal, there was still some doubt over the status of her races at the 2014 Winter Olympics. However, in January 2016 the media announced that the International Olympic Committee had confirmed that Vanessa-Mae could be called an Olympian.

In 2016, Vanessa-Mae settled her defamation lawsuit against the FIS, in which the FIS made an &quot;appropriate payment&quot;, the amount of which was not disclosed. The FIS issued a full apology for its claims of race-fixing, and stated &quot;Ms. Vanakorn and her entourage did not in any way fix, contrive or improperly influence the result, progress, conduct or any other aspect of the FIS-approved races.&quot;

===Post-appeal===
Vanessa-Mae returned to skiing in 2017, to attempt to qualify for the 2018 Winter Olympics. Vanessa-Mae withdrew from competition due to suffering a shoulder injury, in January 2018. With her withdrawal, the placement for Thailand went to 21-year-old Alexia Arisarah Schenkel.

==Personal life==
Vanessa-Mae&#x27;s long-term boyfriend is Frenchman Lionel Catelan. Vanessa-Mae has expressed a lack of interest in marriage, saying &quot;you don&#x27;t need a ring to say I love you&quot;.

==Awards and nominations==
{| class=&quot;wikitable sortable plainrowheaders&quot; 
! scope=&quot;col&quot; | Award
! scope=&quot;col&quot; | Year
! scope=&quot;col&quot; | Nominee(s)
! scope=&quot;col&quot; | Category
! scope=&quot;col&quot; | Result
! scope=&quot;col&quot; class=&quot;unsortable&quot;| 
!scope=&quot;row&quot;|World Music Awards
| 1997
| rowspan=2|Herself
| World&#x27;s Best Selling Classical Artist
| 
! scope=&quot;row&quot;|Žebřík Music Awards
| 1999
| Best International Instrumentalist
| 
==Discography==
*&quot;Violin&quot; (1990)
*&quot;Kids&#x27; Classics&quot; (1991)
*&quot;Tchaikovsky &amp; Beethoven Violin Concertos&quot; (1991)
*&quot;The Violin Player&quot; (1995)
*&quot;The Classical Album 1&quot; (1996)
*&quot;China Girl: The Classical Album 2&quot; (1997)
*&quot;Storm&quot; (1997)
*&quot;The Original Four Seasons and the Devil&#x27;s Trill Sonata: The Classical Album 3&quot; (1999)
*&quot;Subject to Change&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Choreography&quot; (2004)

==Filmography==
* &quot;Live at the Royal Albert Hall, The Red Hot Tour&quot; (1995) (concert documentary)
* &quot;Live at the Berlin Philharmonie&quot; (1997)
* &quot;The Alternative Classical Concert - Live at the Symphony Hall Birmingham&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Storm on World Tour&quot; (1998)
* &quot;The Violin Fantasy&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Arabian Nights&quot; (2000) (actor in the series)
* &quot;The Making of Me&quot; (2008) (subject of episode 3)

== Notes ==
==References==
==Further reading==
*

==External links==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215076" start="0" end="11" title="Vanessa-Mae" label="Vanessa-Mae"/>
<link wikidata="Q215076" start="50" end="80" title="Vanessa-Mae" label="Vanessa-Mae Vanakorn Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q215076" start="259" end="275" title="Vanessa-Mae" label="Vanessa Vanakorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15361321" start="310" end="318" title="Thailand at the 2014 Winter Olympics" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q390965" start="322" end="363" title="alpine skiing at the 2014 Winter Olympics" label="alpine skiing at the 2014 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q212928" start="409" end="437" title="International Ski Federation" label="International Ski Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q659499" start="572" end="602" title="Court of Arbitration for Sport" label="Court of Arbitration for Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="817" end="826" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="876" end="880" title="Thailand" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q180472" start="913" end="921" title="adoption" label="adoption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994505" start="1108" end="1137" title="Central Conservatory of Music" label="Central Conservatory of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="1141" end="1148" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="1336" end="1345" title="Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="1350" end="1361" title="Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="1399" end="1421" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953631" start="1463" end="1480" title="The Violin Player" label="The Violin Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q705596" start="1519" end="1528" title="Mike Batt" label="Mike Batt"/>
<link wikidata="Q131324" start="1609" end="1622" title="Janet Jackson" label="Janet Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q777308" start="1635" end="1650" title="The Velvet Rope" label="The Velvet Rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="1750" end="1763" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556792" start="1806" end="1816" title="In My Life (George Martin album)" label="In My Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="1898" end="1905" title="Beatles" label="Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q210395" start="1917" end="1924" title="Because (Beatles song)" label="Because"/>
<link wikidata="Q202110" start="2054" end="2077" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1998" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="2093" end="2103" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q32963" start="2111" end="2132" title="National Indoor Arena" label="National Indoor Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q10573273" start="2166" end="2195" title="MJ &amp;amp; Friends" label="Michael Jackson &amp;amp; Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="2208" end="2213" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="2218" end="2224" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340" start="2280" end="2295" title="Antonio Vivaldi" label="Antonio Vivaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12016" start="2303" end="2319" title="The Four Seasons (Vivaldi)" label="The Four Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q591627" start="2397" end="2420" title="2002 Winter Paralympics" label="2002 Winter Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q612780" start="2523" end="2557" title="Sunday Times Rich List" label="&amp;quot;Sunday Times&amp;quot; Rich List"/>
<link wikidata="Q217115" start="2680" end="2694" title="Ramzan Kadyrov" label="Ramzan Kadyrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196" start="2730" end="2736" title="Grozny" label="Grozny"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2878" end="2911" title="China Girl: The Classical Album 2" label="China Girl: The Classical Album 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q15251" start="3089" end="3125" title="Handover of Hong Kong" label="reunification of China and Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128150" start="3137" end="3147" title="Classic FM (UK)" label="Classic FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q130003" start="3856" end="3869" title="alpine resort" label="alpine resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q27494" start="3873" end="3880" title="Zermatt" label="Zermatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="3913" end="3926" title="The Telegraph (UK)" label="The Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q186222" start="4115" end="4127" title="alpine skier" label="alpine skier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117409" start="4295" end="4301" title="slalom skiing" label="slalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q338208" start="4306" end="4318" title="giant slalom" label="giant slalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163005" start="4704" end="4711" title="Triglav National Park" label="Triglav"/>
<link wikidata="Q61245618" start="4756" end="4763" title="Krvavec Ski Resort" label="Krvavec"/>
<link wikidata="Q186222" start="5540" end="5552" title="alpine skier" label="alpine skier"/>
<link wikidata="Q15361321" start="5570" end="5606" title="Thailand at the 2014 Winter Olympics" label="Thailand at the 2014 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1830345" start="5896" end="5904" title="Xia Lina" label="Xia Lina"/>
<link wikidata="Q10085" start="6326" end="6335" title="Tina Maze" label="Tina Maze"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="6339" end="6347" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212928" start="6686" end="6689" title="International Ski Federation" label="FIS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8024" end="8036" title="Borut Hrobat" label="Borut Hrobat"/>
<link wikidata="Q116015" start="8145" end="8163" title="Gian-Franco Kasper" label="Gian-Franco Kasper"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="8177" end="8193" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q15830545" start="8688" end="8702" title="Federica Selva" label="Federica Selva"/>
<link wikidata="Q15676906" start="8722" end="8741" title="Ieva Januškevičiūtė" label="Ieva Januškevičiūtė"/>
<link wikidata="Q659499" start="8923" end="8953" title="Court of Arbitration for Sport" label="Court of Arbitration for Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="9454" end="9485" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q659499" start="9649" end="9679" title="Court of Arbitration for Sport" label="Court of Arbitration for Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="10458" end="10489" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9680" start="11055" end="11075" title="2018 Winter Olympics" label="2018 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q48885290" start="11236" end="11260" title="Alexia Arisarah Schenkel" label="Alexia Arisarah Schenkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="11323" end="11332" title="French people" label="Frenchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q375990" start="11803" end="11821" title="World Music Awards" label="World Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052711" start="12011" end="12017" title="Violin (album)" label="Violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404865" start="12038" end="12057" title="Kids&amp;#x27; Classics" label="Kids&amp;#x27; Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690614" start="12078" end="12122" title="Tchaikovsky &amp;amp; Beethoven Violin Concertos (album)" label="Tchaikovsky &amp;amp; Beethoven Violin Concertos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953631" start="12143" end="12160" title="The Violin Player" label="The Violin Player"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12223" end="12256" title="China Girl: The Classical Album 2" label="China Girl: The Classical Album 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050210" start="12277" end="12282" title="Storm (Vanessa-Mae album)" label="Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050303" start="12406" end="12423" title="Subject to Change (Vanessa-Mae album)" label="Subject to Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036168" start="12444" end="12456" title="Choreography (Vanessa-Mae album)" label="Choreography"/>
<link wikidata="Q623864" start="12814" end="12828" title="Arabian Nights (TV miniseries)" label="Arabian Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125977" start="12872" end="12888" title="The Making of Me (TV series)" label="The Making of Me"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407749" wikidata="Q3329841" url="?curid=407749" title="Retinal scan">
<text>A retinal scan is a biometric technique that uses unique patterns on a person&#x27;s retina blood vessels. It is not to be confused with other ocular-based technologies: iris recognition, commonly called an &quot;iris scan&quot;, and eye vein verification that uses scleral veins.

The human retina is a thin tissue made up of neural cells that is located in the posterior portion of the eye. Because of the complex structure of the capillaries that supply the retina with blood, each person&#x27;s retina is unique, making retinal scans an emerging authentication method. The network of blood vessels in the retina is not entirely genetically determined and thus even identical twins do not share a similar pattern.

Although retinal patterns may be altered in cases of diabetes, glaucoma or retinal degenerative disorders, the retina typically remains unchanged from birth until death. Due to its unique and unchanging nature, the retina appears to be the most precise and reliable biometric, aside from DNA. The National Center for State Courts estimate that retinal scanning has an error rate of one in ten million.

A retinal scan is performed by casting an unperceived beam of low-energy infrared light into a person’s eye as they look through the scanner&#x27;s eyepiece. This beam of light traces a standardized path on the retina. Because retinal blood vessels absorb light more readily than the surrounding tissue, the amount of reflection varies during the scan. The pattern of variations is digitized and stored in a database.

==History==
The idea for retinal identification was first conceived by Carleton Simon and Isadore Goldstein and was published in the New York State Journal of Medicine in 1935. The idea was ahead of its time, but once technology caught up, the concept for a retinal scanning device emerged in 1975. In 1976, Robert &quot;Buzz&quot; Hill formed a corporation named EyeDentify, Inc., and made a full-time effort to research and develop such a device. In 1978, specific means for a retinal scanner was patented, followed by a commercial model in 1981.

==In popular culture==
Because of the relative obscurity and &quot;high tech&quot; nature of retinal scans, they are frequently used as a device in fiction to suggest that an area has been particularly strongly secured against intrusion. Some notable examples include:

*In the movie &quot;Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan&quot; (1982), Admiral Kirk gains access to top secret computer files by use of a retinal scan.
*In the science fiction novel &quot;The Long Result&quot; by John Brunner (1965), a retinal scanner is used to access a Remote Control Centre at a spaceport.
*In the movie &quot;Batman&quot; (1966), Batman describes to Robin how the tiny vessels in the retina are unique to the individual, and by utilizing the portable retina scan device in the Batmobile, they confirm the identity of the Penguin.
*In the comic book film series &quot;X-Men&quot; Charles Xavier uses a retinal scanner to unlock Cerebro. This is bypassed by the shape-shifter Mystique assuming his form and William Stryker using an unknown mechanism.
*In the &quot;Half-Life&quot; video game series, the scientists of Black Mesa are frequently shown operating retinal scanners to access locked doors or hidden devices.
*Characters in the films &quot;Never Say Never Again&quot; (1983), &quot;GoldenEye&quot; (1995), &quot;&quot; (1996), &quot;Barb Wire&quot; (1996), &quot;Entrapment&quot; (1999), &quot;Minority Report&quot; (2002) and &quot;Paycheck&quot; (2003) and &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels (film)&quot; (2000) utilize or try to deceive retinal scanners.
*In the &quot;Splinter Cell&quot; video game series, retinal scanners are used to identify agents within the Third Echelon and guards within military/business complexes.
*In the 2012 film &quot;The Avengers&quot;, characters gain access to a quantity of very rare iridium by using two devices: one which apparently hooks onto a victim&#x27;s eyeball, and another which receives signals from the first to holographically reconstruct the retina to fool the scanner.
*In the 1993 film &quot;Demolition Man (film)&quot;, Simon Phoenix deceives a retinal scanner by taking the eyeball from a prison doctor.
*In the video game Doom (2016), a retinal scanner linked with a mutilated researcher is utilized to gain access to the BFG 9000.

==Uses==
Retinal scanners are typically used for authentication and identification purposes. Retinal scanning has been utilized by several government agencies including the FBI, CIA, and NASA, and has also been used in prisons. Retinal scanning also has medical application. Communicable illnesses such as AIDS, syphilis, malaria, chicken pox and Lyme disease as well as hereditary diseases like leukemia, lymphoma, and sickle cell anemia affect the eyes. Pregnancy also affects the eyes. Likewise, indications of chronic health conditions such as congestive heart failure, atherosclerosis, and cholesterol issues first appear in the eyes. Retinal scanning is sometimes confused with iris recognition, which has been employed for a wider scope of applications.

==Pros and cons==
Advantages
* Low occurrence of false positives
* Extremely low (almost 0%) false negative rates
* Highly reliable because no two people have the same retinal pattern
* Speedy results: Identity of the subject is verified very quickly
Disadvantages
* Measurement accuracy can be affected by a disease such as cataracts
* Measurement accuracy can also be affected by severe astigmatism
* Scanning procedure is perceived by some as invasive
* Subject being scanned must be very close to the camera optics
* High equipment cost

==See also==
* Vein matching
* Iris recognition

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3329841" start="2" end="14" title="Retinal scan" label="retinal scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q177765" start="20" end="29" title="biometric" label="biometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="85" end="91" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672722" start="170" end="186" title="iris recognition" label="iris recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081096" start="234" end="255" title="eye vein verification" label="eye vein verification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="286" end="291" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="309" end="315" title="Tissue (biology)" label="tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9620" start="327" end="339" title="Nerve" label="neural cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q430024" start="388" end="391" title="Human eye" label="eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q103142" start="433" end="444" title="Capillary" label="capillaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="473" end="478" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="588" end="600" title="blood vessel" label="blood vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q159979" start="669" end="683" title="identical twin" label="identical twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="771" end="779" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q159701" start="781" end="789" title="glaucoma" label="glaucoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="1194" end="1208" title="infrared light" label="infrared light"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="1356" end="1369" title="blood vessels" label="blood vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q843958" start="1503" end="1512" title="digitized" label="digitized"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="1529" end="1537" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="1758" end="1768" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2380" end="2411" title="Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan" label="Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11154413" start="2543" end="2558" title="The Long Result" label="The Long Result"/>
<link wikidata="Q810857" start="2685" end="2691" title="Batman (1966 film)" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006869" start="2943" end="2948" title="X-Men_(film_series)" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925011" start="3036" end="3049" title="Shapeshifting" label="shape-shifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q752241" start="3139" end="3148" title="Half-Life (series)" label="Half-Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q180279" start="3324" end="3345" title="Never Say Never Again" label="Never Say Never Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q19089" start="3366" end="3375" title="GoldenEye" label="GoldenEye"/>
<link wikidata="Q807302" start="3417" end="3426" title="Barb Wire (1996 film)" label="Barb Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q578873" start="3447" end="3457" title="Entrapment (film)" label="Entrapment"/>
<link wikidata="Q244604" start="3478" end="3493" title="Minority Report (film)" label="Minority Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q247516" start="3517" end="3525" title="Paycheck (film)" label="Paycheck"/>
<link wikidata="Q229599" start="3549" end="3577" title="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels (2000 film)" label="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514735" start="3649" end="3662" title="Tom Clancy&amp;#x27;s Splinter Cell" label="Splinter Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q182218" start="3829" end="3841" title="The Avengers (2012 film)" label="The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q877" start="3899" end="3906" title="iridium" label="iridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q470891" start="4123" end="4144" title="Demolition Man (film)" label="Demolition Man (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q513867" start="4256" end="4267" title="Doom (2016 video game)" label="Doom (2016)"/>
<link wikidata="Q787311" start="4356" end="4364" title="BFG 9000" label="BFG 9000"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="4540" end="4543" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="4545" end="4548" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="4554" end="4558" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="4673" end="4677" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="4679" end="4687" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="4689" end="4696" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q44727" start="4698" end="4709" title="chicken pox" label="chicken pox"/>
<link wikidata="Q201989" start="4714" end="4726" title="Lyme disease" label="Lyme disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="4738" end="4756" title="hereditary disease" label="hereditary disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="4763" end="4771" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="4773" end="4781" title="lymphoma" label="lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q185034" start="4787" end="4805" title="sickle cell anemia" label="sickle cell anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="4823" end="4832" title="Pregnancy" label="Pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="4915" end="4939" title="congestive heart failure" label="congestive heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12252367" start="4941" end="4956" title="atherosclerosis" label="atherosclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43656" start="4962" end="4973" title="cholesterol" label="cholesterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672722" start="5051" end="5067" title="iris recognition" label="iris recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q127724" start="5454" end="5463" title="cataracts" label="cataracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q177895" start="5518" end="5529" title="astigmatism" label="astigmatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918690" start="5686" end="5699" title="Vein matching" label="Vein matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672722" start="5702" end="5718" title="Iris recognition" label="Iris recognition"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407750" wikidata="Q3734" url="?curid=407750" title="Adygea">
<text>Adygea, officially the Republic of Adygea, () or the Adygean Republic, is a republic of Russia. It is situated in the North Caucasus of Eastern Europe. The republic is a part of the Southern Federal District, and covers an area of , with a population of roughly 496,934 residents. It is an enclave within Krasnodar Krai and is the fifth-smallest Russian federal subject by area. Maykop is the capital and the largest city of Adygea, home to one-third of the republic&#x27;s population.

Adygea is one of Russia&#x27;s ethnic republics, primarily representing the indigenous Circassian people that form 25% of the Republic&#x27;s population, while Russians form a majority at 60%, and with minority populations of Armenians and Ukrainians. The official languages of Adygea are Adyghe and Russian.

==History==
The Cherkess (Adyghe) Autonomous Oblast was established within the Russian SFSR on July 27, 1922, on the territories of the Kuban-Black Sea Oblast, primarily settled by the Adyghe people. At that time, Krasnodar was the administrative center. It was renamed Adyghe (Cherkess) Autonomous Oblast on August 24, 1922, soon after its creation. In the first two years of its existence the autonomous oblast was a part of the Russian SFSR, but on October 17, 1924, it was transferred to the jurisdiction of the newly created North Caucasus Krai within the RSFSR.

It was renamed Adyghe Autonomous Oblast (AO) in July 1928. On January 10, 1934, the autonomous oblast became part of the new Azov-Black Sea Krai, which was removed from North Caucasus Krai. Maykop was made the administrative center of the autonomous oblast in 1936. Adyghe AO became part of Krasnodar Krai when it was established on September 13, 1937.

On July 3, 1991, the oblast was elevated to the status of a republic under the jurisdiction of the Russian Federation. The first President of the republic was Aslan Dzharimov, elected on 5 January 1992.

Relations between the Adyghe and ethnic Russians in Adygea are currently good. Russians make up two-thirds of the population within Adygea. The current Head of Adygea is Murat Kumpilov.

==Geography==
Adygea lies in Russia&#x27;s Southern Federal District of Eastern Europe, in the foothills of the Northwestern Caucasus in the Caucasus Mountains System, with plains in the northern areas and mountains in the southern area. Forests (mainly of European beech, oak, and maple) cover almost 40% of its territory.
*&quot;Area&quot; — .
*&quot;Borders&quot; — the Republic of Adygea is entirely surrounded by Krasnodar Krai.
*&quot;Highest point&quot; — Chugush Mountain: .
===Rivers===

The long Kuban River is one of the major navigable rivers in the Caucasus region. It forms part of the northern border between the Republic of Adygea and Krasnodar Krai.
Other rivers include:
*Belaya River
*Chokhrak River
*Dakh River
*Fars River
*Khodz River
*Kisha River
*Bolshaya Laba River — &quot;(forming part of the eastern border between Adygea and Krasnodar Krai)&quot;
*Psekups River
*Pshish River
*Sakhray River
*Sukhoy Kurdzhips River — &quot;flows near the archaeological site at Mezmaiskaya cave&quot;.

===Lakes===

The republic has no large lakes. However, it has several reservoirs:
*, the largest in North Caucasus
*Oktyabrskoye Reservoir
*Shapsug Reservoir
*Tshchikskoye Reservoir (Тщикское))
*Шенджийское
*Четукское
*Кужорское
*Maykop Reservoir

===Mountains===

The republic&#x27;s major mountains and peaks range in height from , and include:
*Chugush Mountain — 
*Mount Fisht — 
*Oshten Mountain
*Pseashkho Mountain
*Shepsi Mountain

===Natural resources===
The republic is rich in oil and natural gas. Other natural resources include gold, silver, tungsten, and iron.

===Climate===
*&quot;Average January temperature&quot;: 
*&quot;Average July temperature&quot;: 
*&quot;Average annual precipitation&quot;: 

February 15, 2010, recorded the absolute maximum for the winter months—in the capital, the city of Maykop, the temperature was .

==Politics==

The chief executive of the government of the Republic of Adygea is the Head (called &quot;President&quot; until May 2011), who is appointed for a five-year term. Proficiency in the Adyghe language is a prerequisite for the candidate.

The current Head, Murat Kumpilov (since January 27, 2017), succeeded Aslan Tkhakushinov, initially as acting Head of the region. There is also a directly elected State Council (&quot;Khase&quot; or &quot;Xase&quot;—not to be confused with the Adyghe Khase, a union of Adyghe who supported Sovmen for a second term), which comprises the Council of Representatives and the Council of the Republic. Both councils are elected every five years and have 27 deputies each.

The Republic sends three representatives to the parliament of the Russian Federation; one to the State Duma and the other two to the Federation Council.

The Constitution of the Republic of Adygea was adopted on May 14, 1995.

==Administrative divisions==
The Republic of Adygea is administratively divided into seven districts (&quot;raions&quot;), two cities/towns, and (at a lower administrative level) five urban-type settlements. Municipally, the republic is divided into two urban okrugs, five urban settlements, and 46 rural settlements.

* Note &quot;м.р.&quot; above is an abbreviation for &quot;муниципальный район&quot; (Municipal District)

==Demographics==
*Population: 

*Life expectancy:

===Vital statistics===
:Source: Russian Federal State Statistics Service 


===Ethnic groups===
According to the 2021 Census, ethnic Russians make up 64.4% of the republic&#x27;s total population, while the ethnic Adyghe are 25.7%. Other groups include Armenians (3.3%), Kurds (1.2%), Romani people (0.7%) and Ukrainians (0.6%).
# 50,304 people were registered from administrative databases, and could not declare an ethnicity. It is estimated that the proportion of ethnicities in this group is the same as that of the declared group.
# Including 397 Kabardins and 16,133 Cherkess.

===Religions===

According to a 2012 survey which interviewed 56,900 people 35.4% of the population of Adygea adheres to the Russian Orthodox Church, 23.6% to Islam, 3% are unaffiliated Christians and 1% are Orthodox Christian believers who do not belong to church or are members of other Orthodox churches. In addition, 19.8% of the population declares to be &quot;spiritual but not religious&quot; 8% is atheist, and 8.6% follows other religions or did not answer to the question.
===Education===
Adyghe State University and Maykop State Technological University, both in the capital Maykop, are the two major higher education facilities in Adygea.

==Economy==

Even though it is one of the poorest parts of Russia, the republic has abundant forests and rich soil. The region is famous for producing grain, sunflowers, tea, tobacco, and other produce. Hog and sheep breeding are also developed.

Food, timber, woodworking, pulp and paper, heavy engineering, and metal-working are the most developed industries.

===Transportation===
There is a small airport in Maykop (ICAO airport code URKM). Several rail lines pass through the republic.

==Culture==

The Adyghe language (Адыгабзэ) is a member of the Northwest Caucasian language family. Along with Russian, Adyghe is the official language of the republic.

There are 8 state and 23 public museums in the republic. The largest museum is the National Museum of the Republic of Adygea in Maykop.

==Notable people==
*Anatoly Berezovoy (1942—2014), Soviet pilot/cosmonaut.
*Aslan Dzharimov (born 1936), first president of the Republic of Adygea.
*Anna Kareyeva (born 1977), handball player.
*Mukharby Kirzhinov (born 1949), weightlifter.
*Andrei Kobenko (born 1982), footballer.
*Nikita Kucherov (born 1993), ice hockey player.
*Vladimir Nevzorov (born 1952), judoka.
*Hazret Sovmen (born 1937), second president of the Republic of Adygea.
*Aslan Tkhakushinov (born 1947), third president of the Republic of Adygea.
*Aslan Tlebzu (born 1981), Adyghe folk musician.
*Konstantin Vasilyev (1942—1976), painter.

==See also==

*Music in the Republic of Adygea
*Mezmaiskaya cave
*Circassian genocide
*Adyghe people

==References==
===Notes===
===Sources===
*
*

==External links==

*Адыгэ Республикэм и Лъэпкъ театр (in Adyghe)
*The Voice of Circassians (Adyghe Language)
* Official website of the Republic of Adygea 
*Overview of the Republic of Adygea (&quot;Kommersant&quot; newspaper)
*Official Website of the Adyghe State University
* Official Website of the Adyghe State University
* Official Website of the National Museum of the Republic of Adygea</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3734" start="0" end="6" title="Adygea" label="Adygea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734" start="23" end="41" title="Adygea" label="Republic of Adygea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734" start="53" end="69" title="Adygea" label="Adygean Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41162" start="76" end="84" title="republics of Russia" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="88" end="94" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37736" start="118" end="132" title="North Caucasus" label="North Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="136" end="150" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q483599" start="182" end="207" title="Southern Federal District" label="Southern Federal District"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="290" end="297" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680" start="305" end="319" title="Krasnodar Krai" label="Krasnodar Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752" start="379" end="385" title="Maykop" label="Maykop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="393" end="400" title="capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625447" start="518" end="524" title="Ethnic groups in Russia" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15763" start="574" end="591" title="Circassian people" label="Circassian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="647" end="655" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="713" end="722" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="727" end="737" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q27776" start="776" end="782" title="Adyghe language" label="Adyghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="787" end="794" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478158" start="813" end="848" title="Adyghe Autonomous Oblast" label="Cherkess (Adyghe) Autonomous Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="876" end="888" title="Russian SFSR" label="Russian SFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995029" start="933" end="955" title="Kuban-Black Sea Oblast" label="Kuban-Black Sea Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q15763" start="982" end="995" title="Adyghe people" label="Adyghe people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646" start="1011" end="1020" title="Krasnodar" label="Krasnodar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="1029" end="1050" title="administrative center" label="administrative center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="1228" end="1240" title="Russian SFSR" label="Russian SFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636093" start="1327" end="1346" title="North Caucasus Krai" label="North Caucasus Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511957" start="1491" end="1510" title="Azov-Black Sea Krai" label="Azov-Black Sea Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680" start="1657" end="1671" title="Krasnodar Krai" label="Krasnodar Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471231" start="1879" end="1894" title="Aslan Dzharimov" label="Aslan Dzharimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4246991" start="2094" end="2108" title="Murat Kumpilov" label="Murat Kumpilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q483599" start="2154" end="2179" title="Southern Federal District" label="Southern Federal District"/>
<link wikidata="Q834521" start="2223" end="2244" title="Western Caucasus" label="Northwestern Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477" start="2252" end="2270" title="Caucasus Mountains" label="Caucasus Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="2284" end="2289" title="plain" label="plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680" start="2529" end="2543" title="Krasnodar Krai" label="Krasnodar Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971946" start="2574" end="2590" title="Chugush Mountain" label="Chugush Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q82308" start="2617" end="2628" title="Kuban River" label="Kuban River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680" start="2762" end="2776" title="Krasnodar Krai" label="Krasnodar Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q815250" start="2801" end="2813" title="Belaya River (Kuban)" label="Belaya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072061" start="2815" end="2829" title="Chokhrak River" label="Chokhrak River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4155337" start="2831" end="2841" title="Dakh River" label="Dakh River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616211" start="2843" end="2853" title="Fars River" label="Fars River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075694" start="2855" end="2866" title="Khodz River" label="Khodz River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222622" start="2868" end="2879" title="Kisha River" label="Kisha River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474304" start="2881" end="2900" title="Bolshaya Laba River" label="Bolshaya Laba River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635007" start="2987" end="3000" title="Psekups River" label="Psekups River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324221" start="3002" end="3014" title="Pshish River" label="Pshish River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4409561" start="3016" end="3029" title="Sakhray River" label="Sakhray River"/>
<link wikidata="Q34003" start="3100" end="3116" title="Mezmaiskaya cave" label="Mezmaiskaya cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q37736" start="3225" end="3239" title="North Caucasus" label="North Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655036" start="3265" end="3282" title="Shapsug Reservoir" label="Shapsug Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971946" start="3473" end="3489" title="Chugush Mountain" label="Chugush Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392222" start="3494" end="3505" title="Mount Fisht" label="Mount Fisht"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="3612" end="3615" title="petroleum" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="3620" end="3631" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="3665" end="3669" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="3671" end="3677" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="3679" end="3687" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="3693" end="3697" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="3819" end="3832" title="precipitation" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752" start="3941" end="3947" title="Maykop" label="Maykop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270400" start="4057" end="4061" title="Head of the Republic of Adygea" label="Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q27776" start="4167" end="4182" title="Adyghe language" label="Adyghe language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4246991" start="4239" end="4253" title="Murat Kumpilov" label="Murat Kumpilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q732556" start="4290" end="4308" title="Aslan Tkhakushinov" label="Aslan Tkhakushinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146731" start="4383" end="4396" title="State Council of the Republic of Adygea" label="State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q715641" start="4785" end="4795" title="State Duma" label="State Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q186473" start="4821" end="4839" title="Federation Council of Russia" label="Federation Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4846" end="4884" title="Constitution of the Republic of Adygea" label="Constitution of the Republic of Adygea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688" start="5023" end="5028" title="raion" label="raion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578772" start="5042" end="5054" title="types of inhabited localities in Russia" label="cities/towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989457" start="5099" end="5120" title="urban-type settlement" label="urban-type settlement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5123" end="5134" title="Subdivisions of Russia#Municipal divisions" label="Municipally"/>
<link wikidata="Q57573219" start="5505" end="5516" title="Russian Census (2021)" label="2021 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="5525" end="5533" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q15763" start="5606" end="5612" title="Adyghe people" label="Adyghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="5645" end="5654" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="5663" end="5668" title="Kurdish people" label="Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="5677" end="5690" title="Romani people" label="Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="5702" end="5712" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q244028" start="5944" end="5953" title="Kabardins" label="Kabardins"/>
<link wikidata="Q15763" start="5965" end="5973" title="Cherkess" label="Cherkess"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="6101" end="6124" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="6135" end="6140" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049261" start="6149" end="6161" title="nondenominational Christianity" label="unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="6162" end="6172" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="6265" end="6282" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Orthodox churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="6382" end="6389" title="atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058030" start="6475" end="6498" title="Adyghe State University" label="Adyghe State University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6503" end="6540" title="Maykop State Technological University" label="Maykop State Technological University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="6779" end="6784" title="cereal" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q171497" start="6786" end="6795" title="sunflower" label="sunflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="6798" end="6801" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="6803" end="6810" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q651237" start="7023" end="7036" title="Maykop Airport" label="small airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752" start="7040" end="7046" title="Maykop" label="Maykop"/>
<link wikidata="Q207529" start="7048" end="7065" title="ICAO airport code" label="ICAO airport code"/>
<link wikidata="Q27776" start="7137" end="7152" title="Adyghe language" label="Adyghe language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33852" start="7183" end="7218" title="Northwest Caucasian language" label="Northwest Caucasian language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q65178098" start="7231" end="7238" title="Russian languages" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q465724" start="7447" end="7464" title="Anatoly Berezovoy" label="Anatoly Berezovoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471231" start="7503" end="7518" title="Aslan Dzharimov" label="Aslan Dzharimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q771094" start="7576" end="7589" title="Anna Kareyeva" label="Anna Kareyeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q955281" start="7621" end="7639" title="Mukharby Kirzhinov" label="Mukharby Kirzhinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4225096" start="7668" end="7682" title="Andrei Kobenko" label="Andrei Kobenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693680" start="7709" end="7724" title="Nikita Kucherov" label="Nikita Kucherov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066258" start="7758" end="7775" title="Vladimir Nevzorov" label="Vladimir Nevzorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914853" start="7798" end="7811" title="Hazret Sovmen" label="Hazret Sovmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q732556" start="7870" end="7888" title="Aslan Tkhakushinov" label="Aslan Tkhakushinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807296" start="7946" end="7958" title="Aslan Tlebzu" label="Aslan Tlebzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q920086" start="7995" end="8014" title="Konstantin Vasilyev" label="Konstantin Vasilyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058143" start="8053" end="8084" title="Music in the Republic of Adygea" label="Music in the Republic of Adygea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34003" start="8086" end="8102" title="Mezmaiskaya cave" label="Mezmaiskaya cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578778" start="8104" end="8123" title="Circassian genocide" label="Circassian genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q15763" start="8125" end="8138" title="Adyghe people" label="Adyghe people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780189" start="8385" end="8395" title="Kommersant" label="Kommersant"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407754" wikidata="Q1143793" url="?curid=407754" title="India national cricket team">
<text>The India men&#x27;s national cricket team, also known as Men in Blue, represents India in international cricket. It is governed by the Board of Control for Cricket in India and is a full member of the International Cricket Council with Test, One Day International and Twenty20 International status. The team is the current T20 World Champions.

The team has played 589 Test matches, winning 181, losing 184, with 223 draws and 1 tie. As of November 2024, India is ranked second in the Test Championship on 111 rating points. India have played in two of the three World Test Championship finals, finishing runners-up in 2021 and 2023, while finishing third in 2025.

Test rivalries include the Border–Gavaskar Trophy with Australia, Freedom Trophy with South Africa, Anthony de Mello Trophy and Pataudi Trophy both with England.

The team has played 1,063 ODI matches, winning 564, losing 445, tying 10 and with 44 ending in a no-result. As of February 2025, India is ranked first in the ICC ODI Championship on 119 rating points. India have appeared in the World Cup final four times 1983, 2003, 2011, 2023 and won twice in 1983 and 2011. It was the second team, after the West Indies, to win the World Cup, and the first to win the competition on home soil after winning it in 2011. India have also won two ICC Champions trophies in 2002 and 2013. In addition, they have also won the ODI Asia Cup 7 times in 1984, 1988, 1990–91, 1995, 2010, 2018, 2023.

The team has played 247 Twenty20 International matches, winning 164, losing 71, tying 6 and with 6 ending in a no-result. As of November 2024, India is ranked first in the ICC T20I Championship on 268 rating points. India have won the ICC Men&#x27;s T20 World Cup twice in 2007 and 2024. They have also won the Twenty20 Asia Cup in 2016 and Asian Games in 2022.

India are the reigning One Day Asian and T20 World Champions, winning the former in 2023 against Sri Lanka at the R. Premadasa Stadium in Colombo and the latter in 2024 against South Africa at the Kensington Oval in Bridgetown.

== History ==
===Early history (1700s–1918)===
The British first brought cricket to India in the early 1700s, with the first cricket match played in 1721. It was played and adopted by Kolis of Gujarat who were sea pirates and outlaws who often looted the British ships. The East India Company tried to manage the Kolis through cricket and were successful. In 1848, the Parsi community in Mumbai formed the Oriental Cricket Club, the first cricket club to be established by Indians. After slow beginnings, the Europeans eventually invited the Parsis to play a match in 1877. By 1912, the Parsis, Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims of Bombay played a quadrangular tournament with the Europeans every year. In the early 1900s, some Indians went on to play for the England cricket team. Some of these, such as Ranjitsinhji and Duleepsinhji were greatly appreciated by the British and their names went on to be used for the Ranji Trophy and Duleep Trophy – two major first-class tournaments in India. In 1911, an Indian men&#x27;s cricket team, captained by Bhupinder Singh of Patiala, went on their first official tour of the British Isles, but only played English county teams and not the England cricket team.

===Test match status (1918–1970)===

India was invited to the International Cricket Council in 1926, and made their debut as a Test playing nation in England in 1932, led by CK Nayudu, who was considered the best Indian batsman at the time. The one-off Test match between the two sides was played at Lord&#x27;s in London. The team was not strong in their batting at this point and went on to lose by 158 runs. India hosted its first men&#x27;s Test cricket series in 1933 when England toured India. The visitors won the three-test series 2–0 with the matches held at Bombay (now Mumbai), Calcutta (now Kolkata) and Madras (now Chennai). The Indian team continued to improve throughout the 1930s and 1940s but did not achieve an international victory during this period. In the early 1940s, India did not play any men&#x27;s Test cricket due to World War II. The team&#x27;s first series as an independent country was in late 1947 against Don Bradman&#x27;s Australia. It was also the first Test series India played which was not against England. Australia men&#x27;s cricket team won the five-match series 4–0, with Bradman tormenting the Indian bowling in his final Australian summer. India subsequently played their first Test series at home not against England, but against the West Indies in 1948. West Indies won the five Test series 1–0. India recorded their first Test victory, in their 24th match, against England at Madras in 1952. Later in the same year, they won their first Test series, which was against Pakistan. They continued their improvement throughout the early 1950s with a series win against New Zealand in 1956. However, they did not win again in the remainder of the decade and lost badly to strong Australian and English sides. On 24 August 1959, India lost by an innings in the Test to complete the only 5–0 whitewash ever inflicted by England. The next decade saw India&#x27;s reputation develop as a team with a strong record at home. They won their first Test series against England at home in 1961–62 and also won a home series against New Zealand. They managed to draw home series against Pakistan and Australia and another series against England. In this same period, India also won its first series outside the subcontinent, against New Zealand in 1967–68.

The key to India&#x27;s bowling in the 1970s were the Indian spin quartet – Bishan Singh Bedi, E. A. S. Prasanna, B. S. Chandrasekhar and Srinivasaraghavan Venkataraghavan. This period also saw the emergence of two of India&#x27;s best ever batsmen, Sunil Gavaskar and Gundappa Viswanath. Indian pitches have had the tendency to support spin and the spin quartet exploited this to create collapses in opposing batting line-ups. These players were responsible for the back-to-back series wins in 1971 in the West Indies and in England, under the captaincy of Ajit Wadekar. Gavaskar scored 774 runs in the West Indian series while Dilip Sardesai&#x27;s 112 played a big part in their one Test win.

===One-day cricket and ICC Cricket World Cup success (1970–1985)===

The advent of men&#x27;s One Day International (ODI) cricket in 1971 created a new dimension in the cricket world. However, India was not considered strong in ODIs at this point and batsmen such as the captain Gavaskar were known for their defensive approach to batting. India began as a weak team in ODIs and did not qualify for the second round in the first two editions of the Cricket World Cup. Gavaskar infamously blocked his way to 36 not out off 174 balls against England in the first World Cup in 1975; India scored just 132 for 3 and lost by 202 runs.

In contrast, India fielded a strong team in Test matches and was particularly strong at home, where their combination of stylish batsmen and beguiling spinners were at their best. India set a then Test record in the third Test against the West Indies at Port-of-Spain in 1976, when they chased 403 to win, thanks to 112 from Viswanath. In November 1976, the team established another record by scoring 524 for 9 declared against New Zealand at Kanpur without any individual batsman scoring a century. There were six fifties, the highest being 70 by Mohinder Amarnath. This innings was only the eighth instance in Test cricket where all eleven batsmen reached double figures.

During the 1980s, India developed a more attack-minded batting line-up with stroke makers such as the wristy Mohammad Azharuddin, Krishnamachari Srikanth, Dilip Vengsarkar and all-rounders Kapil Dev and Ravi Shastri. India won the Cricket World Cup in 1983, defeating the favourites and the two-time defending champions West Indies in the final at Lord&#x27;s, owing to a strong bowling performance. In spite of this, the team performed poorly in the Test arena, including 28 consecutive Test matches without a victory. In 1984, India won the Asia Cup and in 1985, won the World Championship of Cricket in Australia. Apart from this, India remained a weak team outside the Indian subcontinent. India&#x27;s Test series victory in 1986 against England remained the last Test series win by India outside the subcontinent for the next 19 years. The 1980s saw Gavaskar and Kapil Dev (India&#x27;s best all-rounder to date) at the pinnacle of their careers. Gavaskar made a Test record 34 centuries as he became the first man to reach the 10,000 run mark. Kapil Dev later became the highest wicket-taker in Test cricket with 434 wickets. The period was also marked by an unstable leadership, with Gavaskar and Kapil exchanging the captaincy several times.

===Late 20th century (1985–2000)===

The addition of Sachin Tendulkar and Anil Kumble to the national side in 1989 and 1990 further improved the team. The following year, Javagal Srinath, India&#x27;s fastest bowler since Amar Singh made his debut. Despite this, during the 1990s, India did not win any of its 33 Tests outside the subcontinent while it won 17 out of its 30 Tests at home. After being eliminated by neighbours Sri Lanka on home soil at the 1996 Cricket World Cup semi-final, the team underwent a year of change as Sourav Ganguly and Rahul Dravid, later to become captains of the team, made their debut in the same Test at Lord&#x27;s. Tendulkar replaced Azharuddin as captain in late 1996, but after a personal and team form slump, Tendulkar relinquished the captaincy and Azharuddin was reinstated at the beginning of 1998.

After failing to reach the semi-finals at the 1999 Cricket World Cup, Tendulkar was again made captain, and had another poor run, losing 3–0 on a tour of Australia and then 2–0 at home to South Africa. Tendulkar resigned, vowing never to captain the team again.

===21st century===

The team was further damaged in 2000 when former captain Azharuddin and fellow batsman Ajay Jadeja were implicated in a match-fixing scandal and given life and five-year bans respectively. This period was described by the BBC as &quot;the Indian cricket&#x27;s worst hour&quot;. However, the new core – Tendulkar, Dravid, Kumble and Ganguly – swore not to let this happen to them again, and led Indian cricket out of the dark times. The first three put aside personal ambitions to let Ganguly lead them into a new era.

The Indian team underwent major improvements under the captaincy of Ganguly and the guidance of John Wright, India&#x27;s first foreign coach. In the Kolkata Test match, India became only the third team in the history of Test cricket to win a Test match after following on. Australian captain Steve Waugh labelled India as the &quot;Final Frontier&quot; because of his side&#x27;s inability to win a Test series in India. In 2002, India were joint-winners of the ICC Champions Trophy with Sri Lanka and then went to the 2003 Cricket World Cup in South Africa, where they reached the final, only to be beaten by Australia. A convincing ODI series win in Pakistan in early 2006, following a loss in the Test series, gave India the world record of 17 successive ODI victories while batting second.

In September 2007, India won the first-ever ICC Men&#x27;s T20 World Cup held in South Africa, beating Pakistan by five runs in the final. On 2 April 2011, India won the 2011 Cricket World Cup by defeating Sri Lanka in the final, thus becoming the third team after West Indies and Australia to win the World Cup twice. India also became the first team to win the World Cup on home soil. India defeated England in the 2013 ICC Champions Trophy final and captain M. S. Dhoni became the first men&#x27;s cricket team captain in history to win the three major ICC trophies, namely the Cricket World Cup, ICC Men&#x27;s T20 World Cup and ICC Champions Trophy.

In the 2014 ICC Men&#x27;s World Twenty20 hosted in Bangladesh, India narrowly missed out on another ICC trophy by losing to Sri Lanka in the final. India was knocked out of the 2015 Cricket World Cup in the semi-final to eventual winners Australia. India then began 2016 by winning the 2016 Asia Cup, remaining unbeaten throughout the tournament. The team were favourites to win the 2016 ICC World Twenty20, which was being held at home, but lost in the semi-final to eventual champions West Indies. India defeated Pakistan in their first game of the 2017 ICC Champions Trophy but lost to the same opponents in the final, the first time they had met at this stage of a tournament since 2007.

The Indian team&#x27;s next major global tournament was the 2019 Cricket World Cup where the team finished first in the group stage with seven wins and only one loss which came against host nation England. They made the semis but lost to New Zealand by 18 runs. Rohit Sharma was the highest run-scorer for the team with 648 runs. India played the 2021 ICC World Test Championship Final against New Zealand in Southampton in which they lost by eight wickets. India qualified for the semi-finals in the 2022 T20 World Cup, but lost to England by ten wickets.

After a 3–1 series win against Australia on home soil. India played the 2023 ICC World Test Championship final against Australia at The Oval in which they lost by 209 runs. India went on to win the 2023 Asia Cup final against Sri Lanka in R. Premadasa Stadium by ten wickets .Kuldeep Yadav was the player of the tournament with nine wickets. Meanwhile, the Indian men&#x27;s cricket team secured a gold medal in 2022 Asian games due to higher seeding after the final against Afghanisthan was washed out.

India had an unbeaten campaign in the 2023 Cricket World Cup, starting with a win over Australia with six wickets. They stormed into the final after a strong win against Sri Lanka by 302 runs, and then won their semi-final against New Zealand by 70 runs. The game was marked by Virat Kohli becoming the first to ever achieve 50 ODI Centuries, surpassing the previous record set by Sachin Tendulkar. As well, Mohammed Shami took the best bowling figures for an Indian in the ODI World Cup, 7/57. However, they were ultimately defeated in the final by Australia.Virat Kohli was the highest run scorer of the ODI World Cup with 765 runs, the most ever in a single edition of the World Cup.

Rohit Sharma, Virat Kohli, and Ravindra Jadeja played in T20Is during this period however retired from the format following the 2024 T20 World Cup.

India won the 2024 T20 World Cup by defeating South Africa in the final. They became the third team after England and West Indies to win the cup twice and also the first team to win the tournament undefeated. Arshdeep Singh was the joint-highest wicket taker at 17 wickets. 
On 15 November 2024, during the fourth Twenty20 International (T20I) match of India&#x27;s tour of South Africa, which consisted of four matches, both Sanju Samson and Tilak Varma achieved the remarkable feat of scoring centuries. This marks the first instance in the history of Twenty20 International (T20I) match where multiple batters from a full-member team have surpassed the three-figure mark in the same innings.

==Gallery==
==Governing body==
The Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) is the governing body for the Indian cricket team and first-class cricket in India. The Board has been operating since 1929 and represents India at the International Cricket Council (ICC). Its headquarters is situated in the &#x27;Cricket centre&#x27; at Churchgate in Mumbai, Maharashtra. Amongst the richest sporting organisations in the world, it sold media rights for India&#x27;s matches from 2006 to 2010 for $612,000,000. Roger Binny is present BCCI president and Devajit Saikia is secretary.

The International Cricket Council determines India&#x27;s upcoming matches through its future tours program. However, the BCCI, with its influential financial position in the cricketing world, has often challenged the ICC&#x27;s program and called for more series between India, Australia and England which are more likely to earn more revenue as opposed to tours with Bangladesh or Zimbabwe. In the past, the BCCI has also come into conflict with the ICC regarding sponsorships.

=== Selection committee ===

Selection for the Indian cricket team occurs through the BCCI&#x27;s zonal selection policy, where each of the five zones is represented by one selector and one of the members nominated by BCCI as the chairman of the selection committee. This has sometimes led to controversy as to whether these selectors are biased towards their zones.

Until 18 November 2022, Chetan Sharma was the chief selector and Debashish Mohanty, Harvinder Singh and Sunil Joshi were members. The entire panel was sacked after the unsuccessful performance of the team in 2022 ICC Men&#x27;s T20 World Cup. On 7 January 2023, Sharma was again appointed as the chief selector along with Shiv Sunder Das, Subroto Banerjee, Salil Ankola, and Sridharan Sharath. On 17 February 2023, Sharma resigned from his post after a sting operation by a private news channel saw him make several loose comments on the Indian team with Shiv Sunder Das replacing him and acting as an interim chief selector. On 4 July 2023, Ajit Agarkar was appointed as the new chief selector and replaced Sharma. He joined Das, Banerjee, Ankola and Sharath on the selection committee.

== Team colours ==
India plays its Test cricket matches with the traditional cricket whites with navy blue caps and helmets. The uniforms worn in limited-overs matches have different shades of blue for ODIs and T20Is, with sometimes a splash of the colours that are present in the Indian flag.

During the 1992 and 1999 Cricket World Cups, the Indian team&#x27;s kit was sponsored by ISC and ASICS respectively, but had been without an official kit sponsor until 2001. With no official kit sponsor for the Indian team, Omtex manufactured the shirts and pants for the team, while some players chose to wear pants provided to them by their individual sponsors like Adidas and Reebok until December 2005. In December 2005, Nike outbid its competitors Adidas and Reebok, and acquired the contract for five years which started in January 2006 ahead of Indian team&#x27;s tour to Pakistan. Nike was a long time kit supplier to team India with two extensions for a period of five years each time; in 2011 and 2016 respectively.

After Nike ended its contract in September 2020, MPL Sports Apparel &amp; Accessories, a subsidiary of online gaming platform Mobile Premier League replaced Nike as the kit manufacturer in November 2020 ahead of Indian team&#x27;s tour to Australia, which was supposed to run until December 2023.

In November 2022, MPL Sports decided to exit the deal before the end of their contract and hand over their rights to Kewal Kiran Clothing Limited (KKCL). In January 2023, MPL appointed Kewal Kiran Clothing Limited (KKCL) and Killer Jeans (a brand owned by KKCL) as interim sponsors until May 2023. In February 2023, it was announced that Adidas will begin a five-year sponsorship deal in June 2023 ahead of ICC World Test Championship final, replacing KKCL. In May 2023, BCCI officially announced Adidas as their kit sponsor for the next five years running until March 2028. 

== Sponsorship ==
=== Team sponsorship ===
Dream11 (Sporta Technologies Pvt. Ltd.) was announced as the sponsor for the team on 1 July 2023. Their sponsorship is supposed to run until 31 March 2026 for a period of three years. Previously, BYJU&#x27;s was the sponsor for the Indian team from 5 September 2019 until 31 March 2023, after OPPO handed over the rights to them. OPPO&#x27;s sponsorship was supposed to run from 2017 until 2022, but they handed over to BYJU&#x27;s. On 7 March 2022, BYJU&#x27;s extended its sponsorship for one year. Previously, the Indian team has been sponsored by BYJU&#x27;s from September 2019 until March 2023, OPPO from May 2017 until August 2019, Star India from January 2014 until March 2017, Sahara India Pariwar from June 2001 until December 2013 and ITC Limited (with Wills and ITC Hotels brands) from June 1993 until May 2001.

=== Official partners ===
On 9 January 2024, BCCI announced Campa and Atomberg Technologies as official partners for its domestic &amp; international season during 2024–26. On 20 September 2023, BCCI announced SBI Life as the official partner for its domestic &amp; international season during 2023–26. In August 2023, IDFC First Bank replaced Mastercard as the current title sponsor for all international and domestic matches played in India for the 2023–26 season. The title sponsorship was initially given to Paytm for all matches played between 2015 and 2023 but they handed over to Mastercard in 2022. On 30 August 2019, following the conclusion of the expression of interest process for official partners&#x27; rights, the BCCI announced that Sporta Technologies Pvt. Ltd. (Dream11), LafargeHolcim (ACC Cements, and Ambuja Cements) and Hyundai Motors India Ltd. have acquired the official partners&#x27; rights for the BCCI International and Domestic matches during 2019–2023. Disney Star and Airtel have been title sponsors previously.

=== Official broadcasters ===
Viacom18 is the official broadcaster until March 2028 for all the men&#x27;s international and domestic matches played in India. Sports18 telecasts the international and domestic matches on TV, while it is live streamed on JioCinema as OTT (over the top) platform.

==International grounds==
There are numerous world-renowned cricket stadiums located in India. Most grounds are under the administration of various state cricket boards as opposed to being under the control of the BCCI. The Bombay Gymkhana was the first ground in India to host a full-scale cricket match featuring an Indian cricket team. This was between the Parsis and the Europeans in 1877. The first stadium to host a Test match in India was also the Gymkhana Ground in Bombay in 1933, the only Test it ever hosted. The second and third Tests in the 1933 series were hosted at Eden Gardens and Chepauk. The Feroz Shah Kotla Ground in Delhi was the first stadium to host a Test match after independence, a draw against the West Indies in 1948, the first of a five-Test series. There are 21 stadiums in India that have hosted at least one official Test match. In recent years, there has been an increase in the number of world-class cricket stadiums in India.

India currently has the world&#x27;s largest cricket stadium. The Narendra Modi Stadium, is a cricket stadium in Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India. Eden Gardens in Kolkata has hosted the most Tests, and also has the third-largest seating capacity of any cricket stadium in the world. Founded in 1864, it is one of the most historical stadiums in India, having hosted numerous historical and controversial matches. Other major stadiums in India include the Arun Jaitley Cricket Stadium, which was established in 1883 and hosted memorable matches including Anil Kumble&#x27;s ten wickets in an innings haul against Pakistan.

The Bombay Gymkhana hosted the first Test match in India which is the only Test it has hosted to date. Wankhede Stadium, established in 1974, has a capacity to hold 33,100 spectators and is currently the most popular venue in the city. It has hosted 24 Test matches. It was the unofficial successor of the Brabourne Stadium, which is also located in Mumbai. Mumbai is often considered the cricketing capital of India because of its fans and the talent it produces (see Mumbai cricket team). Thus the stadium regularly hosts major Test matches. The M. A. Chidambaram Stadium in Chepauk is also considered to be an important historical Indian cricket ground, established in the early 1900s, and it was the site of India&#x27;s first Test victory.

==Captains==

A total of 35 men have captained the Indian men&#x27;s cricket team in at least one Test match, although only six have led the team in more than 25 matches, and six have captained the team in men&#x27;s ODIs but not Tests. India&#x27;s first captain of the men&#x27;s cricket team was C. K. Nayudu, who led the team in four matches against England: one in England in 1932 and a series of three matches at home in 1933–34. Lala Amarnath, India&#x27;s fourth captain of the men&#x27;s cricket team and the first Indian to score a century in Test cricket while playing for India, led the team in its first Test match after Indian independence. He also captained the side to its first Test victory and first series win, both in a three-match series at home against Pakistan in 1952–53. From 1952 until 1961–62, India men&#x27;s cricket team had a number of captains such as Vijay Hazare, Polly Umrigar and Nari Contractor.

The Nawab of Pataudi, Mansoor Ali Khan Pataudi, was the men&#x27;s team&#x27;s captain for 36 Test matches from 1961–62 to 1969–70, returning for another four matches against West Indies in 1974–75. In the early years of his captaincy tenure, the team was whitewashed in the West Indies, England and Australia. However, in 1967–68, Pataudi led India men&#x27;s cricket team on its maiden New Zealand tour, which ended in India winning the Test series 3–1. In 1970–71, Ajit Wadekar took over the captaincy from Pataudi. Under Wadekar&#x27;s captaincy, India registered its first Test series win in the West Indies and England. India played its first men&#x27;s ODI in 1974, also under his captaincy. India won its first men&#x27;s ODI under the captaincy of Srinivasaraghavan Venkataraghavan in the 1975 Cricket World Cup, against East Africa. Between 1975–76 and 1978–79, Bishan Singh Bedi captained the team in 22 men&#x27;s Tests and four ODIs, winning six Tests and one ODI.

Sunil Gavaskar took over as men&#x27;s Test and ODI captain in 1978–79, leading India in 47 Test matches and 37 ODIs, winning nine Tests and 14 ODIs. He was succeeded by Kapil Dev in the 1980s, who captained for 34 Test matches, including four victories. Kapil Dev led India to victory in 39 of his 74 ODIs in charge, including the 1983 Cricket World Cup. Kapil Dev also captained India&#x27;s 2–0 Test series victory in England in 1986. Between 1987–88 and 1989–90, India had three captains in Dilip Vengsarkar, Ravi Shastri and Krishnamachari Srikkanth. Vengsarkar took over the captaincy from Kapil Dev after the 1987 Cricket World Cup. Although he started with two centuries in his first series as captain, his captaincy period was turbulent and he lost the job following a disastrous tour of the West Indies in early 1989 and a stand-off with the Indian Cricket Board (BCCI).

India has had six regular Test captains of the men&#x27;s cricket team since Mohammad Azharuddin took charge in 1989. Azharuddin led the team in 47 Test matches from 1989–90 to 1998–99, winning 14, and in 174 ODIs, winning 90. He was followed by Sachin Tendulkar, who captained the men&#x27;s cricket team in 25 Test matches and 73 ODIs in the late 1990s; Tendulkar was relatively unsuccessful as a captain, winning only four Test matches and 23 ODIs.

Sourav Ganguly became the regular captain of the men&#x27;s team in both Tests and ODIs in 2000. He remained captain until 2005–06 and became the then most successful Indian captain, winning 21 of his 49 Test matches in charge and 76 of his 146 ODIs. Under his captaincy, India became the joint-winners of the 2002 ICC Champions Trophy with Sri Lanka, and the runners-up of the 2003 Cricket World Cup. India lost only three Tests at home under Ganguly and managed to draw Test series in England and Australia.

Rahul Dravid took over as men&#x27;s Test captain in 2005. In 2006, he led India to its first Test series victory in the West Indies in more than 30 years.

In September 2007, MS Dhoni was named as the new captain of the men&#x27;s ODI and T20I teams, after Dravid stepped down from the post. Soon after taking up the captaincy, Dhoni led the team to the inaugural World men&#x27;s Twenty20 title. Anil Kumble was appointed Test captain in November 2007, but retired from international cricket in November 2008 after captaining in 14 Tests. Dhoni succeeded him as the men&#x27;s Test captain, making him the captain in all formats. Under the captaincy of Dhoni, the Indian men&#x27;s cricket team held the number one position in the ICC Men&#x27;s Test Team Rankings for 21 months (from November 2009 to August 2011), and set a national record for most back-to-back ODI wins (nine straight wins). Dhoni also led the team to victory in 2011 Cricket World Cup and 2013 ICC Champions Trophy. Thus, Dhoni became the first captain in history to win all three major ICC trophies, namely- the ICC Cricket World Cup in 2011, ICC Men&#x27;s T20 World Cup in 2007 and the ICC Champions Trophy in 2013. However, the team performed poorly in away Tests from 2011 to 2014 and Dhoni retired from Test cricket in December 2014, with Virat Kohli being named as the new Test captain. Dhoni resigned as captain of the ODI and T20I teams in January 2017 and Kohli succeeded him at the position.

Under Kohli&#x27;s captaincy, India was unbeaten in 19 Test matches, starting from a 3–0 series win over New Zealand and ending with a 2–1 series win over Australia. India also had an unbeaten streak of winning nine consecutive Test series, starting with a 3–0 series win over Sri Lanka in Sri Lanka and ending with a 1–0 series win over Sri Lanka at home. India also became only the third team after Australia and South Africa to have won their most recent Test series simultaneously against all the other Test-playing nations. As per winning percentage in Test matches, Kohli was India&#x27;s second most successful Test captain, behind Ajinkya Rahane, having won more than 58% of Test matches (at least two games).

In November 2021, Rohit Sharma was appointed as the new T20I captain of the Indian men&#x27;s cricket team after Kohli resigned from the role. Kohli led India one last time in T20Is at the T20 World Cup 2021. Under Rohit Sharma&#x27;s first series as permanent captaincy, India whitewashed New Zealand at home in the T20I series 3–0. In December 2021, Sharma was also appointed as the new ODI captain of the Indian men&#x27;s cricket team, replacing Kohli ahead of their away series against South Africa. Kohli later quit as Test captain as well, after their Test series loss to South Africa. Sharma replaced Kohli as Test captain before the Test series against Sri Lanka and is now the Full-Time Captain of the Indian men&#x27;s cricket team.
===Most matches as captain in all formats===
==Current squad==
The BCCI released the list of their 2023–24 annual player contracts on 28 February 2024. Players can still be upgraded to a Grade C annual player contract on a pro-rata basis by meeting the criteria of playing a minimum of three Tests or eight ODIs or ten T20Is in the specified period (1 October 2023 to 30 September 2024).

This is a list of every active player who is contracted to BCCI, has played for India since February 2024 or was named in the recent Test, ODI or T20I squads. Uncapped players are listed in &quot;italics&quot;.

*Ravichandran Ashwin played in Tests during this period however has retired from international cricket.
*Ravindra Jadeja, Virat Kohli and Rohit Sharma played in T20Is during this period however retired from the format following the 2024 T20 World Cup.

&quot;Last updated: 21st February 2025&quot;

;Key


=== Pay grade ===
BCCI awards central contracts to its players, their pay is graded according to the importance of the player. Players&#x27; salaries are as follows:
* Grade A+ – 
* Grade A – 
* Grade B – 
* Grade C – 
* Grade F – Fast Bowling Contracts
;Match fees
Players also receive a match fee of per Test match, per ODI, and per T20I.

==Coaching staff==

===Coaching history===

*1971: Keki Tarapore
*1971–1974: Hemu Adhikari
*1975: Gulabrai Ramchand
*1978: Datta Gaekwad
*1980–1981: Salim Durrani
*1982: Ashok Mankad
*1983–1987: PR Man Singh
*1988: Chandu Borde
*1990–1991: Bishan Singh Bedi
*1991–1992: Abbas Ali Baig
*1992–1996: Ajit Wadekar
*1996: Sandeep Patil
*1996–1997: Madan Lal
*1997–1999: Anshuman Gaekwad
*1999–2000: Kapil Dev
*2000–2005: John Wright
*2005–2007: Greg Chappell
*2007: Ravi Shastri &quot;(Interim)&quot;
*2007–2008: Lalchand Rajput
*2008–2011: Gary Kirsten
*2011–2015: Duncan Fletcher
*2014–2016: Ravi Shastri &quot;(Team director)&quot;
*2016: Sanjay Bangar (&quot;Interim)&quot;
*2016–2017: Anil Kumble
*2017: Sanjay Bangar &quot;(Interim)&quot;
*2017–2021: Ravi Shastri
*2021–2024: Rahul Dravid
*2024: VVS Laxman &quot;(Interim)&quot;
*2024–present: Gautam Gambhir

==Tournament history==
&quot;A red box around the year indicates tournaments played within India&quot;
===World Test Championship===
===ODI World Cup===


===T20 World Cup===

===Champions Trophy===

===Asia Cup===

===Other tournaments===
====Asian Games====

====Commonwealth Games====
===Defunct tournaments===

==Honours==
===ICC===
 Titles 
*World Test Championship
** Runners-up (2): 2021, 2023

*Cricket World Cup
** Champions (2): 1983, 2011
** Runners-up (2): 2003, 2023
*T20 World Cup
** Champions (2): 2007, 2024
** Runners-up (1): 2014
*Champions Trophy
** Champions (2): 2002, 2013
** Runners-up (2): 2000, 2017

 Awards 

*Test Championship
** Winners (5): 2010, 2011, 2017, 2018, 2019
*ODI Championship
** Winners (1): 2013

===ACC===

*Asia Cup
**Champions (8): 1984, 1988, 1990–91, 1995, 2010, 2016, 2018, 2023
** Runners-up (3): 1997, 2004, 2008

===Others===

*Asian Games
**Gold medal (1): 2022

===Perpetual trophies===
*Border–Gavaskar Trophy (v )
**Winners (10): 1996–97, 1997–98, 2000–01, 2008–09, 2010–11, 2012–13, 2016–17, 2018–19, 2020–21, 2022–23
*Freedom Trophy (v )
**Winners (2): 2015–16, 2019–20
*Anthony de Mello Trophy (v ) 
**Winners (9): 1961–62, 1972–73, 1981–82, 1992–93, 2001–02, 2008–09, 2016–17, 2020–21, 2023–24
*Pataudi Trophy (v )
**Winners (1): 2007

==Statistics==
===Tests===

Head-to-head record 

Most Test runs for India

Most Test wickets for India


===One-Day Internationals===

Head-to-head record 

Most ODI runs for India

Most ODI wickets for India


===Twenty20 Internationals===

Head-to-head record 

Most T20I runs for India

Most T20I wickets for India


==Individual records==

Sachin Tendulkar, who began playing for India as a 16-year-old in 1989 and has since become the most prolific run-scorer in the history of both Test and ODI cricket, holds a large number of national batting records. He holds the record of most appearances in both Tests and ODIs, most runs in both Tests and ODIs and most centuries in Tests. The highest score by an Indian is the 319 scored by Virender Sehwag in Chennai. It is the second triple century in Test cricket by an Indian, the first being a 309 also made by Sehwag although against Pakistan. The team&#x27;s highest ever score was a 759/7 against England at MA Chidambaram Stadium, Chennai in 2016, while its lowest score was 36 against Australia in 2020. In ODIs, the team&#x27;s highest score is 418/5 against West Indies at Indore in 2011–12. India scored 413–5 in a match against Bermuda in 2007 World Cup which was the highest score ever in Cricket World Cup history at the time. In the same match, India set a world record of the highest winning margin in an ODI match of 257 runs.

India has also had some very strong bowling figures, with spin bowler Anil Kumble being a member of the elite group of four bowlers who have taken 600 Test wickets. In 1999, Kumble emulated Jim Laker to become the second bowler to take all ten wickets in a Test match innings when he took 10 wickets for 74 runs against Pakistan at the Feroz Shah Kotla in Delhi.

Many of the Indian cricket team&#x27;s records are also world records, for example Tendulkar&#x27;s century tally (in Tests and ODIs) and run tally (also in both Tests and ODIs). Dhoni&#x27;s 183 not out against Sri Lanka in 2005 is the world record score by a wicketkeeper in ODIs. The Indian cricket team also holds the record sequence of 17 successful run-chases in ODIs, which ended in a dramatic match against the West Indies in May 2006, which India lost by just one run.

Tendulkar was the first batsman to score 200 runs (he was unbeaten on 200 from 147 deliveries including 25 fours and 3 sixes) in a single ODI innings, on 24 February 2010 against South Africa in Gwalior. On 8 December 2011, this achievement was eclipsed by compatriot Virender Sehwag, who scored 219 runs from 149 deliveries (25 fours and 7 sixes) versus the West Indies in Indore. On 13 November 2014 the record was broken by another Indian opening batsmen, Rohit Sharma, who scored 264 runs from 173 deliveries (33 fours and 9 sixes) against Sri Lanka in Kolkata, West Bengal. In 2013, Dhoni became the first captain in history to win all three major ICC trophies- ICC Cricket World Cup in 2011, ICC World Twenty20 in 2007 and ICC Champions Trophy in 2013.

In 2014, Kohli became the first cricketer to win back-to-back Man of the Series awards in the 2014 ICC World Twenty20 and 2016 ICC World Twenty20. Rohit is the most runs scorer in T20Is and also hold joint most T20I centuries. In 2017, Ravichandran Ashwin became the fastest cricketer in history to reach 250 wickets.

==Fan following==
Owing to the massive Indian diaspora in nations like Australia, England and South Africa, a large Indian fan turnout is expected whenever India plays in each of these nations. There have been a number of official fan groups that have been formed over the years, including the &quot;Swami Army&quot; or Indian Army, the Indian equivalent of the Barmy Army, that were very active in their support when India toured Australia in 2003/2004. They are known to attribute a number of popular Indian songs to the cricket team.

Fan rivalry and cross-border tension has created a strong rivalry between the Indian and the Pakistani cricket teams. In tours between these two nations, cricket visas are often employed to accommodate for the tens of thousands of fans wishing to cross the border to watch cricket. This intense fan dedication is one of the major causes of the BCCI&#x27;s financial success.
However, there are downsides to having such a cricket-loving population. Many Indians hold cricket very close to their hearts and losses are not received well by the Indian population. In some cases, particularly after losses to Pakistan or after a long string of weak performances, there have been reports of player effigies being burnt in the streets and vandalism of player homes. In many cases, players have come under intense attention from the media for negative reasons, this has been considered one of the reasons for Ganguly being left out of the Indian team. At times, when a match is surrounded by controversy, it has resulted in a debacle. For example, when India slid to defeat against Australia at Brabourne Stadium in 1969, fans began throwing stones and bottles onto the field as well as setting fire to the stands, before laying siege to the Australian dressing rooms. During the same tour, a stampede occurred at Eden Gardens when tickets were oversold and India fell to another loss; the Australian team bus was later stoned with bricks. A similar event occurred during the 1996 Cricket World Cup, where India were losing the semi-final to Sri Lanka at Eden Gardens. In this case, the fan behaviour was directed at the Indian team in disappointment at their lacklustre performance. An armed guard had to be placed at the home of captain Mohammad Azharuddin to ensure his safety. In 1999, a riot occurred in a Test against Pakistan at Eden Gardens after a collision with Pakistani paceman Shoaib Akhtar saw Sachin run out, forcing police to eject spectators and the game to be played in an empty stadium.In 2006, a string of low scores resulted in Tendulkar being booed by the Mumbai crowd when he got out against England.

Often, fans engage in protests regarding players if they believe that regionalism has affected selection, or because of regional partisan support for local players. In 2005, when Ganguly was dropped from the team, Ganguly&#x27;s home town Kolkata erupted in protests. India later played a match against South Africa in Kolkata. The Indian team was booed by the crowd who supported South Africa instead of India in response to Ganguly&#x27;s dropping. Similar regional divisions in India regarding selection have also caused protests against the team, with political activists from the regional Kalinga Kamgar Sena party in Odisha disrupting the arrival of the team in Cuttack for an ODI over the lack of a local player in the team, with one activist manhandling coach Greg Chappell. Similar treatment was handed to Sunil Gavaskar in the 1987 World Cup Semi Finals by crowds at Wankhede Stadium when he got bowled by Phillip DeFreitas.

A successful string of results, especially victories against the arch-rival Pakistan or victories in major tournaments such as the World Cup are greeted with particular ecstasy from the Indian fans.

==See also==

* Cricket in India
* BCCI Awards 
* Glossary of cricket terms
* India A cricket team
* India national under-19 cricket team
* India–Pakistan cricket rivalry 
* Bangladesh–India cricket rivalry
* National Cricket Academy (NCA)
* Sport in India – Overview of sports in India

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 

===Cited sources===
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1143793" start="4" end="42" title="India national cricket team" label="India men&amp;#x27;s national cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143793" start="58" end="69" title="India national cricket team" label="Men in Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="82" end="87" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764250" start="91" end="112" title="international cricket" label="international cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907539" start="136" end="173" title="Board of Control for Cricket in India" label="Board of Control for Cricket in India"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="183" end="194" title="List of International Cricket Council members#Full Members" label="full member"/>
<link wikidata="Q722694" start="202" end="231" title="International Cricket Council" label="International Cricket Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="237" end="241" title="Test cricket" label="Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q175157" start="243" end="264" title="One Day International" label="One Day International"/>
<link wikidata="Q252171" start="269" end="291" title="Twenty20 International" label="Twenty20 International"/>
<link wikidata="Q979298" start="324" end="343" title="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="T20 World Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146535" start="486" end="503" title="ICC Test Championship" label="Test Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q13578103" start="564" end="587" title="ICC World Test Championship" label="World Test Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q106996036" start="620" end="624" title="2021 ICC World Test Championship final" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q117190859" start="629" end="633" title="2023 ICC World Test Championship final" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q115826037" start="660" end="664" title="2023–2025 ICC World Test Championship" label="2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107265" start="694" end="716" title="Border–Gavaskar Trophy" label="Border–Gavaskar Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q142555" start="722" end="731" title="Australia national cricket team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20981560" start="733" end="747" title="Freedom Trophy (cricket)" label="Freedom Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423651" start="753" end="765" title="South Africa national cricket team" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28172400" start="767" end="790" title="Anthony de Mello Trophy" label="Anthony de Mello Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144288" start="795" end="809" title="Pataudi Trophy" label="Pataudi Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321565" start="820" end="827" title="England cricket team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643349" start="894" end="899" title="List of tied One Day Internationals" label="tying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350376" start="927" end="936" title="no-result" label="no-result"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146534" start="988" end="1008" title="ICC ODI Championship" label="ICC ODI Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q192202" start="1058" end="1067" title="Cricket World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139931" start="1085" end="1089" title="1983 Cricket World Cup" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139957" start="1091" end="1095" title="2003 Cricket World Cup" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q911295" start="1097" end="1101" title="2011 Cricket World Cup" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057443" start="1103" end="1107" title="2023 Cricket World Cup" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139931" start="1125" end="1129" title="1983 Cricket World Cup" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q911295" start="1134" end="1138" title="2011 Cricket World Cup" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q912881" start="1174" end="1185" title="West Indies cricket team" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q911295" start="1279" end="1283" title="2011 Cricket World Cup" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q971637" start="1309" end="1331" title="ICC Champions trophy" label="ICC Champions trophies"/>
<link wikidata="Q179713" start="1335" end="1339" title="2002 ICC Champions Trophy" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653168" start="1344" end="1348" title="2013 ICC Champions Trophy" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866609" start="1386" end="1398" title="Asia Cup" label="ODI Asia Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533885" start="1410" end="1414" title="1984 Asia Cup" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533755" start="1416" end="1420" title="1988 Asia Cup" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533891" start="1422" end="1429" title="1990–91 Asia Cup" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533813" start="1431" end="1435" title="1995 Asia Cup" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520583" start="1437" end="1441" title="2010 Asia Cup" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q23011260" start="1443" end="1447" title="2018 Asia Cup" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q116050914" start="1449" end="1453" title="2023 Asia Cup" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q21067771" start="1536" end="1541" title="List of tied Twenty20 Internationals" label="tying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350376" start="1567" end="1576" title="no-result" label="no-result"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303625" start="1628" end="1649" title="ICC T20I Championship" label="ICC T20I Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q979298" start="1691" end="1719" title="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641168" start="1729" end="1733" title="2007 ICC World Twenty20" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q111568723" start="1738" end="1742" title="2024 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866609" start="1767" end="1784" title="Asia Cup" label="Twenty20 Asia Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q20081123" start="1788" end="1792" title="2016 Asia Cup" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184997" start="1797" end="1808" title="Cricket at the Asian Games" label="Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q120776254" start="1812" end="1816" title="Cricket at the 2022 Asian Games – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866609" start="1842" end="1855" title="Asia Cup" label="One Day Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q979298" start="1860" end="1879" title="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="T20 World Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166912" start="1900" end="1964" title="2023 Asia Cup final" label="in 2023 against Sri Lanka at the R. Premadasa Stadium in Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q126951156" start="1980" end="2045" title="2024 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup final" label="in 2024 against South Africa at the Kensington Oval in Bridgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724195" start="2232" end="2237" title="Kolis" label="Kolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="2241" end="2248" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="2262" end="2269" title="pirates" label="pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q254508" start="2274" end="2280" title="outlaw" label="outlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="2303" end="2310" title="British Raj" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="2322" end="2340" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q200263" start="2417" end="2422" title="Parsi" label="Parsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="2643" end="2649" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940581" start="2688" end="2711" title="Bombay Quadrangular" label="quadrangular tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757835" start="2845" end="2857" title="Ranjitsinhji" label="Ranjitsinhji"/>
<link wikidata="Q6443504" start="2862" end="2874" title="Duleepsinhji" label="Duleepsinhji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051958" start="2958" end="2970" title="Ranji Trophy" label="Ranji Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345067" start="2975" end="2988" title="Duleep Trophy" label="Duleep Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q143319" start="3092" end="3118" title="Bhupinder Singh of Patiala" label="Bhupinder Singh of Patiala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022001" start="3134" end="3174" title="Indian cricket team in England in 1911" label="first official tour of the British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q722694" start="3310" end="3339" title="International Cricket Council" label="International Cricket Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022014" start="3398" end="3413" title="Indian cricket team in England in 1932" label="England in 1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q331613" start="3548" end="3559" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3563" end="3569" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="3693" end="3705" title="Test cricket" label="Test cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378486" start="3726" end="3746" title="English cricket team in India in 1933–34" label="England toured India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="3816" end="3822" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="3837" end="3845" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="3864" end="3870" title="Madras" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4093" end="4105" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021967" start="4129" end="4135" title="Indian cricket team in Australia in 1947–48" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q313591" start="4187" end="4198" title="Don Bradman" label="Don Bradman"/>
<link wikidata="Q142555" start="4206" end="4215" title="Australia national cricket team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q912881" start="4530" end="4541" title="West Indies cricket team" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q182538" start="4766" end="4774" title="Pakistan national cricket team" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143797" start="4862" end="4873" title="New Zealand national cricket team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q597080" start="5563" end="5570" title="bowling (cricket)" label="bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250050" start="5593" end="5612" title="Indian spin quartet" label="Indian spin quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519764" start="5615" end="5632" title="Bishan Singh Bedi" label="Bishan Singh Bedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520942" start="5634" end="5651" title="E. A. S. Prasanna" label="E. A. S. Prasanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766870" start="5653" end="5672" title="B. S. Chandrasekhar" label="B. S. Chandrasekhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157182" start="5677" end="5710" title="Srinivasaraghavan Venkataraghavan" label="Srinivasaraghavan Venkataraghavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731944" start="5808" end="5826" title="Gundappa Viswanath" label="Gundappa Viswanath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210687" start="5835" end="5842" title="cricket pitch" label="pitches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684170" start="5876" end="5880" title="spin bowling" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521097" start="6097" end="6109" title="Ajit Wadekar" label="Ajit Wadekar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027985" start="6168" end="6182" title="Dilip Sardesai" label="Dilip Sardesai"/>
<link wikidata="Q175157" start="6330" end="6351" title="One Day International" label="One Day International"/>
<link wikidata="Q192202" start="6685" end="6702" title="Cricket World Cup" label="Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602636" start="7415" end="7432" title="Mohinder Amarnath" label="Mohinder Amarnath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345095" start="7651" end="7670" title="Mohammad Azharuddin" label="Mohammad Azharuddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721475" start="7672" end="7695" title="Krishnamachari Srikanth" label="Krishnamachari Srikanth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760800" start="7697" end="7713" title="Dilip Vengsarkar" label="Dilip Vengsarkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q558189" start="7731" end="7740" title="Kapil Dev" label="Kapil Dev"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518502" start="7745" end="7757" title="Ravi Shastri" label="Ravi Shastri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866609" start="8085" end="8093" title="Asia Cup" label="Asia Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035489" start="8115" end="8144" title="World Championship of Cricket" label="World Championship of Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="8215" end="8234" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="8348" end="8360" title="Indian subcontinent" label="subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9488" start="8847" end="8863" title="Sachin Tendulkar" label="Sachin Tendulkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849991" start="8868" end="8879" title="Anil Kumble" label="Anil Kumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757591" start="8965" end="8980" title="Javagal Srinath" label="Javagal Srinath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740055" start="9016" end="9026" title="Amar Singh (cricketer)" label="Amar Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="9125" end="9137" title="South Asia" label="subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q203092" start="9220" end="9229" title="Sri Lanka national cricket team" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139943" start="9250" end="9272" title="1996 Cricket World Cup" label="1996 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q561487" start="9324" end="9338" title="Sourav Ganguly" label="Sourav Ganguly"/>
<link wikidata="Q470772" start="9343" end="9355" title="Rahul Dravid" label="Rahul Dravid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139952" start="9682" end="9704" title="1999 Cricket World Cup" label="1999 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722025" start="10006" end="10017" title="Ajay Jadeja" label="Ajay Jadeja"/>
<link wikidata="Q747376" start="10039" end="10051" title="match-fixing" label="match-fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345613" start="10535" end="10546" title="John Wright (cricketer, born 1954)" label="John Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443585" start="10589" end="10607" title="Second Test, 2000–01 Border–Gavaskar Trophy" label="Kolkata Test match"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562655" start="10713" end="10731" title="List of Australia national cricket captains" label="Australian captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q735048" start="10732" end="10743" title="Steve Waugh" label="Steve Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q971637" start="10902" end="10922" title="ICC Champions Trophy" label="ICC Champions Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139957" start="10959" end="10981" title="2003 Cricket World Cup" label="2003 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q979298" start="11279" end="11307" title="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q911295" start="11405" end="11427" title="2011 Cricket World Cup" label="2011 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q13554465" start="11652" end="11683" title="2013 ICC Champions Trophy final" label="2013 ICC Champions Trophy final"/>
<link wikidata="Q470774" start="11696" end="11707" title="M. S. Dhoni" label="M. S. Dhoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q192202" start="11816" end="11833" title="Cricket World Cup" label="Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q979298" start="11835" end="11863" title="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q971637" start="11868" end="11888" title="ICC Champions Trophy" label="ICC Champions Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363392" start="11898" end="11932" title="2014 ICC World Twenty20" label="2014 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s World Twenty20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139964" start="12069" end="12091" title="2015 Cricket World Cup" label="2015 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q20081123" start="12178" end="12191" title="2016 Asia Cup" label="2016 Asia Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731716" start="12275" end="12298" title="2016 ICC World Twenty20" label="2016 ICC World Twenty20"/>
<link wikidata="Q21968116" start="12443" end="12468" title="2017 ICC Champions Trophy" label="2017 ICC Champions Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q476709" start="12645" end="12667" title="2019 Cricket World Cup" label="2019 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520045" start="12847" end="12859" title="Rohit Sharma" label="Rohit Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q106996036" start="12932" end="12970" title="2021 ICC World Test Championship final" label="2021 ICC World Test Championship Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="12994" end="13005" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q55602679" start="13086" end="13104" title="2022 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="2022 T20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q117190859" start="13215" end="13253" title="2023 ICC World Test Championship final" label="2023 ICC World Test Championship final"/>
<link wikidata="Q142555" start="13262" end="13271" title="Australia national cricket team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155836" start="13275" end="13283" title="The Oval" label="The Oval"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166912" start="13341" end="13360" title="2023 Asia Cup final" label="2023 Asia Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q203092" start="13369" end="13378" title="Sri Lanka national cricket team" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121558" start="13382" end="13402" title="R. Premadasa Stadium" label="R. Premadasa Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16225904" start="13419" end="13432" title="Kuldeep Yadav" label="Kuldeep Yadav"/>
<link wikidata="Q120776254" start="13555" end="13571" title="Cricket at the 2022 Asian Games – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2022 Asian games"/>
<link wikidata="Q123459518" start="14189" end="14194" title="2023 Cricket World Cup final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q213854" start="14208" end="14219" title="Virat Kohli" label="Virat Kohli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520045" start="14336" end="14348" title="Rohit Sharma" label="Rohit Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q213854" start="14350" end="14361" title="Virat Kohli" label="Virat Kohli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721457" start="14367" end="14382" title="Ravindra Jadeja" label="Ravindra Jadeja"/>
<link wikidata="Q111568723" start="14464" end="14482" title="2024 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="2024 T20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q111568723" start="14499" end="14517" title="2024 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="2024 T20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423651" start="14531" end="14543" title="South Africa national cricket team" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q126951156" start="14551" end="14556" title="2024 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q60734086" start="14694" end="14708" title="Arshdeep Singh (cricketer)" label="Arshdeep Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q252171" start="14799" end="14828" title="Twenty20 International" label="Twenty20 International (T20I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418593" start="14911" end="14923" title="Sanju Samson" label="Sanju Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q60286914" start="14928" end="14939" title="Tilak Varma" label="Tilak Varma"/>
<link wikidata="Q252171" start="15039" end="15068" title="Twenty20 International" label="Twenty20 International (T20I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859863" start="15171" end="15178" title="innings" label="innings"/>
<link wikidata="Q722694" start="15413" end="15442" title="International Cricket Council" label="International Cricket Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q985666" start="15516" end="15526" title="Churchgate" label="Churchgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="15530" end="15549" title="Mumbai, Maharashtra" label="Mumbai, Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531843" start="15690" end="15701" title="Roger Binny" label="Roger Binny"/>
<link wikidata="Q130044650" start="15732" end="15746" title="Devajit Saikia" label="Devajit Saikia"/>
<link wikidata="Q806537" start="16131" end="16141" title="Bangladesh national cricket team" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254704" start="16145" end="16153" title="Zimbabwe national cricket team" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q152478" start="16228" end="16240" title="sponsor (commercial)" label="sponsorships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756945" start="16635" end="16648" title="Chetan Sharma" label="Chetan Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526637" start="16676" end="16693" title="Debashish Mohanty" label="Debashish Mohanty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527867" start="16695" end="16710" title="Harvinder Singh (cricketer)" label="Harvinder Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528506" start="16715" end="16726" title="Sunil Joshi" label="Sunil Joshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55602679" start="16819" end="16852" title="2022 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="2022 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526609" start="16933" end="16948" title="Shiv Sunder Das" label="Shiv Sunder Das"/>
<link wikidata="Q2775822" start="16950" end="16966" title="Subroto Banerjee" label="Subroto Banerjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722170" start="16968" end="16980" title="Salil Ankola" label="Salil Ankola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586368" start="16986" end="17003" title="Sridharan Sharath" label="Sridharan Sharath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520013" start="17253" end="17265" title="Ajit Agarkar" label="Ajit Agarkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185057" start="17477" end="17491" title="cricket whites" label="cricket whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139945" start="17706" end="17710" title="1992 Cricket World Cup" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139952" start="17715" end="17719" title="1999 Cricket World Cup" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007969" start="17784" end="17787" title="ISC (sportswear)" label="ISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q327247" start="17792" end="17797" title="ASICS" label="ASICS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184999" start="17942" end="17958" title="Cricket clothing and equipment" label="shirts and pants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="18063" end="18069" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q466183" start="18074" end="18080" title="Reebok" label="Reebok"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="18120" end="18124" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022095" start="18247" end="18282" title="Indian cricket team in Pakistan in 2005–06" label="Indian team&amp;#x27;s tour to Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q113040145" start="18548" end="18569" title="Mobile Premier League" label="Mobile Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q83497069" start="18634" end="18670" title="Indian cricket team in Australia in 2020–21" label="Indian team&amp;#x27;s tour to Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117190859" start="19127" end="19160" title="2023 ICC World Test Championship final" label="ICC World Test Championship final"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907539" start="19191" end="19195" title="BCCI" label="BCCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q53080990" start="19340" end="19347" title="Dream11" label="Dream11"/>
<link wikidata="Q48999036" start="19536" end="19547" title="BYJU&amp;#x27;s" label="BYJU&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084900" start="19633" end="19637" title="OPPO" label="OPPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919785" start="19979" end="19989" title="Star India" label="Star India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637622" start="20026" end="20046" title="Sahara India Pariwar" label="Sahara India Pariwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655008" start="20086" end="20097" title="ITC Limited" label="ITC Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q24936747" start="20104" end="20109" title="Wills Navy Cut" label="Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q17058333" start="20114" end="20124" title="ITC Hotels" label="ITC Hotels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106176" start="20225" end="20230" title="Campa Cola" label="Campa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388955" start="20375" end="20383" title="SBI Life Insurance Company" label="SBI Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q22031467" start="20484" end="20499" title="IDFC First Bank" label="IDFC First Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q489921" start="20509" end="20519" title="Mastercard" label="Mastercard"/>
<link wikidata="Q19757718" start="20677" end="20682" title="Paytm" label="Paytm"/>
<link wikidata="Q267818" start="20955" end="20968" title="LafargeHolcim" label="LafargeHolcim"/>
<link wikidata="Q649343" start="20970" end="20981" title="ACC (company)" label="ACC Cements"/>
<link wikidata="Q459976" start="20987" end="21001" title="Ambuja Cements" label="Ambuja Cements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525445" start="21007" end="21032" title="Hyundai India" label="Hyundai Motors India Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q5919785" start="21148" end="21159" title="Disney Star" label="Disney Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q854867" start="21164" end="21170" title="Bharti Airtel" label="Airtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924434" start="21239" end="21247" title="Viacom18" label="Viacom18"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973072" start="21368" end="21376" title="Sports18" label="Sports18"/>
<link wikidata="Q97168124" start="21462" end="21471" title="JioCinema" label="JioCinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="21979" end="21985" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035004" start="22086" end="22098" title="Eden Gardens" label="Eden Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070155" start="22103" end="22110" title="Chepauk" label="Chepauk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217611" start="22116" end="22139" title="Feroz Shah Kotla Ground" label="Feroz Shah Kotla Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852992" start="22346" end="22365" title="List of Test cricket grounds" label="official Test match"/>
<link wikidata="Q16685058" start="22690" end="22706" title="seating capacity" label="seating capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217611" start="22916" end="22944" title="Arun Jaitley Cricket Stadium" label="Arun Jaitley Cricket Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q177067" start="23187" end="23203" title="Wankhede Stadium" label="Wankhede Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378539" start="23553" end="23572" title="Mumbai cricket team" label="Mumbai cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188061" start="23632" end="23657" title="M. A. Chidambaram Stadium" label="M. A. Chidambaram Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519856" start="24129" end="24141" title="C. K. Nayudu" label="C. K. Nayudu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519811" start="24266" end="24279" title="Lala Amarnath" label="Lala Amarnath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="24383" end="24395" title="Test cricket" label="Test cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="24464" end="24483" title="Partition of India" label="Indian independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718746" start="24714" end="24726" title="Vijay Hazare" label="Vijay Hazare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535561" start="24728" end="24741" title="Polly Umrigar" label="Polly Umrigar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521417" start="24746" end="24761" title="Nari Contractor" label="Nari Contractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q983454" start="24786" end="24810" title="Mansoor Ali Khan Pataudi" label="Mansoor Ali Khan Pataudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521097" start="25232" end="25244" title="Ajit Wadekar" label="Ajit Wadekar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157182" start="25521" end="25554" title="Srinivasaraghavan Venkataraghavan" label="Srinivasaraghavan Venkataraghavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139930" start="25562" end="25584" title="1975 Cricket World Cup" label="1975 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302377" start="25594" end="25605" title="East Africa cricket team" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519764" start="25636" end="25653" title="Bishan Singh Bedi" label="Bishan Singh Bedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q558182" start="25743" end="25757" title="Sunil Gavaskar" label="Sunil Gavaskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q558189" start="25913" end="25922" title="Kapil Dev" label="Kapil Dev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139931" start="26075" end="26097" title="1983 Cricket World Cup" label="1983 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721475" start="26273" end="26297" title="Krishnamachari Srikkanth" label="Krishnamachari Srikkanth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345095" start="26702" end="26721" title="Mohammad Azharuddin" label="Mohammad Azharuddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q561487" start="27078" end="27092" title="Sourav Ganguly" label="Sourav Ganguly"/>
<link wikidata="Q179713" start="27388" end="27413" title="2002 ICC Champions Trophy" label="2002 ICC Champions Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139957" start="27456" end="27478" title="2003 Cricket World Cup" label="2003 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q470772" start="27589" end="27601" title="Rahul Dravid" label="Rahul Dravid"/>
<link wikidata="Q470774" start="27765" end="27773" title="MS Dhoni" label="MS Dhoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641168" start="27944" end="27979" title="2007 ICC World Twenty20" label="inaugural World men&amp;#x27;s Twenty20"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146535" start="28322" end="28355" title="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s Test Team Rankings" label="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s Test Team Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q911295" start="28524" end="28546" title="2011 Cricket World Cup" label="2011 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653168" start="28551" end="28576" title="2013 ICC Champions Trophy" label="2013 ICC Champions Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q470774" start="28584" end="28589" title="MS Dhoni" label="Dhoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q979298" start="28706" end="28734" title="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q213854" start="28907" end="28918" title="Virat Kohli" label="Virat Kohli"/>
<link wikidata="Q137669" start="29705" end="29719" title="Ajinkya Rahane" label="Ajinkya Rahane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520045" start="29803" end="29815" title="Rohit Sharma" label="Rohit Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q18124958" start="29974" end="29992" title="2021 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="T20 World Cup 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q107535419" start="30063" end="30086" title="New Zealand cricket team in India in 2021–22" label="whitewashed New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q107472739" start="30256" end="30288" title="Indian cricket team in South Africa in 2021–22" label="away series against South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q107472739" start="30344" end="30377" title="Indian cricket team in South Africa in 2021–22" label="Test series loss to South Africa."/>
<link wikidata="Q3520045" start="30378" end="30384" title="Rohit Sharma" label="Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q107185340" start="30427" end="30456" title="Sri Lankan cricket team in India in 2021–22" label="Test series against Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907539" start="30596" end="30600" title="Board of Control for Cricket in India" label="BCCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007571" start="31131" end="31150" title="Ravichandran Ashwin" label="Ravichandran Ashwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721457" start="31235" end="31250" title="Ravindra Jadeja" label="Ravindra Jadeja"/>
<link wikidata="Q213854" start="31252" end="31263" title="Virat Kohli" label="Virat Kohli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520045" start="31268" end="31280" title="Rohit Sharma" label="Rohit Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q111568723" start="31362" end="31380" title="2024 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="2024 T20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907539" start="31454" end="31458" title="BCCI" label="BCCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529391" start="31829" end="31842" title="Keki Tarapore" label="Keki Tarapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521452" start="31855" end="31868" title="Hemu Adhikari" label="Hemu Adhikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520385" start="31876" end="31893" title="Gulabrai Ramchand" label="Gulabrai Ramchand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520036" start="31901" end="31914" title="Datta Gaekwad" label="Datta Gaekwad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535057" start="31927" end="31940" title="Salim Durrani" label="Salim Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520510" start="31948" end="31960" title="Ashok Mankad" label="Ashok Mankad"/>
<link wikidata="Q79853261" start="31973" end="31985" title="P. R. Man Singh" label="PR Man Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520848" start="31993" end="32005" title="Chandu Borde" label="Chandu Borde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519764" start="32018" end="32035" title="Bishan Singh Bedi" label="Bishan Singh Bedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531252" start="32048" end="32062" title="Abbas Ali Baig" label="Abbas Ali Baig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521097" start="32075" end="32087" title="Ajit Wadekar" label="Ajit Wadekar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721774" start="32095" end="32108" title="Sandeep Patil" label="Sandeep Patil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767834" start="32121" end="32130" title="Madan Lal" label="Madan Lal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721727" start="32143" end="32159" title="Anshuman Gaekwad" label="Anshuman Gaekwad"/>
<link wikidata="Q558189" start="32172" end="32181" title="Kapil Dev" label="Kapil Dev"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345613" start="32194" end="32205" title="John Wright (cricketer, born 1954)" label="John Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544896" start="32218" end="32231" title="Greg Chappell" label="Greg Chappell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518502" start="32239" end="32251" title="Ravi Shastri" label="Ravi Shastri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520482" start="32286" end="32301" title="Lalchand Rajput" label="Lalchand Rajput"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723803" start="32314" end="32326" title="Gary Kirsten" label="Gary Kirsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520574" start="32339" end="32354" title="Duncan Fletcher" label="Duncan Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518502" start="32367" end="32379" title="Ravi Shastri" label="Ravi Shastri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764505" start="32415" end="32428" title="Sanjay Bangar" label="Sanjay Bangar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849991" start="32463" end="32474" title="Anil Kumble" label="Anil Kumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764505" start="32482" end="32495" title="Sanjay Bangar" label="Sanjay Bangar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518502" start="32530" end="32542" title="Ravi Shastri" label="Ravi Shastri"/>
<link wikidata="Q470772" start="32555" end="32567" title="Rahul Dravid" label="Rahul Dravid"/>
<link wikidata="Q10233" start="32575" end="32585" title="VVS Laxman" label="VVS Laxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721515" start="32623" end="32637" title="Gautam Gambhir" label="Gautam Gambhir"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="32730" end="32735" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q13578103" start="32986" end="33009" title="ICC World Test Championship" label="World Test Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317740" start="33029" end="33033" title="2019–2021 ICC World Test Championship" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q107402205" start="33035" end="33039" title="2021–2023 ICC World Test Championship" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q192202" start="33042" end="33059" title="ICC Cricket World Cup" label="Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139931" start="33078" end="33082" title="1983 Cricket World Cup" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q911295" start="33084" end="33088" title="2011 Cricket World Cup" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139957" start="33108" end="33112" title="2003 Cricket World Cup" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057443" start="33114" end="33118" title="2023 Cricket World Cup" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q979298" start="33120" end="33133" title="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="T20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641168" start="33152" end="33156" title="2007 ICC World Twenty20" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q111568723" start="33158" end="33162" title="2024 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363392" start="33182" end="33186" title="2014 ICC World Twenty20" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q971637" start="33188" end="33204" title="ICC Champions Trophy" label="Champions Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179713" start="33223" end="33227" title="2002 ICC Champions Trophy" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653168" start="33229" end="33233" title="2013 ICC Champions Trophy" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653178" start="33253" end="33257" title="2000 ICC Champions Trophy" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q21968116" start="33259" end="33263" title="2017 ICC Champions Trophy" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q123900614" start="33276" end="33293" title="ICC Test Championship Mace" label="Test Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33340" end="33356" title="ICC ODI Championship#ICC ODI championship (2002–2013)" label="ODI Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866609" start="33391" end="33399" title="Asia Cup" label="Asia Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533885" start="33417" end="33421" title="1984 Asia Cup" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533755" start="33423" end="33427" title="1988 Asia Cup" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533891" start="33429" end="33436" title="1990–91 Asia Cup" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533813" start="33438" end="33442" title="1995 Asia Cup" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520583" start="33444" end="33448" title="2010 Asia Cup" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q20081123" start="33450" end="33454" title="2016 Asia Cup" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q23011260" start="33456" end="33460" title="2018 Asia Cup" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q116050914" start="33462" end="33466" title="2023 Asia Cup" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533745" start="33486" end="33490" title="1997 Asia Cup" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533762" start="33492" end="33496" title="2004 Asia Cup" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522083" start="33498" end="33502" title="2008 Asia Cup" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184997" start="33519" end="33530" title="Cricket at the Asian Games" label="Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q120776254" start="33549" end="33553" title="Cricket at the 2022 Asian Games – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107265" start="33581" end="33603" title="Border–Gavaskar Trophy" label="Border–Gavaskar Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000648" start="33625" end="33632" title="1996–97 Border–Gavaskar Trophy" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870928" start="33634" end="33641" title="1997–98 Border–Gavaskar Trophy" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824952" start="33643" end="33650" title="Australian cricket team in India in 2000–01" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824957" start="33652" end="33659" title="2008–09 Border–Gavaskar Trophy" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824960" start="33661" end="33668" title="Australian cricket team in India in 2010–11" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824956" start="33670" end="33677" title="2012–13 Border–Gavaskar Trophy" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q23019635" start="33679" end="33686" title="2016–17 Border–Gavaskar Trophy" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q48731346" start="33688" end="33695" title="Indian cricket team in Australia in 2018–19" label="2018–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q83497069" start="33697" end="33704" title="Indian cricket team in Australia in 2020–21" label="2020–21"/>
<link wikidata="Q113456600" start="33706" end="33713" title="Australian cricket team in India in 2022–23" label="2022–23"/>
<link wikidata="Q20981560" start="33715" end="33729" title="Freedom Trophy (cricket)" label="Freedom Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20648576" start="33750" end="33757" title="South African cricket team in India in 2015–16" label="2015–16"/>
<link wikidata="Q60767039" start="33759" end="33766" title="South African cricket team in India in 2019–20" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q28172400" start="33768" end="33791" title="Anthony de Mello Trophy" label="Anthony de Mello Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378488" start="33813" end="33820" title="English cricket team in India, Pakistan and Ceylon in 1961–62" label="1961–62"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378490" start="33822" end="33829" title="English cricket team in India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka in 1972–73" label="1972–73"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378493" start="33831" end="33838" title="English cricket team in India in 1981–82" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378495" start="33840" end="33847" title="English cricket team in India in 1992–93" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378496" start="33849" end="33856" title="English cricket team in India in 2001–02" label="2001–02"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378498" start="33858" end="33865" title="English cricket team in India in 2008–09" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q22098318" start="33867" end="33874" title="English cricket team in India in 2016–17" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q85759347" start="33876" end="33883" title="English cricket team in India in 2020–21" label="2020–21"/>
<link wikidata="Q120972721" start="33885" end="33892" title="English cricket team in India in 2023–24" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144288" start="33894" end="33908" title="Pataudi Trophy" label="Pataudi Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022060" start="33929" end="33933" title="Indian cricket team in England in 2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q9488" start="34280" end="34296" title="Sachin Tendulkar" label="Sachin Tendulkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345479" start="34674" end="34689" title="Virender Sehwag" label="Virender Sehwag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118985" start="34719" end="34749" title="List of Test cricket triple centuries" label="triple century in Test cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523455" start="35125" end="35132" title="Bermuda national cricket team" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127675" start="35136" end="35150" title="2007 Cricket World Cup" label="2007 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849991" start="35400" end="35411" title="Anil Kumble" label="Anil Kumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526029" start="35520" end="35529" title="Jim Laker" label="Jim Laker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187568" start="35666" end="35682" title="Feroz Shah Kotla" label="Feroz Shah Kotla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="35686" end="35691" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601227" start="35750" end="35763" title="List of Test cricket records" label="world records"/>
<link wikidata="Q203092" start="35906" end="35915" title="Sri Lanka national cricket team" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q158467" start="36368" end="36375" title="Gwalior" label="Gwalior"/>
<link wikidata="Q66616" start="36547" end="36553" title="Indore" label="Indore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520045" start="36632" end="36644" title="Rohit Sharma" label="Rohit Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="36730" end="36737" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363392" start="37027" end="37050" title="2014 ICC World Twenty20" label="2014 ICC World Twenty20"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731716" start="37055" end="37078" title="2016 ICC World Twenty20" label="2016 ICC World Twenty20"/>
<link wikidata="Q925034" start="37291" end="37306" title="Indian diaspora" label="Indian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="37323" end="37332" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="37334" end="37341" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="37346" end="37358" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q808396" start="37614" end="37624" title="Barmy Army" label="Barmy Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191484" start="37841" end="37906" title="India–Pakistan cricket rivalry" label="strong rivalry between the Indian and the Pakistani cricket teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185016" start="38256" end="38263" title="Cricket in India" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899864" start="38482" end="38490" title="effigies" label="effigies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786546" start="38877" end="38894" title="Brabourne Stadium" label="Brabourne Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139943" start="39258" end="39280" title="1996 Cricket World Cup" label="1996 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035004" start="39618" end="39630" title="Eden Gardens" label="Eden Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310017" start="39654" end="39663" title="Pakistani" label="Pakistani"/>
<link wikidata="Q738330" start="39672" end="39685" title="Shoaib Akhtar" label="Shoaib Akhtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="40146" end="40153" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423651" start="40210" end="40222" title="South Africa national cricket team" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="40530" end="40536" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q207324" start="40575" end="40582" title="Cuttack" label="Cuttack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544896" start="40675" end="40688" title="Greg Chappell" label="Greg Chappell"/>
<link wikidata="Q558182" start="40722" end="40736" title="Sunil Gavaskar" label="Sunil Gavaskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583640" start="40744" end="40770" title="1987 Cricket World Cup knockout stage" label="1987 World Cup Semi Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q177067" start="40784" end="40800" title="Wankhede Stadium" label="Wankhede Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951082" start="40813" end="40819" title="bowled" label="bowled"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527355" start="40823" end="40840" title="Phillip DeFreitas" label="Phillip DeFreitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191484" start="40886" end="40927" title="India-Pakistan cricket rivalry" label="victories against the arch-rival Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192202" start="40974" end="40983" title="Cricket World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185016" start="41059" end="41075" title="Cricket in India" label="Cricket in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q19882281" start="41078" end="41089" title="BCCI Awards" label="BCCI Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178987" start="41093" end="41118" title="Glossary of cricket terms" label="Glossary of cricket terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019252" start="41121" end="41141" title="India A cricket team" label="India A cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019440" start="41144" end="41180" title="India national under-19 cricket team" label="India national under-19 cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191484" start="41183" end="41213" title="India–Pakistan cricket rivalry" label="India–Pakistan cricket rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131068663" start="41217" end="41249" title="Bangladesh–India cricket rivalry" label="Bangladesh–India cricket rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971988" start="41252" end="41276" title="National Cricket Academy" label="National Cricket Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666451" start="41285" end="41299" title="Sport in India" label="Sport in India"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407755" wikidata="Q48527" url="?curid=407755" title="States' rights">
<text>In American political discourse, states&#x27; rights are political powers held for the state governments rather than the federal government according to the United States Constitution, reflecting especially the enumerated powers of Congress and the Tenth Amendment. The enumerated powers that are listed in the Constitution include exclusive federal powers, as well as concurrent powers that are shared with the states, and all of those powers are contrasted with the reserved powers—also called states&#x27; rights—that only the states possess. Since the 1940s, the term &quot;states&#x27; rights&quot; has often been considered a loaded term or dog whistle because of its use in opposition to federally-mandated racial desegregation and, more recently, same-sex marriage and reproductive rights.

==Background==
The balance of federal powers and those powers held by the states as defined in the Supremacy Clause of the U.S. Constitution was first addressed in the case of &quot;McCulloch v. Maryland&quot; (1819). The Court&#x27;s decision by Chief Justice John Marshall asserted that the laws adopted by the federal government, when exercising its constitutional powers, are generally paramount over any conflicting laws adopted by state governments. After &quot;McCulloch&quot;, the primary legal issues in this area concerned the scope of Congress&#x27; constitutional powers, and whether the states possess certain powers to the exclusion of the federal government, even if the Constitution does not explicitly limit them to the states.

==The Supremacy Clause==
The Supremacy Clause of the U.S. Constitution states:
In &quot;The Federalist&quot; Papers, ratification proponent Alexander Hamilton explained the limitations this clause placed on the proposed federal government, describing that acts of the federal government were binding on the states and the people therein &quot;only if&quot; the act was in pursuance of constitutionally granted powers, and juxtaposing acts which exceeded those bounds as &quot;void and of no force&quot;:
==Controversy to 1865==
In the period between the American Revolution and the ratification of the United States Constitution, the states had united under a much weaker federal government and a much stronger state and local government, pursuant to the Articles of Confederation. The Articles gave the central government very little, if any, authority to overrule individual state actions. The Constitution subsequently strengthened the central government, authorizing it to exercise powers deemed necessary to exercise its authority, with an ambiguous boundary between the two co-existing levels of government. In the event of any conflict between state and federal law, the Constitution resolved the conflict via the Supremacy Clause of Article VI in favor of the federal government, which declares federal law the &quot;supreme Law of the Land&quot; and provides that &quot;the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing in the Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary notwithstanding.&quot; However, the Supremacy Clause only applies if the federal government is acting in pursuit of its constitutionally authorized powers, as noted by the phrase &quot;in pursuance thereof&quot; in the actual text of the Supremacy Clause itself (see above).

===Alien and Sedition Acts===
When the Federalists passed the Alien and Sedition Acts in 1798, Thomas Jefferson and James Madison secretly wrote the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions, which provide a classic statement in support of states&#x27; rights and called on state legislatures to nullify unconstitutional federal laws. (The other states, however, did not follow suit and several rejected the notion that states could nullify federal law.) According to this theory, the federal union is a voluntary association of states, and if the central government goes too far each state has the right to nullify that law. As Jefferson said in the Kentucky Resolutions:

Resolved, that the several States composing the United States of America, are not united on the principle of unlimited submission to their general government; but that by compact under the style and title of a Constitution for the United States and of amendments thereto, they constituted a general government for special purposes, delegated to that government certain definite powers, reserving each State to itself, the residuary mass of right to their own self-government; and that whensoever the general government assumes undelegated powers, its acts are unauthoritative, void, and of no force: That to this compact each State acceded as a State, and is an integral party, its co-States forming, as to itself, the other party...each party has an equal right to judge for itself, as well of infractions as of the mode and measure of redress.

The Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions, which became part of the Principles of &#x27;98, along with the supporting Report of 1800 by Madison, became final documents of Jefferson&#x27;s Democratic-Republican Party. Gutzman argued that Governor Edmund Randolph designed the protest in the name of moderation. Gutzman argues that in 1798, Madison espoused states&#x27; rights to defeat national legislation that he maintained was a threat to republicanism. During 1831–33, the South Carolina Nullifiers quoted Madison in their defense of states&#x27; rights. But Madison feared that the growing support for this doctrine would undermine the union and argued that by ratifying the Constitution states had transferred their sovereignty to the federal government.

The most vociferous supporters of states&#x27; rights, such as John Randolph of Roanoke, were called &quot;Old Republicans&quot; into the 1820s and 1830s.

Tate (2011) undertook a literary criticism of a major book by John Taylor of Caroline, &quot;New Views of the Constitution of the United States.&quot; Tate argues it is structured as a forensic historiography modeled on the techniques of 18th-century Whig lawyers. Taylor believed that evidence from American history gave proof of state sovereignty within the union, against the arguments of nationalists such as U.S. Chief Justice John Marshall.

Another states&#x27; rights dispute occurred over the War of 1812. At the Hartford Convention of 1814–15, New England Federalists voiced opposition to President Madison&#x27;s war, and discussed secession from the Union. In the end they stopped short of calls for secession, but when their report appeared at the same time as news of the great American victory at the Battle of New Orleans, the Federalists were politically ruined.

===Nullification Crisis of 1832===
One major and continuous strain on the union, from roughly 1820 through the Civil War, was the issue of trade and tariffs. Heavily dependent upon international trade, the almost entirely agricultural and export-oriented South imported most of its manufactured goods from Europe or obtained them from the North. The North, by contrast, had a growing domestic industrial economy that viewed foreign trade as competition. Trade barriers, especially protective tariffs, were viewed as harmful to the Southern economy, which depended on exports.

In 1828, the Congress passed protective tariffs to benefit trade in the northern states, but that were detrimental to the South. Southerners vocally expressed their tariff opposition in documents such as the &quot;South Carolina Exposition and Protest&quot; in 1828, written in response to the &quot;Tariff of Abominations&quot;. &quot;Exposition and Protest&quot; was the work of South Carolina senator and former vice president John C. Calhoun, formerly an advocate of protective tariffs and internal improvements at federal expense.

South Carolina&#x27;s Nullification Ordinance declared that both the tariff of 1828 and the tariff of 1832 were null and void within the state borders of South Carolina. This action initiated the Nullification Crisis. Passed by a state convention on November 24, 1832, it led, on December 10, to President Andrew Jackson&#x27;s proclamation against South Carolina, which sent a naval flotilla and a threat of sending federal troops to enforce the tariffs; Jackson authorized this under color of national authority, claiming in his 1832 Proclamation Regarding Nullification that &quot;our social compact in express terms declares, that the laws of the United States, its Constitution, and treaties made under it, are the supreme law of the land&quot; and for greater caution adds, &quot;that the judges in every State shall be bound thereby, anything in the Constitution or laws of any State to the contrary notwithstanding.&quot;

===Civil War===

Over following decades, another central dispute over states&#x27; rights moved to the forefront. The issue of slavery polarized the union, with the Jeffersonian principles often being used by both sides—anti-slavery Northerners, and Southern slaveholders and secessionists—in debates that ultimately led to the American Civil War. Supporters of slavery often argued that one of the rights of the states was the protection of slave property wherever it went, a position endorsed by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1857 Dred Scott decision. In contrast, opponents of slavery argued that the non-slave-states&#x27; rights were violated both by that decision and by the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850. While historians in the 21st century agree on the centrality of the conflict over slavery, they disagree sharply on which aspects of this conflict (ideological, economic, political, or social) were most important.

====Southern arguments====
Southern states had a long tradition of using states&#x27; rights doctrine since the late eighteenth century to support slavery. A major Southern argument in the 1850s was that federal law to ban the expansion of slavery into the territories discriminated against states that allowed slavery, making them second-class states. In 1857 the Supreme Court sided with these states&#x27; rights supporters, declaring in &quot;Dred Scott v. Sandford&quot; that Congress had no authority to regulate slavery in the territories.

Jefferson Davis used the following argument in favor of the equal rights of states:
Southern states argued against &quot;states&#x27; rights&quot; when it benefited them in the context of fugitive slave laws. For example, Texas challenged some northern states having the right to protect fugitive slaves, with the argument that this would make the institution null once a particular slave had crossed into a free state. The question was pivotal in the case of Dred Scott v. Sandford.

====Northern arguments====
The historian James McPherson noted that Southerners were inconsistent on the states&#x27; rights issue, and that Northern states tried to protect the rights of their states against the South during the Gag Rule and fugitive slave law controversies. Contemporany political thinkers like Karl Marx also noted this inconsistency regarding the Confederacy&#x27;s actions during the war:The attempts of the Confederacy to annex Missouri and Kentucky, for example, against the will of these states, prove the hollowness of the pretext that it is fighting for the rights of the individual states against the encroachments of the Union. On the individual states that it considers to belong to the &quot;South&quot; it confers, to be sure, the right to secede from the Union, but by no means the right to remain in the Union.The historian William H. Freehling noted that the South&#x27;s argument for a state&#x27;s right to secede was different from Thomas Jefferson&#x27;s, in that Jefferson based such a right on the unalienable equal rights of man. The South&#x27;s version of such a right was modified to be consistent with slavery, and with the South&#x27;s blend of democracy and authoritarianism. Historian Henry Brooks Adams explains that the anti-slavery North took a consistent and principled stand on states&#x27; rights against federal encroachment throughout its history, while the Southern states, whenever they saw an opportunity to expand slavery and the reach of their political influence, termed &quot;Slave Power&quot;, often conveniently forgot the principle of states&#x27; rights—and fought in favor of federal centralization:

Sinha and Richards both argue that the Southerners only advocated states&#x27; rights when they disagreed with a policy. Examples given are a states&#x27; right to engage in slavery or to suppress freedom of speech. They argue that it was instead the result of the increasing cognitive dissonance in the minds of Northerners and (some) Southern non-slaveowners between the ideals that the United States was founded upon and identified itself as standing for, as expressed in the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution of the United States, and the Bill of Rights, and the reality that the slave-power represented, as what they describe as an anti-democratic, counter-republican, oligarchic, despotic, authoritarian, if not totalitarian, movement for ownership of human beings as the personal chattels of the slaver. As this cognitive dissonance increased, the people of the Northern states, and the Northern states themselves, became increasingly inclined to resist the encroachments of the Slave Power upon their states&#x27; rights and encroachments of the Slave Power by and upon the federal government of the United States. The Slave Power, having failed to maintain its dominance of the federal government through democratic means, sought other means of maintaining its dominance of the federal government, by means of military aggression, by right of force and coercion, and thus, the Civil War occurred.

====&quot;Texas v. White&quot;====
In &quot;Texas v. White&quot;, the Supreme Court ruled that Texas had remained a state ever since it first joined the Union, despite claims to have joined the Confederate States of America; the court further held that the Constitution did not permit states to unilaterally secede from the United States, and that the ordinances of secession, and all the acts of the legislatures within seceding states intended to give effect to such ordinances, were &quot;absolutely null&quot; under the constitution.

==Since the Civil War==
A series of Supreme Court decisions developed the state action constraint on the Equal Protection Clause. The state action theory weakened the effect of the Equal Protection Clause against state governments, in that the clause was held not to apply to unequal protection of the laws caused in part by complete lack of state action in specific cases, even if state actions in other instances form an overall pattern of segregation and other discrimination. The separate but equal theory further weakened the effect of the Equal Protection Clause against state governments.

===In case law===
With &quot;United States v. Cruikshank&quot; (1876), a case which arose out of the Colfax Massacre of Black residents contesting the results of a Reconstruction-era election, the Supreme Court held that the Fourteenth Amendment did not apply to the First Amendment or Second Amendment to state governments in respect to their own citizens, only to acts of the federal government. In &quot;McDonald v. City of Chicago&quot; (2010), the Supreme Court held that the Second Amendment right of an individual to &quot;keep and bear arms&quot; is incorporated by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, and therefore fully applicable to states and local governments.

Furthermore, &quot;United States v. Harris&quot; (1883) held that the Equal Protection Clause did not apply to an 1883 prison lynching on the basis that the Fourteenth Amendment applied only to state acts, not to individual criminal actions.

In the &quot;Civil Rights Cases&quot; (1883), the Supreme Court allowed segregation by striking down the Civil Rights Act of 1875, a statute that prohibited racial discrimination in public accommodation. It again held that the Equal Protection Clause applied only to acts done by states, not to those done by private individuals, and as the Civil Rights Act of 1875 applied to private establishments, the Court said, it exceeded congressional enforcement power under Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment.

===Later progressive era and World War II===
By the beginning of the 20th century, greater cooperation began to develop between the state and federal governments and the federal government began to accumulate more power. Early in this period, a federal income tax was imposed, first during the Civil War as a war measure and then permanently with the Sixteenth Amendment in 1913. Before this, the states played a larger role in government.

States&#x27; rights were affected by the fundamental alteration of the federal government resulting from the Seventeenth Amendment, depriving state governments of an avenue of control over the federal government via the representation of each state&#x27;s legislature in the U.S. Senate. This change has been described by legal critics as the loss of a check and balance on the federal government by the states.

Following the Great Depression, the New Deal, and then World War II saw further growth in the authority and responsibilities of the federal government. The case of &quot;Wickard v. Filburn&quot; allowed the federal government to enforce the Agricultural Adjustment Act, providing subsidies to farmers for limiting their crop yields, arguing agriculture affected interstate commerce and came under the jurisdiction of the Commerce Clause even when a farmer grew his crops not to be sold, but for his own private use.

After World War II, President Harry Truman supported a civil rights bill and desegregated the military. The reaction was a split in the Democratic Party that led to the formation of the &quot;States&#x27; Rights Democratic Party&quot;—better known as the Dixiecrats—led by Strom Thurmond. Thurmond ran as the States&#x27; Rights candidate for president in the 1948 election, losing to Truman.

===Civil rights movement===
During the 1950s and 1960s, the civil rights movement was confronted by the proponents in the Southern states of racial segregation and Jim Crow laws who denounced federal interference in these state-level laws as an assault on states&#x27; rights.

Though &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot; (1954) overruled the &quot;Plessy v. Ferguson&quot; (1896) decision, the Fourteenth and Fifteenth amendments were largely inactive in the South until the Civil Rights Act of 1964 () and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Several states passed Interposition Resolutions to declare that the Supreme Court&#x27;s ruling in Brown usurped states&#x27; rights.

There was also opposition by states&#x27; rights advocates to voting rights at Edmund Pettus Bridge, which was part of the Selma to Montgomery marches, that resulted in the Voting Rights Act of 1965.

==Contemporary debates==
In 1964, the issue of fair housing in California involved the boundary between state laws and federalism. California Proposition 14 overturned the Rumsford Fair Housing Act in California and allowed discrimination in any type of housing sale or rental. Martin Luther King Jr. and others saw this as a backlash against civil rights, while actor and future (1967) governor of California Ronald Reagan gained popularity by supporting Proposition 14. The U.S. Supreme Court&#x27;s &quot;Reitman v. Mulkey&quot; decision overturned Proposition 14 in 1967 in favor of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

Conservative historians Thomas E. Woods Jr. and Kevin R. C. Gutzman argue that when politicians come to power they exercise all the power they can get, in the process trampling states&#x27; rights. Gutzman argues that the Kentucky and Virginia resolutions of 1798 by Jefferson and Madison were not only responses to immediate threats but were legitimate responses based on the long-standing principles of states&#x27; rights and strict adherence to the Constitution.

Another concern is the fact that on more than one occasion, the federal government has threatened to withhold highway funds from states which did not pass certain articles of legislation. Any state which lost highway funding for any extended period would face financial impoverishment, infrastructure collapse or both. Although the first such action (the enactment of a national speed limit) was directly related to highways and done in the face of a fuel shortage, most subsequent actions have had little or nothing to do with highways and have not been done in the face of any compelling national crisis. An example of this would be the federally mandated drinking age of 21, upheld in &quot;South Dakota v. Dole&quot;. Critics of such actions feel that the federal government is upsetting the traditional balance between itself and state governments.

More recently, the issue of states&#x27; rights has come to a head when the Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) Commission recommended that Congress and the Department of Defense implement sweeping changes to the National Guard by consolidating some Guard installations and closing others. These recommendations in 2005 drew strong criticism from many states, and several states sued the federal government on the basis that Congress and the Pentagon would be violating states&#x27; rights should they force the realignment and closure of Guard bases without the prior approval of the governors from the affected states. After Pennsylvania won a federal lawsuit to block the deactivation of the 111th Fighter Wing of the Pennsylvania Air National Guard, defense and Congressional leaders chose to try to settle the remaining BRAC lawsuits out of court, reaching compromises with the plaintiff states.

Current states&#x27; rights issues include the death penalty, assisted suicide, same-sex marriage, gun control, and cannabis, the last of which is in direct violation of federal law. In &quot;Gonzales v. Raich&quot;, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the federal government, permitting the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) to arrest medical marijuana patients and caregivers. In &quot;Gonzales v. Oregon&quot;, the Supreme Court ruled the practice of physician-assisted suicide in Oregon is legal. In &quot;Obergefell v. Hodges&quot;, the Supreme Court ruled that states could not withhold recognition to same-sex marriages. In &quot;District of Columbia v. Heller&quot; (2008), the United States Supreme Court ruled that gun ownership is an individual right under the Second Amendment of the United States Constitution, and the District of Columbia could not completely ban gun ownership by law-abiding private citizens. Two years later, the court ruled that the Heller decision applied to states and territories via the Second and 14th Amendments in &quot;McDonald v. Chicago&quot;, stating that states, territories and political divisions thereof, could not impose total bans on gun ownership by law-abiding citizens.

These concerns have led to a movement sometimes called the State Sovereignty movement or &quot;10th Amendment Sovereignty Movement&quot;.

==10th Amendment==
The Tenth Amendment of the United States Constitution has been used as a prominent tool of invoking nullification, a common tactic of those that believe in the primacy of States&#x27; rights. The Tenth Amendment reads as follows: Notably, the Tenth Amendment has been successfully utilized to nullify restrictive federal laws pertaining to gun rights, immigration, cannabis, and more. Additionally, organizations such as the Tenth Amendment Center seek to utilize the Tenth Amendment to achieve, &quot;Liberty through decentralization&quot;. The Tenth Amendment center chiefly focuses on encouraging state representatives to submit bills that nullify federal laws by providing model legislation on their website that provides a rubric for state legislators to follow.

In 2009–2010 thirty-eight states introduced resolutions to reaffirm the principles of sovereignty under the Constitution and the 10th Amendment; 14 states have passed the resolutions. These non-binding resolutions, often called &quot;state sovereignty resolutions&quot; do not carry the force of law. Instead, they are intended to be a statement to demand that the federal government halt its practices of assuming powers and imposing mandates upon the states for purposes not enumerated by the Constitution.

==States&#x27; rights and the Rehnquist Court==
The Supreme Court&#x27;s &quot;University of Alabama v. Garrett&quot; (2001) and &quot;Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents&quot; (2000) decisions allowed states to use a rational basis review for discrimination against the aged and disabled, arguing that these types of discrimination were rationally related to a legitimate state interest, and that no &quot;razorlike precision&quot; was needed.&quot; The Supreme Court&#x27;s &quot;United States v. Morrison&quot; (2000) decision limited the ability of rape victims to sue their attackers in federal court. Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist explained that &quot;States historically have been sovereign&quot; in the area of law enforcement, which in the Court&#x27;s opinion required narrow interpretations of the Commerce Clause and Fourteenth Amendment.

&quot;Kimel&quot;, &quot;Garrett&quot; and &quot;Morrison&quot; indicated that the Court&#x27;s previous decisions in favor of enumerated powers and limits on Congressional power over the states, such as &quot;United States v. Lopez&quot; (1995), &quot;Seminole Tribe v. Florida&quot; (1996) and &quot;City of Boerne v. Flores&quot; (1997) were more than one time flukes. In the past, Congress relied on the Commerce Clause and the Equal Protection Clause for passing civil rights bills, including the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

&quot;Lopez&quot; limited the Commerce Clause to things that directly affect interstate commerce, which excludes issues like gun control laws, hate crimes, and other crimes that affect commerce but are not directly related to commerce. &quot;Seminole&quot; reinforced the &quot;sovereign immunity of states&quot; doctrine, which makes it difficult to sue states for many things, especially civil rights violations. The &quot;Flores&quot; &quot;congruence and proportionality&quot; requirement prevents Congress from going too far in requiring states to comply with the Equal Protection Clause, which replaced the ratchet theory advanced in &quot;Katzenbach v. Morgan&quot; (1966). The ratchet theory held that Congress could ratchet up civil rights beyond what the Court had recognized, but that Congress could not ratchet down judicially recognized rights. An important precedent for &quot;Morrison&quot; was &quot;United States v. Harris&quot; (1883), which ruled that the Equal Protection Clause did not apply to a prison lynching because the state action doctrine applies Equal Protection only to state action, not private criminal acts. Since the ratchet principle was replaced with the &quot;congruence and proportionality&quot; principle by &quot;Flores&quot;, it was easier to revive older precedents for preventing Congress from going beyond what Court interpretations would allow. Critics such as Associate Justice John Paul Stevens accused the Court of judicial activism (i.e., interpreting law to reach a desired conclusion).

The tide against federal power in the Rehnquist court was stopped in the case of &quot;Gonzales v. Raich&quot;, 545 U.S. 1 (2005), in which the court upheld the federal power to prohibit medicinal use of cannabis even if states have permitted it. Rehnquist himself was a dissenter in the &quot;Raich&quot; case.

==States&#x27; rights as code word==
Since the 1940s, the term &quot;states&#x27; rights&quot; has at times been referred to as a loaded term or dog whistle because of its use in opposition to federally-mandated racial desegregation and, more recently, same-sex marriage and reproductive rights.

During the heyday of the civil rights movement, defenders of racial segregation used the term &quot;states&#x27; rights&quot; as a code word in what is now referred to as dog-whistle politics: political messaging that appears to mean one thing to the general population but has an additional, different, or more specific resonance for a targeted subgroup. In 1948 it was the official name of the &quot;Dixiecrat&quot; party led by white supremacist presidential candidate Strom Thurmond. Democratic Governor George Wallace of Alabama, who famously declared in his inaugural address in 1963, &quot;Segregation now! Segregation tomorrow! Segregation forever!&quot; later remarked that he should have said, &quot;States&#x27; rights now! States&#x27; rights tomorrow! States&#x27; rights forever!&quot; Wallace, however, claimed that segregation was but one issue symbolic of a larger struggle for states&#x27; rights. In that view, which some historians dispute, his replacement of &quot;segregation&quot; with &quot;states&#x27; rights&quot; would be more of a clarification than a euphemism.

In 2010, some claimed that Texas Governor Rick Perry&#x27;s use of the expression &quot;states&#x27; rights&quot; was &quot;reminiscent of an earlier era when it was a rallying cry against civil rights.&quot; During an interview with &quot;The Dallas Morning News&quot;, Perry made it clear that he supports the end of segregation, including passage of the Civil Rights Act. The Texas president of the NAACP, Gary Bledsoe, stated that he understood that Perry was not speaking of &quot;states&#x27; rights&quot; in a racial context, but others still claimed to feel offended by the term because of its past misuse.

==See also==
* 
* 
** 
* 
* 
* 
* (The rights and responsibilities of EU member states.)

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
* , which argues at 143–49: &quot;To many, [the notion of states&#x27; rights] stands for an anachronistic (and immoral) preference for the race-based denial of essential individual rights...&quot;.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* (in JSTOR)
* 

==Further reading==
* Sotirios A. Barber, &quot;The Fallacies of States&#x27; Rights.&quot; Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2013.
* Jefferson Davis, &quot;&quot; (1890). &quot;The North American Review&quot;, Vol. 150, No. 399, pp. 205–219.
* Frederick D. Drake, ed. &quot;States&#x27; Rights and American Federalism: A Documentary History&quot; (1999)
* James J. Kilpatrick. &quot;The Sovereign States: Notes of a Citizen of Virginia&quot; Chicago: Henry Regnery Company, 1957.

==External links==

* Tenth Amendment Center Federalism and States Rights in the U.S.
* States&#x27; Rights in &quot;Encyclopedia Virginia&quot;
* A copy of transcript of Florida&#x27;s 1957 Interposition Resolution, made available for public use by the State Archives of Florida
* Missouri Sovereignty Project &quot;Institutionalizing&quot; the 10th Amendment into the populace and political fabrics of Missouri.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3" end="11" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q330963" start="12" end="31" title="politics of the United States" label="political discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q48527" start="33" end="52" title="States&amp;#x27; rights" label="states&amp;#x27; rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="57" end="72" title="political power" label="political power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603694" start="87" end="104" title="state governments of the United States" label="state governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="121" end="139" title="federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="157" end="183" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773061" start="211" end="228" title="enumerated powers" label="enumerated powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q164665" start="249" end="264" title="Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Tenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907946" start="332" end="356" title="exclusive federal powers" label="exclusive federal powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159112" start="369" end="386" title="concurrent powers" label="concurrent powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315291" start="468" end="483" title="reserved powers" label="reserved powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757993" start="632" end="643" title="loaded language" label="loaded term"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288144" start="647" end="658" title="Dog whistle (politics)" label="dog whistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48532" start="721" end="734" title="Desegregation in the United States" label="desegregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17476" start="755" end="772" title="Same-sex marriage in the United States" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536343" start="777" end="796" title="reproductive rights" label="reproductive rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644794" start="898" end="914" title="Supremacy Clause" label="Supremacy Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="922" end="939" title="United States Constitution" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q908270" start="981" end="1002" title="McCulloch v. Maryland" label="McCulloch v. Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q310829" start="1060" end="1073" title="John Marshall" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644794" start="1574" end="1590" title="Supremacy Clause" label="Supremacy Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440605" start="1627" end="1660" title="Federalist No. 33" label="&amp;quot;The Federalist&amp;quot; Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="1685" end="1703" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="2099" end="2118" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="2147" end="2173" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="2300" end="2325" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48436" start="2786" end="2796" title="Article Six of the United States Constitution" label="Article VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644794" start="3279" end="3295" title="Supremacy Clause" label="Supremacy Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118757" start="3379" end="3402" title="Alien and Sedition Acts" label="Alien and Sedition Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="3412" end="3428" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="3433" end="3446" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140753" start="3466" end="3499" title="Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions" label="Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q779359" start="3605" end="3642" title="Nullification (U.S. Constitution)" label="nullify unconstitutional federal laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245177" start="4894" end="4916" title="Principles of &amp;#x27;98" label="Principles of &amp;#x27;98"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320904" start="4944" end="4958" title="Report of 1800" label="Report of 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="5014" end="5041" title="Democratic-Republican Party" label="Democratic-Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q318703" start="5072" end="5087" title="Edmund Randolph" label="Edmund Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396415" start="5136" end="5143" title="Kevin Gutzman" label="Gutzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341317" start="5651" end="5675" title="John Randolph of Roanoke" label="John Randolph of Roanoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205057" start="5806" end="5829" title="John Taylor of Caroline" label="John Taylor of Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="6246" end="6257" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674472" start="6266" end="6285" title="Hartford Convention" label="Hartford Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="6310" end="6321" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q687031" start="6387" end="6396" title="secession" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q41894" start="6560" end="6581" title="Battle of New Orleans" label="Battle of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="6774" end="6780" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="6847" end="6859" title="agriculture" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q182722" start="6864" end="6870" title="export" label="export"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="6880" end="6885" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q917614" start="7018" end="7036" title="Industrial society" label="industrial economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="7215" end="7223" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566579" start="7416" end="7453" title="South Carolina Exposition and Protest" label="South Carolina Exposition and Protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686034" start="7502" end="7524" title="Tariff of Abominations" label="Tariff of Abominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="7583" end="7597" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="7598" end="7605" title="United States Senate" label="senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q42178" start="7617" end="7631" title="vice president" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q207191" start="7632" end="7647" title="John C. Calhoun" label="John C. Calhoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="7684" end="7690" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047872" start="7696" end="7717" title="internal improvements" label="internal improvements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="7739" end="7753" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885396" start="7761" end="7784" title="Nullification Ordinance" label="Nullification Ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686034" start="7808" end="7822" title="tariff of 1828" label="tariff of 1828"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686035" start="7831" end="7845" title="tariff of 1832" label="tariff of 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q472699" start="7935" end="7955" title="Nullification Crisis" label="Nullification Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="8045" end="8059" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="8797" end="8804" title="slavery in the United States" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="8998" end="9016" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="9172" end="9190" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q690462" start="9199" end="9218" title="Dred Scott v. Sandford" label="Dred Scott decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921545" start="9347" end="9365" title="Fugitive Slave Law" label="Fugitive Slave Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q316748" start="9412" end="9417" title="Scholarly consensus" label="agree"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="10138" end="10153" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921545" start="10326" end="10345" title="fugitive slave laws in the United States" label="fugitive slave laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="10546" end="10556" title="Free state (United States)" label="free state"/>
<link wikidata="Q690462" start="10598" end="10620" title="Dred Scott v. Sandford" label="Dred Scott v. Sandford"/>
<link wikidata="Q709723" start="10664" end="10679" title="James M. McPherson" label="James McPherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228948" start="10853" end="10861" title="Gag rule (United States)" label="Gag Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="10937" end="10946" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952344" start="11074" end="11082" title="Missouri in the American Civil War" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392449" start="11087" end="11095" title="Kentucky in the American Civil War" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q458390" start="11857" end="11875" title="Henry Brooks Adams" label="Henry Brooks Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522748" start="12163" end="12174" title="Slave Power" label="Slave Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407695" start="13756" end="13770" title="Texas v. White" label="Texas v. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="13906" end="13935" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="13969" end="13981" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="13997" end="14003" title="United States state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q687031" start="14020" end="14026" title="secession" label="secede"/>
<link wikidata="Q696606" start="14215" end="14219" title="void (law)" label="null"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137223" start="14356" end="14379" title="Equal Protection Clause" label="Equal Protection Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974008" start="14735" end="14753" title="separate but equal" label="separate but equal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893259" start="14877" end="14904" title="United States v. Cruikshank" label="United States v. Cruikshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144758" start="14949" end="14964" title="Colfax Massacre" label="Colfax Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="15073" end="15093" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="15115" end="15130" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q210645" start="15134" end="15150" title="Second Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360440" start="15255" end="15282" title="McDonald v. City of Chicago" label="McDonald v. City of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893312" start="15558" end="15581" title="United States v. Harris" label="United States v. Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124539" start="15795" end="15813" title="Civil Rights Cases" label="Civil Rights Cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q501202" start="15887" end="15911" title="Civil Rights Act of 1875" label="Civil Rights Act of 1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160979" start="16249" end="16286" title="congressional power of enforcement" label="Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="16583" end="16592" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q194938" start="16640" end="16659" title="Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q197656" start="16839" end="16860" title="Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Seventeenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="17005" end="17016" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="17083" end="17100" title="Checks and balances" label="check and balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="17157" end="17173" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="17179" end="17187" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="17198" end="17210" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998256" start="17313" end="17331" title="Wickard v. Filburn" label="Wickard v. Filburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q536633" start="17384" end="17411" title="Agricultural Adjustment Act" label="Agricultural Adjustment Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="17564" end="17579" title="Commerce Clause" label="Commerce Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="17690" end="17702" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="17796" end="17812" title="Democratic Party (U.S.)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231756" start="17915" end="17924" title="Dixiecrat" label="Dixiecrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q324719" start="17933" end="17947" title="Strom Thurmond" label="Strom Thurmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q568973" start="18020" end="18033" title="1948 United States presidential election" label="1948 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="18114" end="18135" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="18195" end="18213" title="racial segregation in the United States" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="18218" end="18230" title="Jim Crow law" label="Jim Crow law"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="18345" end="18372" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q656660" start="18406" end="18424" title="Plessy v. Ferguson" label="Plessy v. Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="18533" end="18557" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608064" start="18569" end="18594" title="Voting Rights Act of 1965" label="Voting Rights Act of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056423" start="18618" end="18631" title="Interposition" label="Interposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339739" start="18810" end="18830" title="Edmund Pettus Bridge" label="Edmund Pettus Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061891" start="18854" end="18881" title="Selma to Montgomery marches" label="Selma to Montgomery marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608064" start="18904" end="18929" title="Voting Rights Act of 1965" label="Voting Rights Act of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020777" start="19063" end="19088" title="California Proposition 14 (1963)" label="California Proposition 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="19210" end="19232" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="19331" end="19341" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="19342" end="19355" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423948" start="19440" end="19457" title="Reitman v. Mulkey" label="Reitman v. Mulkey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20146" end="20168" title="Interstate Highway System#The federal role in financing" label="withhold highway funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915195" start="20703" end="20715" title="drinking age" label="drinking age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567010" start="20739" end="20759" title="South Dakota v. Dole" label="South Dakota v. Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886428" start="20976" end="21004" title="Base Realignment and Closure" label="Base Realignment and Closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="21040" end="21048" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="21057" end="21078" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="21113" end="21127" title="United States National Guard" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="21527" end="21539" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547331" start="21595" end="21613" title="111th Fighter Wing" label="111th Fighter Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163637" start="21621" end="21652" title="Pennsylvania Air National Guard" label="Pennsylvania Air National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="21783" end="21792" title="plaintiff" label="plaintiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="21849" end="21862" title="death penalty" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q689846" start="21864" end="21880" title="assisted suicide" label="assisted suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="21882" end="21899" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328508" start="21901" end="21912" title="gun control" label="gun control"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21918" end="21926" title="legality of cannabis by U.S. jurisdiction#By state" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582161" start="21994" end="22011" title="Gonzales v. Raich" label="Gonzales v. Raich"/>
<link wikidata="Q622899" start="22094" end="22125" title="Drug Enforcement Administration" label="Drug Enforcement Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840545" start="22194" end="22212" title="Gonzales v. Oregon" label="Gonzales v. Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q689846" start="22260" end="22286" title="physician-assisted suicide" label="physician-assisted suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="22290" end="22296" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866992" start="22316" end="22336" title="Obergefell v. Hodges" label="Obergefell v. Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229683" start="22443" end="22473" title="District of Columbia v. Heller" label="District of Columbia v. Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q210645" start="22578" end="22628" title="Second Amendment of the United States Constitution" label="Second Amendment of the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="22842" end="22857" title="Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution" label="14th Amendments"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360440" start="22867" end="22886" title="McDonald v. Chicago" label="McDonald v. Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23090" end="23107" title="Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution#State sovereignty resolutions and nullification acts" label="State Sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q164665" start="23193" end="23208" title="Tenth Amendment" label="Tenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051051" start="23529" end="23539" title="gun rights" label="gun rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="23541" end="23552" title="immigration" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="23554" end="23562" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802106" start="23614" end="23636" title="Tenth Amendment Center" label="Tenth Amendment Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="23691" end="23698" title="Liberty" label="Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q188961" start="23707" end="23723" title="decentralization" label="decentralization"/>
<link wikidata="Q23134771" start="24192" end="24221" title="state sovereignty resolutions" label="state sovereignty resolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931388" start="24547" end="24579" title="Board of Trustees of the University of Alabama v. Garrett" label="University of Alabama v. Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410052" start="24603" end="24636" title="Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents" label="Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295753" start="24684" end="24705" title="rational basis review" label="rational basis review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893409" start="24948" end="24973" title="United States v. Morrison" label="United States v. Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q311562" start="25087" end="25107" title="William H. Rehnquist" label="William H. Rehnquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q870728" start="25533" end="25555" title="United States v. Lopez" label="United States v. Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449546" start="25576" end="25601" title="Seminole Tribe v. Florida" label="Seminole Tribe v. Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123597" start="25625" end="25649" title="City of Boerne v. Flores" label="City of Boerne v. Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="25731" end="25746" title="Commerce Clause" label="Commerce Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137223" start="25755" end="25778" title="Equal Protection Clause" label="Equal Protection Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="25825" end="25849" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378583" start="26498" end="26518" title="Katzenbach v. Morgan" label="Katzenbach v. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893312" start="26768" end="26791" title="United States v. Harris" label="United States v. Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="27259" end="27276" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Associate Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11109" start="27277" end="27294" title="John Paul Stevens" label="John Paul Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330176" start="27316" end="27333" title="judicial activism" label="judicial activism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582161" start="27478" end="27495" title="Gonzales v. Raich" label="Gonzales v. Raich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="27595" end="27603" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757993" start="27834" end="27845" title="loaded language" label="loaded term"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288144" start="27849" end="27860" title="Dog whistle (politics)" label="dog whistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48532" start="27923" end="27936" title="Desegregation in the United States" label="desegregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17476" start="27957" end="27974" title="Same-sex marriage in the United States" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536343" start="27979" end="27998" title="reproductive rights" label="reproductive rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="28026" end="28047" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="28062" end="28080" title="racial segregation in the United States" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140114" start="28132" end="28141" title="code word (figure of speech)" label="code word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231756" start="28403" end="28412" title="Dixiecrat" label="Dixiecrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="28432" end="28449" title="White supremacy" label="white supremacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q324719" start="28473" end="28487" title="Strom Thurmond" label="Strom Thurmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="28509" end="28523" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="28527" end="28534" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q83464" start="29082" end="29091" title="euphemism" label="euphemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="29121" end="29126" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q215057" start="29136" end="29146" title="Rick Perry" label="Rick Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q889935" start="29334" end="29357" title="The Dallas Morning News" label="The Dallas Morning News"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="29451" end="29467" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="29496" end="29501" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="30224" end="30239" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680621" start="30447" end="30466" title="James J. Kilpatrick" label="James J. Kilpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579498" start="30542" end="30563" title="Henry Regnery Company" label="Henry Regnery Company"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407761" wikidata="Q1138705" url="?curid=407761" title="State Anthem of Adygea">
<text>The State Anthem of the Republic of Adygea is one of the official state symbols of the federal subject, along with its flag and emblem. Its lyrics were written by Iskhak Mashbash, and the music was composed by Umar Tkhabisimov. The anthem was approved by decision of the Supreme Council of Adygea on 25 March 1992. This was one of the first decisions made by the republic&#x27;s parliament after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.

== Lyrics ==
===Adyghe version===
===Russian version===
===English translation===
== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
*Anthem of the Republic of Adygea (Adyghe vocal)
*Anthem of the Republic of Adygea (Russian vocal)
*Anthem of the Republic of Adygeya (music only)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1138705" start="4" end="42" title="State Anthem of Adygea" label="State Anthem of the Republic of Adygea"/>
<link wikidata="Q43263" start="87" end="102" title="federal subjects of Russia" label="federal subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q279667" start="119" end="123" title="flag of the Republic of Adygea" label="flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366769" start="128" end="134" title="coat of arms of the Republic of Adygea" label="emblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286084" start="163" end="178" title="Iskhak Mashbash" label="Iskhak Mashbash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="400" end="431" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407763" wikidata="Q2072112" url="?curid=407763" title="Unit cube">
<text>A unit cube, more formally a cube of side 1, is a cube whose sides are 1 unit long. The volume of a 3-dimensional unit cube is 1 cubic unit, and its total surface area is 6 square units.

== Unit hypercube ==
The term &quot;unit cube&quot; or unit hypercube is also used for hypercubes, or &quot;cubes&quot; in &quot;n&quot;-dimensional spaces, for values of &quot;n&quot; other than 3 and edge length 1.

Sometimes the term &quot;unit cube&quot; refers in specific to the set [0, 1]&quot;n&quot; of all &quot;n&quot;-tuples of numbers in the interval [0, 1].

The length of the longest diagonal of a unit hypercube of &quot;n&quot; dimensions is formula_1, the square root of &quot;n&quot; and the (Euclidean) length of the vector (1,1,1...1,1) in &quot;n&quot;-dimensional space.

== See also ==
*Doubling the cube
*&quot;k&quot;-cell
*Robbins constant, the average distance between two random points in a unit cube
*Tychonoff cube, an infinite-dimensional analogue of the unit cube
*Unit square
*Unit sphere

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2072112" start="2" end="11" title="Unit cube" label="unit cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072112" start="29" end="43" title="Unit cube" label="cube of side 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q812880" start="50" end="54" title="cube" label="cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q213723" start="275" end="284" title="hypercube" label="hypercube"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="311" end="343" title="N-dimensional space" label="&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;-dimensional spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q213673" start="799" end="816" title="Doubling the cube" label="Doubling the cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801534" start="818" end="836" title="k-cell (mathematics)" label="&amp;quot;k&amp;quot;-cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q112052143" start="838" end="854" title="Robbins constant" label="Robbins constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337810" start="919" end="933" title="Tychonoff cube" label="Tychonoff cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307838" start="986" end="997" title="Unit square" label="Unit square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307800" start="999" end="1010" title="Unit sphere" label="Unit sphere"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407764" wikidata="Q517269" url="?curid=407764" title="Witch of Agnesi">
<text>In mathematics, the witch of Agnesi () is a cubic plane curve defined from two diametrically opposite points of a circle. 

The curve was studied as early as 1653 by Pierre de Fermat, in 1703 by Guido Grandi, and by Isaac Newton. It gets its name from Italian mathematician Maria Gaetana Agnesi who published it in 1748. The Italian name &#x27; is based on [[Latin]]&#x27; (sheet of sailing ships) and the sinus versus. 
This was read by John Colson as &#x27;, where&#x27; is translated as &quot;woman who is against God&quot; and interpreted as &quot;witch&quot;.

The graph of the derivative of the arctangent function forms an example of the witch of Agnesi. As the probability density function of the Cauchy distribution, the witch of Agnesi has applications in probability theory. It also gives rise to Runge&#x27;s phenomenon in the approximation of functions by polynomials, has been used to approximate the energy distribution of spectral lines, and models the shape of hills.

The witch is tangent to its defining circle at one of the two defining points, and asymptotic to the tangent line to the circle at the other point. It has a unique vertex (a point of extreme curvature) at the point of tangency with its defining circle, which is also its osculating circle at that point. It also has two finite inflection points and one infinite inflection point. The area between the witch and its asymptotic line is four times the area of the defining circle, and the volume of revolution of the curve around its defining line is twice the volume of the torus of revolution of its defining circle.

==Construction==
 
To construct this curve, start with any two points &quot;O&quot; and &quot;M&quot;, and draw a circle with &quot;OM&quot; as diameter. For any other point &quot;A&quot; on the circle, let &quot;N&quot; be the point of intersection of the secant line &quot;OA&quot; and the tangent line at &quot;M&quot;.
Let &quot;P&quot; be the point of intersection of a line perpendicular to &quot;OM&quot; through &quot;A&quot;, and a line parallel to &quot;OM&quot; through &quot;N&quot;. Then &quot;P&quot; lies on the witch of Agnesi. The witch consists of all the points &quot;P&quot; that can be constructed in this way from the same choice of &quot;O&quot; and &quot;M&quot;. It includes, as a limiting case, the point &quot;M&quot; itself.

==Equations==
Suppose that point &quot;O&quot; is at the origin and point &quot;M&quot; lies on the positive formula_1-axis, and that the circle with diameter &quot;OM&quot; has 
Then the witch constructed from &quot;O&quot; has the Cartesian equation
formula_2
This equation can be simplified, by choosing to the form
formula_3
or equivalently, by clearing denominators, as the cubic algebraic equation
formula_4
In its simplified form, this curve is the graph of the derivative of the arctangent function.

The witch of Agnesi can also be described by parametric equations whose parameter is the angle between &quot;OM&quot; and &quot;OA&quot;, measured clockwise:
formula_5

==Properties==
The main properties of this curve can be derived from integral calculus.
The area between the witch and its asymptotic line is four times the area of the fixed circle, 
The volume of revolution of the witch of Agnesi about its asymptote This is two times the volume of the torus formed by revolving the defining circle of the witch around the same line.

The curve has a unique vertex at the point of tangency with its defining circle. That is, this point is the only point where the curvature reaches a local minimum or local maximum. The defining circle of the witch is also its osculating circle at the vertex, the unique circle that &quot;kisses&quot; the curve at that point by sharing the same orientation and curvature. Because this is an osculating circle at the vertex of the curve, it has third-order contact with the curve.

The curve has two inflection points, at the points
formula_6
corresponding to the When considered as a curve in the projective plane there is also a third infinite inflection point, at the point where the line at infinity is crossed by the asymptotic line. Because one of its inflection points is infinite, the witch has the minimum possible number of finite real inflection points of any non-singular cubic 

The largest area of a rectangle that can be inscribed between the witch and its asymptote for a rectangle whose height is the radius of the defining circle and whose width is twice the diameter of the 

==History==
===Early studies===

The curve was studied by Pierre de Fermat in his 1659 treatise on quadrature. In it, Fermat computes the area under the curve and (without details) claims that the same method extends as well to the cissoid of Diocles. Fermat writes that the curve was suggested to him &quot;ab erudito geometra&quot; [by a learned geometer]. speculate that the geometer who suggested this curve to Fermat might have been Antoine de Laloubère.

The construction given above for this curve was found by ; the same construction was also found earlier by Isaac Newton, but only published posthumously later, in 1779.
 also suggested the name &quot;versiera&quot; (in Italian) or &quot;versoria&quot; (in Latin) for the curve. The Latin term is also used for a sheet, the rope which turns the sail, but Grandi may have instead intended merely to refer to the versine function that appeared in his construction.

In 1748, Maria Gaetana Agnesi published &quot;Instituzioni analitiche ad uso della gioventù italiana&quot;, an early textbook on calculus. In it, after first considering two other curves, she includes a study of this curve. She defines the curve geometrically as the locus of points satisfying a certain proportion, determines its algebraic equation, and finds its vertex, asymptotic line, and inflection points.

===Etymology===
Maria Gaetana Agnesi named the curve according to Grandi, &quot;versiera&quot;. Coincidentally, at that time in Italy it was common to speak of the Devil through other words like &quot;aversiero&quot; or &quot;versiero&quot;, derived from Latin &quot;adversarius&quot;, the &quot;adversary&quot; of God. &quot;Versiera&quot;, in particular, was used to indicate the wife of the devil, or &quot;witch&quot;. Because of this, Cambridge professor John Colson mistranslated the name of the curve as &quot;witch&quot;. Different modern works about Agnesi and about the curve suggest slightly different guesses how exactly this mistranslation happened. Struik mentions that:

On the other hand, Stephen Stigler suggests that Grandi himself &quot;may have been indulging in a play on words&quot;, a double pun connecting the devil to the versine and the sine function to the shape of the female breast (both of which can be written as &quot;seno&quot; in Italian).

==Applications==
A scaled version of the curve is the probability density function of the Cauchy distribution. This is the probability distribution on the random variable formula_7 determined by the following random experiment: for a fixed point formula_8 above the choose uniformly at random a line and let formula_7 be the coordinate of the point where this random line crosses the axis. The Cauchy distribution has a peaked distribution visually resembling the normal distribution, but its heavy tails prevent it from having an expected value by the usual definitions, despite its symmetry. In terms of the witch itself, this means that the of the centroid of the region between the curve and its asymptotic line is not well-defined, despite this region&#x27;s symmetry and finite area.

In numerical analysis, when approximating functions using polynomial interpolation with equally spaced interpolation points, it may be the case for some functions that using more points creates worse approximations, so that the interpolation diverges from the function it is trying to approximate rather than converging to it. This paradoxical behavior is called Runge&#x27;s phenomenon. It was first discovered by Carl David Tolmé Runge for Runge&#x27;s function another scaled version of the witch of Agnesi, when interpolating this function over the The same phenomenon occurs for the witch formula_10 itself over the wider 

The witch of Agnesi approximates the spectral energy distribution of spectral lines, particularly X-ray lines.

The cross-section of a smooth hill has a similar shape to the witch. Curves with this shape have been used as the generic topographic obstacle in a flow in mathematical modeling.
Solitary waves in deep water can also take this shape.

A version of this curve was used by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz to derive the Leibniz formula for. This formula, the infinite series
formula_11
can be derived by equating the area under the curve with the integral of the 
using the Taylor series expansion of this function as the infinite geometric series and integrating term-by-term.

==In popular culture== 
&quot;The Witch of Agnesi&quot; is the title of a novel by Robert Spiller. It includes a scene in which a teacher gives a version of the history of the term.
&quot;Witch of Agnesi&quot; is also the title of a music album by jazz quartet Radius. The cover of the album features an image of the construction of the witch.

==References==
==External links==
*&quot;Witch of Agnesi&quot; at MacTutor&#x27;s Famous Curves Index
*Witch of Agnesi by Chris Boucher based on work by Eric W. Weisstein, The Wolfram Demonstrations Project.
*&quot;Witch of Agnesi&quot; at &quot;mathcurve&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q517269" start="20" end="35" title="Witch of Agnesi" label="witch of Agnesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369721" start="44" end="61" title="cubic plane curve" label="cubic plane curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q75655" start="166" end="182" title="Pierre de Fermat" label="Pierre de Fermat"/>
<link wikidata="Q982368" start="195" end="207" title="Guido Grandi" label="Guido Grandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="216" end="228" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q200392" start="274" end="294" title="Maria Gaetana Agnesi" label="Maria Gaetana Agnesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q517269" start="338" end="366" title="Witch of Agnesi" label="&amp;#x27; is based on [[Latin]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q477494" start="374" end="379" title="Sheet (sailing)" label="sheet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="406" end="418" title="List_of_trigonometric_identities#Half-angle_formulae" label="sinus versus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394680" start="438" end="449" title="John Colson" label="John Colson"/>
<link wikidata="Q517269" start="453" end="466" title="Witch of Agnesi" label="&amp;#x27;, where"/>
<link wikidata="Q182598" start="570" end="575" title="Graph of a function" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q674533" start="601" end="611" title="arctangent" label="arctangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q207522" start="669" end="697" title="probability density function" label="probability density function"/>
<link wikidata="Q726441" start="705" end="724" title="Cauchy distribution" label="Cauchy distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="766" end="784" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990319" start="808" end="831" title="Runge&amp;#x27;s phenomenon" label="Runge&amp;#x27;s phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071054" start="839" end="865" title="Linear approximation" label="approximation of functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="869" end="879" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="938" end="951" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q131251" start="999" end="1006" title="tangent" label="tangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q179436" start="1069" end="1079" title="asymptotic" label="asymptotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q647040" start="1087" end="1113" title="Tangent lines to circles" label="tangent line to the circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q362765" start="1150" end="1156" title="vertex (curve)" label="vertex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166240" start="1257" end="1274" title="osculating circle" label="osculating circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q212794" start="1313" end="1329" title="inflection point" label="inflection point"/>
<link wikidata="Q725939" start="1472" end="1492" title="Solid of revolution" label="volume of revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12510" start="1558" end="1563" title="torus" label="torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q426301" start="1860" end="1871" title="secant line" label="secant line"/>
<link wikidata="Q40735" start="2414" end="2420" title="Origin (mathematics)" label="origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48971469" start="2706" end="2727" title="clearing denominators" label="clearing denominators"/>
<link wikidata="Q50698" start="2742" end="2760" title="algebraic equation" label="algebraic equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182598" start="2813" end="2818" title="Graph of a function" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="2826" end="2836" title="derivative" label="derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q674533" start="2844" end="2854" title="arctangent" label="arctangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q35889" start="2911" end="2930" title="parametric equation" label="parametric equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="3104" end="3121" title="integral calculus" label="integral calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q725939" start="3223" end="3243" title="volume of revolution" label="volume of revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12510" start="3323" end="3328" title="torus" label="torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q362765" start="3428" end="3434" title="Vertex (curve)" label="vertex"/>
<link wikidata="Q214881" start="3534" end="3543" title="curvature" label="curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166240" start="3631" end="3648" title="osculating circle" label="osculating circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q829376" start="3849" end="3868" title="Contact (mathematics)" label="third-order contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q212794" start="3904" end="3920" title="inflection point" label="inflection point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475760" start="4002" end="4018" title="projective plane" label="projective plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130665" start="4091" end="4107" title="line at infinity" label="line at infinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q209" start="4318" end="4327" title="rectangle" label="rectangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q75655" start="4557" end="4573" title="Pierre de Fermat" label="Pierre de Fermat"/>
<link wikidata="Q576422" start="4598" end="4608" title="Quadrature (mathematics)" label="quadrature"/>
<link wikidata="Q206079" start="4731" end="4749" title="cissoid of Diocles" label="cissoid of Diocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q388699" start="4937" end="4957" title="Antoine de Laloubère" label="Antoine de Laloubère"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="5067" end="5079" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q477494" start="5272" end="5277" title="Sheet (sailing)" label="sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364682" start="5370" end="5377" title="versine" label="versine"/>
<link wikidata="Q200392" start="5432" end="5452" title="Maria Gaetana Agnesi" label="Maria Gaetana Agnesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="5552" end="5560" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200392" start="5853" end="5873" title="Maria Gaetana Agnesi" label="Maria Gaetana Agnesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674" start="6001" end="6006" title="Devil" label="Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394680" start="6297" end="6308" title="John Colson" label="John Colson"/>
<link wikidata="Q932815" start="6500" end="6506" title="Dirk Jan Struik" label="Struik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610606" start="6542" end="6557" title="Stephen Stigler" label="Stephen Stigler"/>
<link wikidata="Q207522" start="6866" end="6894" title="probability density function" label="probability density function"/>
<link wikidata="Q726441" start="6902" end="6921" title="Cauchy distribution" label="Cauchy distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="6967" end="6982" title="random variable" label="random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062469" start="7021" end="7038" title="Experiment (probability theory)" label="random experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="7276" end="7295" title="normal distribution" label="normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472677" start="7305" end="7316" title="Heavy-tailed distribution" label="heavy tails"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="7343" end="7357" title="expected value" label="expected value"/>
<link wikidata="Q511093" start="7463" end="7471" title="centroid" label="centroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11216" start="7606" end="7624" title="numerical analysis" label="numerical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q637347" start="7661" end="7685" title="polynomial interpolation" label="polynomial interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990319" start="7966" end="7989" title="Runge&amp;#x27;s phenomenon" label="Runge&amp;#x27;s phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q57564" start="8018" end="8040" title="Carl David Tolmé Runge" label="Carl David Tolmé Runge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575187" start="8269" end="8297" title="spectral energy distribution" label="spectral energy distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="8301" end="8315" title="spectral lines" label="spectral lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="8330" end="8335" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q54050" start="8374" end="8378" title="hill" label="hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q464949" start="8523" end="8536" title="Soliton" label="Solitary wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="8615" end="8640" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q97226587" start="8655" end="8674" title="Leibniz formula for π" label="Leibniz formula for"/>
<link wikidata="Q170198" start="8694" end="8709" title="infinite series" label="infinite series"/>
<link wikidata="Q131187" start="8809" end="8822" title="Taylor series" label="Taylor series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306887" start="8866" end="8882" title="geometric series" label="geometric series"/>
<link wikidata="Q168550" start="9412" end="9429" title="Eric W. Weisstein" label="Eric W. Weisstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632017" start="9431" end="9465" title="The Wolfram Demonstrations Project" label="The Wolfram Demonstrations Project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407765" wikidata="Q16966762" url="?curid=407765" title="Pennsylvania Constitution of 1776">
<text>The Pennsylvania Constitution of 1776 (ratified September 28, 1776) was the state&#x27;s first constitution following its declaration of independence and has been described as the most democratic in America. It was drafted by Robert Whitehill, Timothy Matlack, Dr. Thomas Young, George Bryan, James Cannon, and Benjamin Franklin. Pennsylvania&#x27;s innovative and highly democratic government structure, featuring a unicameral legislature and collective executive, may have influenced the later French Republic&#x27;s formation under the French Constitution of 1793. The constitution also included a declaration of rights that coincided with the Virginia Declaration of Rights of 1776.

==Background==
Pennsylvania&#x27;s new constitution was tied to ongoing political changes within the province in 1776. As the Revolution evolved, the views of some political leaders differed from those of the Provincial Assembly (and its supporters) and of the Deputy Governor, John Penn. Extralegal committees were established that would eventually displace and take over the government.

For example, in June 1774, after Governor Penn refused to convene the Assembly to consider the question of discussing some action to the British government’s response to the Boston Tea Party, a public meeting held under the leadership of John Dickinson and Thomas Willing inspired 8,000 people in Philadelphia to call for the First Continental Congress and the establishment of a committee of correspondence to communicate with the other colonies. Although these measures were subsequently adopted by the Assembly, other public-action committees that had been supported by large public demonstrations (with attendees numbering in the thousands) outpaced Assembly action, for example establishing a military association for defense (though this action was later validated by the Assembly’s establishment of the Committee of Safety). In May 1776, the Second Continental Congress called for dispensing with Royal Governors and Assemblies that did not act with the groups (parties) opposing the Crown. The Pennsylvania Provincial Conference in June 1776 resolved “that the present Assembly of the Colony is ‘not competent to the exigencies of affairs’ and that a Provincial Convention ought to be called for inaugurating a form of Colonial government, in compliance with the recommendation of Congress”. 

Until this point, many influential leaders in Pennsylvania had not supported independence from the Crown, but had favored reconciliation. The Continental Congress, however, inspired the more radical elements in Pennsylvania to overmaster these more conservative leaders. Shortly afterwards, in June 1776, these committees called a state convention, which met on July 15, 1776. The decisions made at that convention would, when ratified, cause the previous government to be completely superseded; it established a Council of Safety to rule in the interim, and it drew up the commonwealth (state) constitution, which was adopted on September 28, 1776. The change of government, was, however, opposed by many of the commonwealth’s citizens - John Dickinson, James Wilson, Robert Morris, and Frederick Muhlenberg, among others. 

The constitutional convention met in Philadelphia and elected Benjamin Franklin, president, Colonel George Ross, vice-president, John Morris, secretary, and Jacob Garrigues, assistant-secretary. From its inception, the convention arrogated to itself the interim political power of the state. The constitution was completed on September 28, at which time it was read in convention for the last time, signed by the president and members, and transmitted to the Committee of Safety, with directions to deliver it to the general assembly of the state at their first meeting, immediately after they should have chosen their speaker. The first meeting of the Pennsylvania General Assembly took place on November 28, 1776. Thomas Wharton Jr., who had been the President of the Committee of Safety, was chosen as President of the Supreme Executive Council in June 1777 and became, in effect, the first Governor of the Commonwealth.

==Innovations==

It contained several innovations that were quite radical for that era, including:

* Voting franchise for all men who had paid taxes, an innovation because it was somewhat less restrictive than a requirement that voters own property.
* A unicameral legislature, with members elected for one term.
* A twelve-member Supreme Executive Council to administer the government.
* A judiciary appointed by the legislature for seven-year terms, removable at any time.
* The provision that all approved legislation would take effect only at the next session of the Assembly, so the people of the state could assess the utility of the proposed law.
* A President elected by the Assembly and Council together. Thomas Wharton Jr. was chosen in 1777 to be the first President of the Supreme Executive Council.
* A Council of Censors (elected every seven years) to conduct an evaluation of the activities of the state government. It could censure actions by the government, order impeachments and recommend to the legislature the repeal of laws that appeared to violate the constitution. The Council of Censors was the only body with the authority to call a convention to amend the constitution.

The constitution also established Pennsylvania&#x27;s official title, the &quot;Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.&quot; Three other states (Kentucky, Massachusetts, and Virginia) are presently self-designated as &quot;commonwealths.&quot; Additionally, the constitution served as a template for Vermont&#x27;s 1777 constitution, which gave birth to the state (or what historians refer to as the Vermont Republic, because claim over the land was disputed by both New York and New Hampshire, until it was formally admitted into the Union in 1791).

==See also==
* Frame of Government of Pennsylvania
* Uniform Firearms Act

==References==
==External links==
*Avalon Project&#x27;s Copy of the 1776 Pennsylvania Constitution
*Zinn, Howard (date unknown). &quot;A People&#x27;s History of the United States&quot;. Chapter 4: Tyranny is Tyranny. History Is A Weapon.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16966762" start="4" end="37" title="Pennsylvania Constitution of 1776" label="Pennsylvania Constitution of 1776"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152303" start="122" end="149" title="Pennsylvania Provincial Conference" label="declaration of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351019" start="226" end="242" title="Robert Whitehill (Pennsylvania politician)" label="Robert Whitehill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4309931" start="244" end="259" title="Timothy Matlack" label="Timothy Matlack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855858" start="261" end="277" title="Thomas Young (American revolutionary)" label="Dr. Thomas Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q883590" start="279" end="291" title="George Bryan" label="George Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130987" start="293" end="305" title="James Cannon (mathematician)" label="James Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="311" end="328" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="417" end="439" title="unicameral legislature" label="unicameral legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q598887" start="539" end="566" title="French Constitution of 1793" label="French Constitution of 1793"/>
<link wikidata="Q944717" start="647" end="677" title="Virginia Declaration of Rights" label="Virginia Declaration of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252491" start="966" end="975" title="John Penn (governor)" label="John Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19024" start="1252" end="1268" title="Boston Tea Party" label="Boston Tea Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q878687" start="1316" end="1330" title="John Dickinson" label="John Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q500967" start="1335" end="1349" title="Thomas Willing" label="Thomas Willing"/>
<link wikidata="Q252612" start="1404" end="1430" title="First Continental Congress" label="First Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985399" start="1458" end="1485" title="Committee of safety (American Revolution)" label="committee of correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="1927" end="1954" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Second Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152303" start="2080" end="2114" title="Pennsylvania Provincial Conference" label="Pennsylvania Provincial Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q365181" start="3135" end="3147" title="James Wilson (Founding Father)" label="James Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q464876" start="3149" end="3162" title="Robert Morris (financier)" label="Robert Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q724629" start="3168" end="3188" title="Frederick Muhlenberg" label="Frederick Muhlenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="3268" end="3285" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q655575" start="3306" end="3317" title="George Ross (delegate)" label="George Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q883460" start="3922" end="3940" title="Thomas Wharton Jr." label="Thomas Wharton Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7645039" start="4463" end="4488" title="Supreme Executive Council of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania" label="Supreme Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q883460" start="4846" end="4864" title="Thomas Wharton Jr." label="Thomas Wharton Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5058950" start="5072" end="5079" title="Censure in the United States" label="censure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949797" start="5113" end="5124" title="Impeachment in the United States" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="5458" end="5464" title="U.S. state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="5466" end="5474" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="5476" end="5489" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="5495" end="5503" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="5544" end="5557" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="commonwealths"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164241" start="5621" end="5653" title="Constitution of Vermont (1777)" label="Vermont&amp;#x27;s 1777 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649602" start="5721" end="5737" title="Vermont Republic" label="Vermont Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="5788" end="5796" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="5801" end="5814" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477912" start="5888" end="5923" title="Frame of Government of Pennsylvania" label="Frame of Government of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885042" start="5926" end="5946" title="Uniform Firearms Act" label="Uniform Firearms Act"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407771" wikidata="Q2070732" url="?curid=407771" title="Guttigadus globosus">
<text>Guttigadus globosus, the tadpole cod, is a deepwater fish found in the oceanic islands off New Zealand and in the mid South Atlantic at depths ranging from 1200 to 1600 m.

The tadpole cod is a member of the family Moridae, the morid cods, related to the true cods (of genus &quot;Gadus&quot;, family Gadidae). Like the familiar Atlantic cod, it has small whiskers (barbels) on its mouth. 

==Size==
This species reaches a length of .

It has no commercial value, and is not currently believed to be endangered. Not much is known about this species, being discovered in 1986.

The tadpole cod is distinct from the tadpole fish, &quot;Raniceps raninus&quot;. This fish was formerly classified in the family Ranicipitidae, called the tadpole cods, as its sole member. The family was placed in a different order of fish, the Ophidiiformes (cusk-eels and brotulas). However, it is now regarded as a member of the same family as cods, Gadidae.

==References==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2070732" start="25" end="36" title="Guttigadus globosus" label="tadpole cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="91" end="102" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="124" end="132" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="208" end="214" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q545745" start="215" end="222" title="Moridae" label="Moridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194939" start="260" end="263" title="cod" label="cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q208028" start="301" end="308" title="Gadidae" label="Gadidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q199788" start="329" end="341" title="Atlantic cod" label="Atlantic cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q809245" start="366" end="372" title="barbel (anatomy)" label="barbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="500" end="510" title="endangered" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094691" start="634" end="650" title="Raniceps raninus" label="Raniceps raninus"/>
<link wikidata="Q574457" start="822" end="835" title="Ophidiiformes" label="Ophidiiformes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407774" wikidata="Q725953" url="?curid=407774" title="Ashley MacIsaac">
<text>Ashley Dwayne MacIsaac (born February 24, 1975) is a Canadian fiddler, pianist, singer and songwriter from Cape Breton Island. He has received three Juno Awards, winning for Best New Solo Artist and Best Roots &amp; Traditional Album – Solo at the Juno Awards of 1996, and for Best Instrumental Artist at the Juno Awards of 1997. His 1995 album &quot;Hi™ How Are You Today?&quot; was a double-platinum selling Canadian record. MacIsaac published an autobiography, &quot;Fiddling with Disaster&quot; in 2003.

==Life and family==
MacIsaac was born in Creignish, Inverness County, Nova Scotia, on Cape Breton Island. His sister Lisa is also a fiddler, who has her own alternative country band, Madison Violet. She also appears on his album &quot;Helter&#x27;s Celtic&quot;, which was recorded at Metalworks Studios in Mississauga, Ontario.

His cousins Alexis MacIsaac, Wendy MacIsaac and Natalie MacMaster are also touring fiddlers. He is also a distant cousin of the White Stripes guitarist and lead vocalist Jack White. The two met and MacIsaac opened for the White Stripes concert in Glace Bay in 2007.

In 2007, MacIsaac married Andrew Stokes. According to MacIsaac, spoken during his February 25, 2017, concert at Koerner Hall in Toronto, they are now divorced. He lives in Windsor, Ontario.

==Career==
MacIsaac&#x27;s album &quot;Hi™ How Are You Today?&quot;, featuring the hit single &quot;Sleepy Maggie&quot;, with vocals in Scottish Gaelic by Mary Jane Lamond was released in 1995. The song peaked at number 13 on the Canadian &quot;RPM&quot; Top Singles chart and found minor success in the United States, reaching number two on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Bubbling Under Hot 100. &quot;Hi™ How Are You Today?&quot; was a double-platinum selling Canadian record and earned MacIsaac a 1996 Juno in the category Best Roots &amp; Traditional Album – Solo. During his early career, MacIsaac subtly acknowledged his sexual identity, sometimes wearing a set of rainbow flag freedom rings on a neck chain in promotional photos, but avoided explicitly coming out to the press. He officially came out in 1996 after &quot;Frank&quot;, a Canadian gossip magazine, published a cover story about his sexuality. In 1996, in a &quot;Maclean&#x27;s&quot; interview, he claimed that he had discussed his sexual life, including his young boyfriend and a claimed fondness for watersports, in an interview with the LGBT newsmagazine &quot;The Advocate&quot;. &quot;The Advocate&quot; did not print any of the material, but &quot;Maclean&#x27;s&quot; dropped him from its year-end honours list.

In 1996, MacIsaac toured the United States as an opening act for the Chieftains. It was widely reported in the media that another opener, folk singer Nanci Griffith, dropped out of the tour because she objected to MacIsaac&#x27;s musical style, but Griffith later confirmed in &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; that her primary conflict was not with MacIsaac&#x27;s style, but with tour organizers over how much time was available for her after the addition of MacIsaac to the bill. On a 1997 &quot;Late Night with Conan O&#x27;Brien&quot; appearance, his leg kick lifted his kilt high enough that his genitals were visible to the studio audience, although they were blurred out in post-production before the actual broadcast. On that same year he also featured as a guest on Toronto indie rock band Glueleg&#x27;s final studio album, &quot;Clodhopper&quot;, specifically on the album&#x27;s second track, &quot;See Saw Man&quot;.

In 1998 MacIsaac fought successfully to be independent of his record label. He subsequently signed with the independent label Loggerhead Records for his 1999 album &quot;Helter&#x27;s Celtic&quot;. During the promotional tour for that album, he indicated to the press that he had battled an addiction to crack cocaine from 1997 to 1999. In 1999, a journalist for &quot;The New Yorker&quot; noted MacIsaac&#x27;s rock-star bravado and eccentricities.

In December 1999, MacIsaac screamed obscenities at a New Year&#x27;s Eve rave in Halifax; the performance led to cancellations of his concerts across Canada and a &quot;media frenzy over his perceived downward spiral&quot;. MacIsaac got into a media spat with his label Loggerhead after the label sent out a press release distancing itself from his actions. Also the same year, MacIsaac told the &quot;Halifax Chronicle-Herald&quot; that he was on the verge of declaring bankruptcy, retracted the statement within a few days, and then actually filed for bankruptcy several months later.

In 2003, MacIsaac was alleged to have made a racist statement on stage, at a show where he reportedly accused an Asian woman in the audience of spreading SARS. He subsequently stated that the comment was intended as an ironic parody of racism, and sued the &quot;Ottawa Citizen&quot; for misrepresenting the statement as racist when in fact he was speaking out against racial profiling happening in Canada at the time. In 2005, MacIsaac signed on with Linus Entertainment, forming a rock band with himself on lead vocals and guitar. In 2010, MacIsaac wrote a charity single, &quot;Dreams&quot;, to benefit Kwame Nkrumah-Acheampong, a skier from Ghana who was the first Ghanaian athlete ever to compete in the Winter Olympics. In addition to Matthew Harder of the band House of Doc and Geoffrey Kelly, Vince Ditrich and Tobin Frank of the band Spirit of the West, Nkrumah-Acheampong himself participated in the recording, playing traditional Ghanaian percussion. The single, credited to the Parallel Band, was released to iTunes on February 19, 2010. MacIsaac also performed in the opening ceremonies for the 2010 Olympic Games in Vancouver.

In 2016, MacIsaac co-hosted, with Heather Rankin, the East Coast Music Awards.

==Political involvement==
MacIsaac has declared an interest in politics and has stated, in a letter to the &quot;National Post&quot;, that he is studying constitutional law so as to pursue an entry into Canadian federal politics.

In the March 20, 2006, edition of the &quot;Halifax Daily News&quot;, MacIsaac declared himself a candidate for the leadership of the Liberal Party of Canada. He denied that his campaign was a publicity stunt, telling the Canadian Press that he fully intended to mount a serious campaign, but on June 21, 2006, he decided to no longer take part in the leadership race. In 2013, he again suggested to the press that he was interested in entering politics, although he did not specify for which political party.

== Equipment and playing style ==
MacIsaac plays a right-handed fiddle left-handed, most notably allowing it to remain strung right-handed, a highly unusual style of playing. MacIsaac however explained in a 2014 interview for the Celtic Colours Festival that during his first fiddle lesson with Stan Chapman when his father asked if he should change the strings around the other way, Stan said &quot;Well, if you change the strings on your fiddle, you&#x27;ll never be able to play anyone else&#x27;s fiddle. So if he&#x27;s gonna learn that way, learn that way&quot;. In the same interview, MacIsaac also elaborated that his unorthodox playing style allows the &quot;lower&quot; notes to remain on the &quot;lower&quot; side of the fiddle, and this allows him to go &quot;up&quot; to the &quot;higher&quot; notes; he said it &quot;just makes sonic sense&quot; to him to have the strings upside down.

==Discography==

===Albums===
===Singles===
==Filmography==
* &quot;The Hanging Garden&quot; – Basil, wedding musician (1997)
* &quot;Power Play&quot; – himself (one episode, 1999)
* &quot;New Waterford Girl&quot; – Town fiddler (1999)
* &quot;Nabbie no koi&quot; – Ashley O&#x27;Connor (1999)
* &quot;Marion Bridge&quot; – Mickey (2002)
* &quot;Life and Times&quot; – himself (one episode, 2005)
* &quot;Through the Times&quot; Self released DVD – himself at the Doryman Tavern
* &quot;Under Great White Northern Lights&quot; – Ashley performance Savoy Theatre, Glace Bay (2009)
* &quot;Storage Wars Canada&quot; – as himself, appraises found violin (2015)
* &quot;Celebrity Portraits&quot; – as himself 2 episodes (2009)
* &quot;Son of Man&quot; – Mark (short film, 2023)

==See also==

* Music of Canada
* Canadian rock
* List of Canadian musicians

==References==
==External links==
* Ashley MacIsaac Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q725953" start="0" end="22" title="Ashley MacIsaac" label="Ashley Dwayne MacIsaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="62" end="68" title="fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q486748" start="71" end="78" title="pianist" label="pianist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188489" start="107" end="125" title="Cape Breton Island" label="Cape Breton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q507057" start="149" end="160" title="Juno Awards" label="Juno Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314050" start="174" end="194" title="Juno Award for New Artist of the Year" label="Best New Solo Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314102" start="199" end="240" title="Juno Award for Roots &amp;amp; Traditional Album of the Year – Solo" label="Best Roots &amp;amp; Traditional Album – Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314156" start="248" end="267" title="Juno Awards of 1996" label="Juno Awards of 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314158" start="309" end="328" title="Juno Awards of 1997" label="Juno Awards of 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873104" start="351" end="373" title="Hi™ How Are You Today?" label="Hi™ How Are You Today?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630310" start="561" end="590" title="Inverness County, Nova Scotia" label="Inverness County, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188489" start="595" end="613" title="Cape Breton Island" label="Cape Breton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q438476" start="666" end="685" title="alternative country" label="alternative country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883393" start="692" end="706" title="Madison Violet" label="Madison Violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019854" start="794" end="812" title="Metalworks Studios" label="Metalworks Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q50816" start="816" end="836" title="Mississauga, Ontario" label="Mississauga, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q106153152" start="868" end="882" title="Beòlach" label="Wendy MacIsaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968206" start="887" end="904" title="Natalie MacMaster" label="Natalie MacMaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q268160" start="963" end="980" title="the White Stripes" label="the White Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q272031" start="1009" end="1019" title="Jack White (musician)" label="Jack White"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108251" start="1086" end="1095" title="Glace Bay, Nova Scotia" label="Glace Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q182625" start="1278" end="1285" title="Windsor, Ontario" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873104" start="1336" end="1358" title="Hi™ How Are You Today?" label="Hi™ How Are You Today?"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="1433" end="1448" title="Scottish Gaelic language" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q431169" start="1452" end="1468" title="Mary Jane Lamond" label="Mary Jane Lamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344164" start="1536" end="1563" title="RPM (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;RPM&amp;quot; Top Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="1643" end="1664" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q570827" start="1665" end="1687" title="Bubbling Under Hot 100" label="Bubbling Under Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314156" start="1792" end="1801" title="Juno Awards of 1996" label="1996 Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314102" start="1818" end="1859" title="Juno Award for Roots &amp;amp; Traditional Album of the Year – Solo" label="Best Roots &amp;amp; Traditional Album – Solo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1963" end="1989" title="LGBT symbols#Freedom rings" label="rainbow flag freedom rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="2052" end="2062" title="coming out" label="coming out"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082477" start="2120" end="2125" title="Frank (magazine)" label="Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184850" start="2226" end="2240" title="Maclean&amp;#x27;s" label="Maclean&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q457251" start="2365" end="2376" title="urolagnia" label="watersports"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="2403" end="2407" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q752361" start="2427" end="2439" title="The Advocate (LGBT magazine)" label="The Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q662577" start="2648" end="2662" title="the Chieftains" label="the Chieftains"/>
<link wikidata="Q447032" start="2733" end="2747" title="Nanci Griffith" label="Nanci Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="2866" end="2879" title="Rolling Stone (magazine)" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639429" start="3074" end="3108" title="Late Night with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Late Night with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q151948" start="3151" end="3155" title="kilt" label="kilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q648877" start="3257" end="3272" title="post-production" label="post-production"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572380" start="3375" end="3382" title="Glueleg" label="Glueleg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="3615" end="3632" title="independent record label" label="independent label"/>
<link wikidata="Q330694" start="3811" end="3824" title="crack cocaine" label="crack cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="3876" end="3890" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q645767" start="4031" end="4035" title="rave" label="rave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="4039" end="4046" title="Halifax Urban Area" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520275" start="4360" end="4384" title="Halifax Chronicle-Herald" label="Halifax Chronicle-Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q103177" start="4700" end="4704" title="SARS" label="SARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q131361" start="4765" end="4771" title="irony" label="ironic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357762" start="4809" end="4823" title="Ottawa Citizen" label="Ottawa Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850662" start="4915" end="4931" title="racial profiling" label="racial profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q556385" start="5152" end="5176" title="Kwame Nkrumah-Acheampong" label="Kwame Nkrumah-Acheampong"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="5191" end="5196" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="5255" end="5270" title="Winter Olympics" label="Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534720" start="5331" end="5345" title="Geoffrey Kelly" label="Geoffrey Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931483" start="5347" end="5360" title="Vince Ditrich" label="Vince Ditrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811693" start="5365" end="5376" title="Tobin Frank" label="Tobin Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578043" start="5389" end="5407" title="Spirit of the West" label="Spirit of the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="5567" end="5573" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044663" start="5627" end="5672" title="2010 Winter Olympics opening ceremony" label="opening ceremonies for the 2010 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q20685252" start="5722" end="5736" title="Heather Rankin (singer)" label="Heather Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328131" start="5742" end="5765" title="East Coast Music Awards" label="East Coast Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812075" start="5881" end="5894" title="National Post" label="National Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q11206" start="5922" end="5940" title="constitutional law" label="constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728680" start="6043" end="6061" title="Halifax Daily News" label="Halifax Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993055" start="6115" end="6125" title="Liberal Party of Canada leadership election, 2006" label="leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="6133" end="6156" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999003" start="6192" end="6207" title="publicity stunt" label="publicity stunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410130" start="6221" end="6235" title="Canadian Press" label="Canadian Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058494" start="6740" end="6754" title="Celtic Colours" label="Celtic Colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q607328" start="7480" end="7498" title="The Hanging Garden (film)" label="The Hanging Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236387" start="7546" end="7556" title="Power Play (1998 TV series)" label="Power Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012322" start="7601" end="7619" title="New Waterford Girl" label="New Waterford Girl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7656" end="7669" title="Nabbie no koi" label="Nabbie no koi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293618" start="7714" end="7727" title="Marion Bridge (film)" label="Marion Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545057" start="7758" end="7772" title="Life and Times (TV series)" label="Life and Times"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7817" end="7834" title="Through the Times" label="Through the Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937820" start="7899" end="7932" title="Under Great White Northern Lights" label="Under Great White Northern Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q125804165" start="7960" end="7984" title="Savoy Theatre, Glace Bay" label="Savoy Theatre, Glace Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988061" start="8000" end="8019" title="Storage Wars Canada" label="Storage Wars Canada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8078" end="8097" title="Celebrity Portraits" label="Celebrity Portraits"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942037" start="8203" end="8218" title="Music of Canada" label="Music of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437821" start="8221" end="8234" title="Canadian rock" label="Canadian rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565887" start="8237" end="8263" title="List of Canadian musicians" label="List of Canadian musicians"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407775" wikidata="Q678832" url="?curid=407775" title="The Glass Menagerie">
<text>The Glass Menagerie is a memory play by Tennessee Williams that premiered in 1944 and catapulted Williams from obscurity to fame. The play has strong autobiographical elements, featuring characters based on its author, his histrionic mother, and his mentally fragile sister. In writing the play, Williams drew on an earlier short story, as well as a screenplay he had written under the title of &quot;The Gentleman Caller&quot;.

The play premiered in Chicago on 26 December 1944. After a shaky start, it was championed by Chicago critics Ashton Stevens and Claudia Cassidy, whose enthusiasm helped build audiences so the producers could move the play to Broadway where it won the New York Drama Critics&#x27; Circle Award in 1945. &quot;The Glass Menagerie&quot; was Williams&#x27; first successful play; he went on to become one of America&#x27;s most highly regarded playwrights.

== Characters ==
; Amanda Wingfield:A faded Southern belle who grew up in Blue Mountain, Mississippi, abandoned by her husband, and who is trying to raise her two children under harsh financial conditions. Amanda yearns for the comforts of her youth and also longs for her children to have the same comforts, but her devotion to them has made her – as she admits at one point – almost &quot;hateful&quot; towards them.
; Tom Wingfield:Amanda&#x27;s son. Tom works at a shoe warehouse to support his family but is frustrated by his job and aspires to be a poet. He struggles to write, all the while being sleep-deprived and irritable. Yet, he escapes from reality through nightly excursions to the movies. Tom feels both obligated toward yet burdened by his family and longs to escape.
; Laura Wingfield:Amanda&#x27;s daughter and Tom&#x27;s elder sister. A childhood illness has left her with a limp, and she has a mental fragility and an inferiority complex that has isolated her from the outside world. She has created a world of her own symbolized by her collection of glass figurines. The unicorn may represent Laura because it is unique and fragile.
; Jim O&#x27;Connor:An old high school acquaintance of Tom and Laura. Jim was a popular athlete and actor during his days at Soldan High School. Subsequent years have been less kind to Jim; by the time of the play&#x27;s action, he is working as a shipping clerk at the same shoe warehouse as Tom. His hope to shine again is conveyed by his study of public speaking, radio engineering, and ideas of self-improvement that appear related to those of Dale Carnegie.
; Mr. Wingfield:Amanda&#x27;s absent husband, and Laura&#x27;s and Tom&#x27;s father. Mr. Wingfield was a handsome man, full of charm, who worked for a telephone company and eventually &quot;fell in love with long-distance,&quot; abandoning his family 16 years before the play&#x27;s action. Although he does not appear onstage, Mr. Wingfield is frequently referred to by Amanda, and his picture is prominently displayed in the Wingfields&#x27; living room. This unseen character appears to incorporate elements of Williams&#x27; father.

== Synopsis ==
The play is introduced to the audience by Tom, the narrator and protagonist, as a memory play based on his recollection of his mother Amanda and his sister Laura. Because the play is based on memory, Tom cautions the audience that what they see may not be precisely what happened.

Amanda Wingfield, a faded Southern belle of middle age, shares a dingy St. Louis apartment with her son Tom, in his early 20s, and his slightly older sister, Laura. Although she is a survivor and a pragmatist, Amanda yearns for the comforts and admiration she remembers from her days as a fêted debutante. She worries especially about the future of her daughter Laura, a young woman with a limp caused by a childhood illness, possibly polio, and a tremulous insecurity about the outside world. Tom works in a shoe warehouse doing his best to support the family. He chafes under the banality and boredom of everyday life and struggles to write, while spending much of his spare time going to the movies — or so he says — at all hours of the night.

Amanda is obsessed with finding a suitor — or, as she puts it, a &quot;gentleman caller&quot; — for Laura, whose crippling shyness and anxiety led her to drop out of both high school and a subsequent secretarial course and who spends much of her time polishing and arranging her collection of little glass animals. Pressured by his mother to help find a caller for Laura, Tom invites Jim, an acquaintance from work, home for dinner.

The delighted Amanda spruces up the apartment, prepares a special dinner, and converses coquettishly with Jim, almost reliving her youth when she had an abundance of suitors calling on her. Laura discovers that Jim is the boy she was attracted to in high school and has often thought of since, though the relationship between the shy Laura and the &quot;most likely to succeed&quot; Jim was never more than a distant, teasing acquaintanceship. Initially, Laura is so overcome by shyness that she is unable to join the others at dinner, and she claims to be ill. After dinner, however, Jim and Laura are left alone by candlelight in the living room, waiting for the electricity to be restored. (Tom has not paid the power bill, which hints to the audience that he is banking the bill money and preparing to leave the household.) 

As the evening progresses, Jim recognizes Laura&#x27;s feelings of inferiority and encourages her to think better of herself. He and Laura share a quiet dance, in which he accidentally brushes against her glass menagerie, knocking a glass unicorn to the floor and breaking off its horn. Jim then compliments Laura and kisses her. After Jim tells Laura that he is engaged to be married, Laura asks him to take the broken unicorn as a gift, and he then leaves. When Amanda learns that Jim is to be married, she turns her anger upon Tom and cruelly lashes out at him, although Tom did not know that Jim was engaged. Tom seems quite surprised by this, and it is possible that Jim was only making up the story of the engagement, as he felt that the family was trying to set him up with Laura and he had no romantic interest in her.

The play concludes with Tom saying that he left home soon afterward and never returned. He then bids farewell to his mother and sister and asks Laura to blow out the candles.

== Original Broadway cast ==

&quot;The Glass Menagerie&quot; opened on Broadway in the Playhouse Theatre on March 31, 1945, and played there until June 29, 1946. It then moved to the Royale Theatre from July 1, 1946, until its closing on August 3, 1946. The show was directed by Eddie Dowling and Margo Jones. The cast for opening night was as follows:
* Eddie Dowling as Tom Wingfield
* Laurette Taylor as Amanda Wingfield
* Julie Haydon as Laura Wingfield
* Anthony Ross as Jim O&#x27;Connor

Laurette Taylor&#x27;s performance as Amanda set a standard against which subsequent actresses taking the role were to be judged, typically to their disadvantage. In the 2004 documentary &quot;&quot;, Broadway veterans rank Taylor&#x27;s performance as the most memorable of their lives.

The play won the New York Drama Critics&#x27; Circle Award as Best American Play. Williams gave credit to two Chicago critics, Claudia Cassidy and Ashton Stevens, for &quot;giving him a &#x27;start...in a fashion&#x27;...&quot; Cassidy wrote that the play had &quot;the stamina of success ...&quot; Stevens wrote that the play had &quot;the courage of true poetry ...&quot;

== Autobiographical elements ==
The characters and story mimic Williams&#x27; own life more closely than any of his other works: Williams (whose real name was Thomas) closely resembles Tom, and his mother inspires Amanda. His sickly and mentally unstable older sister Rose provides the basis for the fragile Laura (who Jim remembers calling &quot;Blue Roses&quot;, an affectionate nickname based on his mishearing of pleurosis, which she had in high school), though it has also been suggested that Laura may incorporate aspects of Williams himself, referencing his introverted nature and obsessive focus on just one aspect of life (writing for Williams and glass animals in Laura&#x27;s case). Williams, who was close to Rose growing up, learned to his horror that in 1943, in his absence, his sister had been subjected to a botched lobotomy. Rose was left incapacitated and institutionalized for the rest of her life. With the success of &quot;The Glass Menagerie&quot;, Williams was to give half of the royalties from the play to his mother. He later designated half of the royalties from his play &quot;Summer and Smoke&quot; to provide for Rose&#x27;s care, arranging for her move from the state hospital to a private sanitarium. Eventually, he was to leave the bulk of his estate to ensure Rose&#x27;s continuing care. Rose died in 1996.

== Development ==
The play was reworked from one of Williams&#x27; short stories &quot;Portrait of a Girl in Glass&quot; (1943; published 1948). The story is also written from the point of view of narrator Tom Wingfield, and many of his soliloquies from &quot;The Glass Menagerie&quot; seem lifted straight from this original. Certain elements have been omitted from the play, including the reasons for Laura&#x27;s fascination with Jim&#x27;s freckles (linked to a book that she loved and often reread, &quot;Freckles&quot; by Gene Stratton-Porter). Generally, the story contains the same plot as the play, with certain sections given more emphasis, and character details edited (for example, in the story, Jim nicknames Tom &quot;Slim&quot;, instead of &quot;Shakespeare&quot;). Another basis for the play is a screenplay Williams wrote under the title of &quot;The Gentleman Caller&quot;. Williams had been briefly contracted as a writer to MGM, and he apparently envisioned Ethel Barrymore and Judy Garland for the roles that eventually became Amanda and Laura, although when the play was eventually filmed in 1950, Gertrude Lawrence was cast as Amanda and Jane Wyman as Laura.

In 1944, after several reworkings, while touring on the road, the play arrived at the Civic Theatre in Chicago. The producers wanted more changes and were heavily pressuring Williams for a happy ending. The play had not found an audience and production was being considered for closing after the opening night in Chicago. Then the reviews by critics Ashton Stevens in The &quot;Chicago Herald-American&quot; and Claudia Cassidy in the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; came out. They praised the production, especially the writing and the performance by Laurette Taylor, with Cassidy writing about it several times. These reviews drove Chicago audiences to the Civic Theater and the play became a hit, propelling it to Broadway the next year.

== Adaptations ==
=== Film ===
Two Hollywood film versions of &quot;The Glass Menagerie&quot; have been produced.

The first, released in 1950 and directed by Irving Rapper, stars Gertrude Lawrence (Amanda), Jane Wyman (Laura), Arthur Kennedy (Tom) and Kirk Douglas (Jim). Williams characterized this version, which had an implied happy ending grafted onto it in the style of American films from that era, as the worst adaptation of his work. Bosley Crowther of &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote, &quot;As much as we hate to say so, Miss Lawrence&#x27;s performance does not compare with the tender and radiant creation of the late Laurette Taylor on the stage.&quot; The film has never been released on home media.

In 1987, a second adaptation was released, directed by Paul Newman and starring Joanne Woodward (Amanda), Karen Allen (Laura), John Malkovich (Tom) and James Naughton (Jim). If anything, this was even less well-received than the earlier film and sank without much attention. However, &quot;The New York Times&quot; reviewer noted it &quot;starts stiffly and gets better as it goes along, with the dinner-party sequence its biggest success; in this highly charged situation, Miss Woodward&#x27;s Amanda indeed seems to flower. But quiet reverence is its prevailing tone, and in the end, that seems thoroughly at odds with anything Williams ever intended.&quot; Similar to the earlier incarnation, it has yet to receive a physical media release.

In 2004, an Indian adaptation of the play, filmed in the Malayalam language, was released, titled &quot;Akale&quot; (&quot;At a Distance&quot;). Directed by Shyamaprasad, the story is set in the southern Indian state of Kerala in the 1970s, in an Anglo-Indian/Latin Catholic household. The characters were renamed to fit context (the surname Wingfield was changed to D&#x27;Costa, reflecting the part-Portuguese heritage of the family — probably on the absent father&#x27;s side, since the mother is Anglo-Indian), but the story remains essentially the same. It stars Prithviraj Sukumaran as Neil D&#x27;Costa (Tom Wingfield), Geethu Mohandas as Rosemary D&#x27;Costa (Laura Wingfield), Sheela as Margaret D&#x27;Costa (Amanda Wingfield) and Tom George Kolath as Freddy Evans (Jim O&#x27;Connor). Sheela won the National Film Award for Best Supporting Actress, and Geethu Mohandas won the Kerala State Film Award for the best actress.

The 2011 Iranian film &quot;Here Without Me&quot; is also an adaptation of the play, in a contemporary Iranian setting.

=== Radio ===
The first radio adaptation was performed on &quot;Theatre Guild on the Air&quot; in 1951 starring Helen Hayes as Amanda with Montgomery Clift as Tom, Kathryn Baird as Laura and Karl Malden as Jim.

A 1953 adaptation appeared on the radio series &quot;Best Plays&quot; starring Evelyn Varden as Amanda and Geraldine Page as Laura. Jane Wyman recreated her film portrayal of Laura for a 1954 adaptation on &quot;Lux Radio Theatre&quot; with Fay Bainter as Amanda and Frank Lovejoy as Tom and Tom Brown as Jim. The 1953 version is not known to survive but recordings of the other two are in circulation.

In 1964, Caedmon Records produced an LP version as the initial issue of its theatre series. The production starred Jessica Tandy as Amanda, Montgomery Clift as Tom, Julie Harris as Laura and David Wayne as the gentleman caller. The recording is now available in the form of an audio app.

In 2020, BBC Radio 3 adapted the play with Anastasia Hille as Amanda, George MacKay as Tom, Patsy Ferran as Laura, Sope Dirisu as Jim. This version is available on the BBC iPlayer

=== Television ===
The first television version, recorded on videotape and starring Shirley Booth as Amanda, was broadcast on December 8, 1966, as part of &quot;CBS Playhouse&quot;. Barbara Loden played Laura, Hal Holbrook played Tom and Pat Hingle played the Gentleman Caller. Booth was nominated for an Emmy for her performance. The videotape, long thought to be lost, was reconstructed from unedited takes found in the archives of the University of Southern California and an audio recording of the original telecast. On December 8, 2016—fifty years to the day after the original telecast—a re-assembled version of the play was shown on TCM.

A second television adaptation was broadcast on ABC on December 16, 1973, starring Katharine Hepburn as Amanda, Sam Waterston as Tom, Joanna Miles as Laura and Michael Moriarty as Jim. It was directed by Anthony Harvey. (Tom&#x27;s initial soliloquy is cut from this version; it opens with him walking alone in an alley, sitting on a rampart to read the newspaper and having his sister&#x27;s and mother&#x27;s voices conjure up the first domestic scene.) All four actors were nominated for Emmy Awards, with Moriarty and Miles winning.

== Later stage productions ==

&quot;The Glass Menagerie&quot; has had several Broadway revivals. Maureen Stapleton, Anne Pitoniak, Jessica Tandy, Julie Harris, Jessica Lange, Judith Ivey, Harriet Harris, Cherry Jones, Sally Field and Amy Adams have all portrayed Amanda Wingfield.
* The play had its London premiere at Theatre Royal Haymarket, beginning July 28, 1948 in a production directed by John Gielgud.
** Helen Hayes as Amanda Wingfield
** Frances Heflin as Laura Wingfield
** Phil Brown as Tom Wingfield
** Hugh McDermott as Jim O&#x27;Connor
* May 4 to October 2, 1965, at the Brooks Atkinson Theatre
** Maureen Stapleton as Amanda Wingfield
** Piper Laurie as Laura Wingfield
** George Grizzard as Tom Wingfield
** Pat Hingle as Jim O&#x27;Connor
* December 18, 1975, to February 22, 1976, at the Circle in the Square Theatre
** Maureen Stapleton as Amanda Wingfield
** Pamela Payton-Wright as Laura Wingfield
** Rip Torn as Tom Wingfield
** Paul Rudd as Jim O&#x27;Connor
* Previewed October 24, 1979, to November 21, 1979, at the Crucible Theatre, Sheffield, South Yorkshire, England; &lt;br&gt;November 21, 1979 to December 9, 1979, at the Round House Theatre, London
** Gloria Grahame as Amanda Wingfield
** Veronica Roberts as Laura Wingfield
** Clive Arrindell as Tom Wingfield
** Malcolm Ingram as Jim O&#x27;Connor
* December 1, 1983, to February 19, 1984, at the Eugene O&#x27;Neill Theatre
** Jessica Tandy as Amanda Wingfield
** Amanda Plummer as Laura Wingfield
** Bruce Davison as Tom Wingfield
** John Heard as Jim O&#x27;Connor
* 1989 at the Royal Exchange, Manchester directed by Ian Hastings
** Avril Elgar as Amanda Wingfield
** Geraldine Somerville as Laura Wingfield
** Linus Roache as Tom Wingfield
* November 15, 1994, to January 1, 1995, at Criterion Center Stage Right
** Julie Harris as Amanda Wingfield
** Calista Flockhart as Laura Wingfield (in her Broadway debut)
** Željko Ivanek as Tom Wingfield
** Kevin Kilner as Jim O&#x27;Connor 
* In 1997, Kiefer Sutherland returned to his theatrical roots, starring with his mother, Canadian actress Shirley Douglas, in a Canadian production of &quot;The Glass Menagerie&quot; at the Royal Alexandra Theatre in Toronto.
* March 22 to July 3, 2005, at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre
** Jessica Lange as Amanda Wingfield
** Sarah Paulson as Laura Wingfield
** Christian Slater as Tom Wingfield
** Josh Lucas as Jim O&#x27;Connor
* April 2008 at the Royal Exchange, Manchester directed by Braham Murray
** Brenda Blethyn as Amanda Wingfield
** Emma Hamilton as Laura Wingfield
** Mark Arends as Tom Wingfield
* Off-Broadway at the Roundabout Theatre Company, March 24 to June 13, 2010,
** Patch Darragh as Tom Wingfield
** Keira Keeley as Laura Wingfield
** Judith Ivey as Amanda Wingfield
** Michael Mosley as Jim O&#x27;Connor
* 2013 Broadway revival directed by John Tiffany. Previews began on September 5, &amp; ran from September 26, 2013 – February 23, 2014 at the Booth Theatre, following an engagement at the American Repertory Theater. This production earned 7 Tony Award nods, including Best Revival of a Play, Best Actress in a Play (Jones), Best Featured Actor in a Play (Smith), and Best Featured Actress in a Play (Keenan-Bolger). and 3 Drama Desk Award nods, including Outstanding Featured Actor in a Play, Outstanding Featured Actress in a Play, and Outstanding Music in a Play (Nico Muhly).
** Cherry Jones as Amanda Wingfield
** Zachary Quinto as Tom Wingfield
** Celia Keenan-Bolger as Laura Wingfield
** Brian J. Smith as Jim O&#x27;Connor
* 26 January to 29 April 2017, at the Duke of York&#x27;s Theatre, London
** Cherry Jones as Amanda Wingfield
** Kate O&#x27;Flynn as Laura Wingfield
** Michael Esper as Tom Wingfield
** Brian J. Smith as Jim O&#x27;Connor
* February 7 to May 21, 2017, at the Belasco Theatre, Broadway
** Sally Field as Amanda Wingfield
** Madison Ferris as Laura Wingfield
** Joe Mantello as Tom Wingfield
** Finn Wittrock as Jim O&#x27;Connor
* 23 May - 27 August 2022 at the Duke of York&#x27;s Theatre, London
** Amy Adams as Amanda Wingfield
** Tom Glynn-Carney as Tom Wingfield
** Lizzie Annis as Laura Wingfield
** Victor Alli as Jim O&#x27;Connor
** Paul Hilton as Narrator

== Awards ==
=== Original Broadway Production (1945) ===
=== 1994 Broadway Revival ===
=== 2013 Broadway Revival ===
=== 2017 Broadway Revival ===
== References ==
== External links ==
* 1951 &quot;Theatre Guild on the Air&quot; radio adaptation at Internet Archive
* Museum of the City of New York – Theater still photos of the 1945 production of &quot;The Glass Menagerie&quot;
* Why Expressionism? &quot;The Glass Menagerie&quot;: A Common Core Exemplar</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17148218" start="25" end="36" title="memory play" label="memory play"/>
<link wikidata="Q134262" start="40" end="58" title="Tennessee Williams" label="Tennessee Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q845787" start="223" end="233" title="Histrionic personality disorder" label="histrionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806076" start="539" end="553" title="Ashton Stevens" label="Ashton Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129145" start="558" end="573" title="Claudia Cassidy" label="Claudia Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711507" start="681" end="722" title="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle" label="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q478109" start="928" end="942" title="Southern belle" label="Southern belle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310749" start="958" end="971" title="Blue Mountain, Mississippi" label="Blue Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="973" end="984" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557201" start="2164" end="2182" title="Soldan International Studies High School" label="Soldan High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q230762" start="2487" end="2500" title="Dale Carnegie" label="Dale Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q526231" start="2965" end="2981" title="unseen character" label="unseen character"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148218" start="3138" end="3149" title="memory play" label="memory play"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="3773" end="3778" title="polio" label="polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="6426" end="6434" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q15032188" start="6442" end="6459" title="Playhouse Theatre (New York City)" label="Playhouse Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892910" start="6538" end="6552" title="Bernard B. Jacobs Theatre" label="Royale Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335980" start="6634" end="6647" title="Eddie Dowling" label="Eddie Dowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760631" start="6652" end="6663" title="Margo Jones" label="Margo Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335980" start="6710" end="6723" title="Eddie Dowling" label="Eddie Dowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406954" start="6743" end="6758" title="Laurette Taylor" label="Laurette Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308246" start="6781" end="6793" title="Julie Haydon" label="Julie Haydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773380" start="6815" end="6827" title="Anthony Ross" label="Anthony Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q55998" start="7931" end="7940" title="pleurisy" label="pleurosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207684" start="8347" end="8355" title="lobotomy" label="lobotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424688" start="8620" end="8636" title="Summer and Smoke" label="Summer and Smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494338" start="9368" end="9376" title="Freckles (novel)" label="Freckles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531480" start="9386" end="9406" title="Gene Stratton-Porter" label="Gene Stratton-Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="9802" end="9805" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q230147" start="9836" end="9851" title="Ethel Barrymore" label="Ethel Barrymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="9856" end="9868" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q433053" start="9978" end="9995" title="Gertrude Lawrence" label="Gertrude Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q95055" start="10019" end="10029" title="Jane Wyman" label="Jane Wyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1833594" start="10127" end="10140" title="Civic Opera House (Chicago)" label="Civic Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095396" start="10419" end="10442" title="Chicago Herald-American" label="Chicago Herald-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="10482" end="10497" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257444" start="10814" end="10837" title="Film adaptation" label="Hollywood film versions"/>
<link wikidata="Q374434" start="10898" end="10903" title="The Glass Menagerie (1950 film)" label="first"/>
<link wikidata="Q323243" start="10938" end="10951" title="Irving Rapper" label="Irving Rapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q433053" start="10959" end="10976" title="Gertrude Lawrence" label="Gertrude Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q95055" start="10987" end="10997" title="Jane Wyman" label="Jane Wyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q351838" start="11007" end="11021" title="Arthur Kennedy" label="Arthur Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104027" start="11032" end="11044" title="Kirk Douglas" label="Kirk Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q894444" start="11222" end="11237" title="Bosley Crowther" label="Bosley Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="11247" end="11265" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406954" start="11414" end="11429" title="Laurette Taylor" label="Laurette Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057592" start="11510" end="11527" title="The Glass Menagerie (1987 film)" label="second adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41871" start="11554" end="11565" title="Paul Newman" label="Paul Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111542" start="11579" end="11594" title="Joanne Woodward" label="Joanne Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q229137" start="11605" end="11616" title="Karen Allen" label="Karen Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q172261" start="11626" end="11640" title="John Malkovich" label="John Malkovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q349668" start="11651" end="11665" title="James Naughton" label="James Naughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q328799" start="12256" end="12262" title="Cinema of India" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744006" start="12301" end="12310" title="Malayalam cinema" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3597158" start="12348" end="12353" title="Akale" label="Akale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505974" start="12401" end="12413" title="Shyamaprasad" label="Shyamaprasad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595178" start="12812" end="12832" title="Prithviraj Sukumaran" label="Prithviraj Sukumaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163350" start="12986" end="13003" title="Tom George Kolath" label="Tom George Kolath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967146" start="13056" end="13103" title="National Film Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="National Film Award for Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434212" start="13208" end="13223" title="Here Without Me" label="Here Without Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q213302" start="13413" end="13424" title="Helen Hayes" label="Helen Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193102" start="13440" end="13456" title="Montgomery Clift" label="Montgomery Clift"/>
<link wikidata="Q94992" start="13492" end="13503" title="Karl Malden" label="Karl Malden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061390" start="13592" end="13605" title="Evelyn Varden" label="Evelyn Varden"/>
<link wikidata="Q228650" start="13620" end="13634" title="Geraldine Page" label="Geraldine Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q95055" start="13645" end="13655" title="Jane Wyman" label="Jane Wyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706176" start="13725" end="13742" title="Lux Radio Theatre" label="Lux Radio Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q152888" start="13754" end="13765" title="Fay Bainter" label="Fay Bainter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557512" start="13780" end="13793" title="Frank Lovejoy" label="Frank Lovejoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439545" start="13805" end="13814" title="Tom Brown (actor)" label="Tom Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016792" start="13926" end="13941" title="Caedmon Records" label="Caedmon Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q182104" start="14032" end="14045" title="Jessica Tandy" label="Jessica Tandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193102" start="14057" end="14073" title="Montgomery Clift" label="Montgomery Clift"/>
<link wikidata="Q236708" start="14082" end="14094" title="Julie Harris (actress)" label="Julie Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177111" start="14108" end="14119" title="David Wayne" label="David Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q749608" start="14215" end="14226" title="BBC Radio 3" label="BBC Radio 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845494" start="14249" end="14264" title="Anastasia Hille" label="Anastasia Hille"/>
<link wikidata="Q970066" start="14276" end="14289" title="George MacKay (actor)" label="George MacKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q60218128" start="14298" end="14310" title="Patsy Ferran" label="Patsy Ferran"/>
<link wikidata="Q24006329" start="14321" end="14332" title="Sope Dirisu" label="Sope Dirisu"/>
<link wikidata="Q747779" start="14448" end="14457" title="videotape" label="videotape"/>
<link wikidata="Q253308" start="14471" end="14484" title="Shirley Booth" label="Shirley Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648566" start="14548" end="14561" title="CBS Playhouse" label="CBS Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q442111" start="14569" end="14582" title="Barbara Loden" label="Barbara Loden"/>
<link wikidata="Q314801" start="14597" end="14609" title="Hal Holbrook" label="Hal Holbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q165283" start="14625" end="14635" title="Pat Hingle" label="Pat Hingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5827123" start="15035" end="15063" title="The Glass Menagerie (1973 film)" label="second television adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="15081" end="15084" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q56016" start="15116" end="15133" title="Katharine Hepburn" label="Katharine Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q284876" start="15145" end="15158" title="Sam Waterston" label="Sam Waterston"/>
<link wikidata="Q387830" start="15167" end="15179" title="Joanna Miles" label="Joanna Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q531869" start="15193" end="15209" title="Michael Moriarty" label="Michael Moriarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q543124" start="15237" end="15251" title="Anthony Harvey" label="Anthony Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="15524" end="15534" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q230841" start="15669" end="15686" title="Maureen Stapleton" label="Maureen Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q565705" start="15688" end="15701" title="Anne Pitoniak" label="Anne Pitoniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q182104" start="15703" end="15716" title="Jessica Tandy" label="Jessica Tandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q236708" start="15718" end="15730" title="Julie Harris (actress)" label="Julie Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q173585" start="15732" end="15745" title="Jessica Lange" label="Jessica Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q533613" start="15747" end="15758" title="Judith Ivey" label="Judith Ivey"/>
<link wikidata="Q270622" start="15760" end="15774" title="Harriet Sansom Harris" label="Harriet Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q239046" start="15776" end="15788" title="Cherry Jones" label="Cherry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q187033" start="15790" end="15801" title="Sally Field" label="Sally Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q481832" start="15806" end="15815" title="Amy Adams" label="Amy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q540426" start="15891" end="15914" title="Theatre Royal Haymarket" label="Theatre Royal Haymarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q204685" start="15968" end="15980" title="John Gielgud" label="John Gielgud"/>
<link wikidata="Q213302" start="15985" end="15996" title="Helen Hayes" label="Helen Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478707" start="16020" end="16034" title="Frances Heflin" label="Frances Heflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q325398" start="16057" end="16067" title="Phil Brown (actor)" label="Phil Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q15441011" start="16088" end="16102" title="Hugh McDermott (actor)" label="Hugh McDermott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974974" start="16159" end="16182" title="Brooks Atkinson Theatre" label="Brooks Atkinson Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q230841" start="16186" end="16203" title="Maureen Stapleton" label="Maureen Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q232282" start="16227" end="16239" title="Piper Laurie" label="Piper Laurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q249925" start="16262" end="16277" title="George Grizzard" label="George Grizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q165283" start="16298" end="16308" title="Pat Hingle" label="Pat Hingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973328" start="16380" end="16408" title="Circle in the Square Theatre" label="Circle in the Square Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q230841" start="16412" end="16429" title="Maureen Stapleton" label="Maureen Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008837" start="16453" end="16473" title="Pamela Payton-Wright" label="Pamela Payton-Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q313522" start="16496" end="16504" title="Rip Torn" label="Rip Torn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141915" start="16615" end="16631" title="Crucible Theatre" label="Crucible Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="16633" end="16642" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q23095" start="16644" end="16659" title="South Yorkshire" label="South Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780197" start="16726" end="16745" title="Roundhouse (venue)" label="Round House Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q59314" start="16757" end="16771" title="Gloria Grahame" label="Gloria Grahame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922446" start="16795" end="16811" title="Veronica Roberts" label="Veronica Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407593" start="16955" end="16982" title="Eugene O&amp;#x27;Neill Theatre" label="Eugene O&amp;#x27;Neill Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q182104" start="16986" end="16999" title="Jessica Tandy" label="Jessica Tandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q238483" start="17023" end="17037" title="Amanda Plummer" label="Amanda Plummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q355163" start="17060" end="17073" title="Bruce Davison" label="Bruce Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q462327" start="17094" end="17104" title="John Heard (actor)" label="John Heard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445926" start="17140" end="17166" title="Royal Exchange, Manchester" label="Royal Exchange, Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242648" start="17195" end="17206" title="Avril Elgar" label="Avril Elgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q235572" start="17230" end="17250" title="Geraldine Somerville" label="Geraldine Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q468915" start="17273" end="17285" title="Linus Roache" label="Linus Roache"/>
<link wikidata="Q26424" start="17415" end="17432" title="Calista Flockhart" label="Calista Flockhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q382197" start="17479" end="17492" title="Željko Ivanek" label="Željko Ivanek"/>
<link wikidata="Q103946" start="17559" end="17576" title="Kiefer Sutherland" label="Kiefer Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q460062" start="17654" end="17669" title="Shirley Douglas" label="Shirley Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="17765" end="17772" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403074" start="17809" end="17832" title="Ethel Barrymore Theatre" label="Ethel Barrymore Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q173585" start="17836" end="17849" title="Jessica Lange" label="Jessica Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q257442" start="17873" end="17886" title="Sarah Paulson" label="Sarah Paulson"/>
<link wikidata="Q204590" start="17909" end="17925" title="Christian Slater" label="Christian Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q53651" start="17946" end="17956" title="Josh Lucas" label="Josh Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445926" start="17998" end="18024" title="Royal Exchange, Manchester" label="Royal Exchange, Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955439" start="18037" end="18050" title="Braham Murray" label="Braham Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q229952" start="18054" end="18068" title="Brenda Blethyn" label="Brenda Blethyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052469" start="18092" end="18105" title="Emma Hamilton (Australian actress)" label="Emma Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371225" start="18179" end="18205" title="Roundabout Theatre Company" label="Roundabout Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928662" start="18341" end="18355" title="Michael Mosley (actor)" label="Michael Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260836" start="18413" end="18425" title="John Tiffany" label="John Tiffany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527434" start="18519" end="18532" title="Booth Theatre" label="Booth Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113755" start="18565" end="18591" title="American Repertory Theater" label="American Repertory Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="18618" end="18628" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821798" start="18645" end="18667" title="Tony Award for Best Revival of a Play" label="Best Revival of a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537996" start="18669" end="18691" title="Tony Award for Best Actress in a Musical" label="Best Actress in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474410" start="18701" end="18730" title="Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play" label="Best Featured Actor in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q627778" start="18744" end="18775" title="Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play" label="Best Featured Actress in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="18799" end="18815" title="Drama Desk Award" label="Drama Desk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q239046" start="18959" end="18971" title="Cherry Jones" label="Cherry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q139642" start="18995" end="19009" title="Zachary Quinto" label="Zachary Quinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058003" start="19030" end="19049" title="Celia Keenan-Bolger" label="Celia Keenan-Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q912401" start="19072" end="19086" title="Brian J. Smith" label="Brian J. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275938" start="19146" end="19173" title="Duke of York&amp;#x27;s Theatre" label="Duke of York&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="19175" end="19181" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q239046" start="19185" end="19197" title="Cherry Jones" label="Cherry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q23713460" start="19221" end="19238" title="Kate O&amp;#x27;Flynn" label="Kate O&amp;#x27;Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210636" start="19261" end="19274" title="Michael Esper" label="Michael Esper"/>
<link wikidata="Q912401" start="19295" end="19309" title="Brian J. Smith" label="Brian J. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q815278" start="19368" end="19383" title="Belasco Theatre" label="Belasco Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q187033" start="19397" end="19408" title="Sally Field" label="Sally Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q34605705" start="19432" end="19446" title="Madison Ferris" label="Madison Ferris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211112" start="19469" end="19481" title="Joe Mantello" label="Joe Mantello"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450687" start="19502" end="19515" title="Finn Wittrock" label="Finn Wittrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275938" start="19570" end="19597" title="Duke of York&amp;#x27;s Theatre" label="Duke of York&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q481832" start="19609" end="19618" title="Amy Adams" label="Amy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q33133445" start="19642" end="19658" title="Tom Glynn-Carney" label="Tom Glynn-Carney"/>
<link wikidata="Q19282295" start="19750" end="19761" title="Paul Hilton (actor)" label="Paul Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="20024" end="20040" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407790" wikidata="Q838690" url="?curid=407790" title="New Ireland Province">
<text>New Ireland Province, formerly New Mecklenburg (), and Nova Hibernia, is the northeasternmost province of Papua New Guinea.

==Physical geography==
The largest island of the province is New Ireland.

Also part of the province are numerous smaller islands, including Saint Matthias Group (Mussau, Emirau), New Hanover, Djaul, Tabar Group (Tabar, Tatau, Simberi), Lihir, Tanga Group (Malendok, Boang) and Feni Islands (Ambitle, Babase) commonly called Anir Islands.

The land area of the province is around 9 560 km². The sea area within the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of New Ireland Province is around 230,000 km².

==Ecology==
In the early days of the French Revolution while searching for a lost scientific expedition the vessel La Recherche passed by New Ireland. On board was the prominent botanist Jacques-Julien Houtou de Labillardière who noted in his journal fine stands of teak (&quot;Tectona grandis&quot;) trees growing at the southern end of the island. This marks the easternmost occurrence of teak, an important timber tree that extends naturally from India to Thailand on the Asian mainland and also is present on Java in the Indonesian archipelago.

==History==
There have been at least three waves of migration into New Ireland over the last 40,000 years. The Lapita pottery culture was present around 3,300 years ago.

Chinese and South-East Asian contact appears to have been longstanding, though the evidence is thin.

Dutch explorers made the first European contact in 1616. It was initially believed by Europeans to be part of New Britain, but the British explorer Philip Carteret established in 1767 that the island was physically separate, and gave it the name Nova Hibernia, Latin for &#x27;New Ireland&#x27;.

In the 1870s and 1880s, Marquis de Rays, a French nobleman, attempted to establish a French colony on the island called La Nouvelle France. He sent four ill-fated expeditions to the island, the most notable of which was the third attempt, now known simply as the De Rays Expedition, which caused the death of 123 of the 350 or so settlers.


Missionary activity did not begin until 1877, and New Ireland was colonised by Germany in 1886 under the name Neu-Mecklenburg, as part of the German partition comprising the northern half of present-day Papua New Guinea.

Blackbirding, the removal, often by force, of local young men to work on plantations in northern Australia and other Pacific islands, was widespread in New Ireland in the late 19th century, especially from Lihir Island and Tanga Islands.

Australia took control in 1914, in the early stages of World War I, and renamed the island New Ireland after the island of Ireland. It became part of the Mandated Territory of New Guinea declared in 1921 by the League of Nations and administered by Australia.

During World War II, New Ireland was occupied by Japanese forces from January 1942 to September 1945.

Australian colonial administration continued until Papua New Guinea became independent in September 1975.

The core of New Ireland&#x27;s economy is agriculture, livestock, and forestry and marine products. Additionally, there is significant gold mining activity, particularly in Lihir and Simberi.

== Human geography == 

The population during the year 2000 census was 118,350 people, the vast majority of whom (about 90%) live in small rural villages. The population is very young, with a median age of 18.7 years. Over 40% of the population is under the age of 15 years, whereas only 3% is above 65 years old.

The provincial capital is Kavieng, located on the main island&#x27;s northern tip. Namatanai is another small town two-thirds of the way along the island. The Boluminski Highway runs down the east coast, linking the two towns.

Around twenty languages are spoken in New Ireland, and the number of dialects and subdialects totals perhaps 45. All are in the New Ireland languages group within the Austronesian language family, except for one language isolate, Kuot.

== Culture == 
New Ireland, like much of Papua New Guinea, has a mixture of the old and the new: traditional cultural practices (&quot;custom&quot;) are widespread and almost universally respected, yet society is changing as a result of church activity, urbanisation, and various aspects of global contemporary culture making their mark.

Probably the most famous cultural system of New Ireland is &quot;Malagan&quot;, a Nalik word for an ancient and revered set of practices and ceremonies practised throughout much of the main island. Malagan is also an art where the dead are remembered through the various depictions that are carved on Malagan masks. The Malagan masks have a symbolic meaning as the dead must be remembered through the masks and ceremonies. They are the practical means of capturing the spirits of recent dead relatives or clan members. During the colonial era, significant quantities of Malagan masks were collected by European administrators and can be seen in museums all over Europe.

==Districts and LLGs==

Each province in Papua New Guinea has one or more districts, and each district has one or more Local Level Government (LLG) areas. For census purposes, the LLG areas are subdivided into wards and those into census units.

== Provincial leaders==

The province was governed by a decentralised provincial administration, headed by a Premier, from 1977 to 1995. Following reforms taking effect that year, the national government reassumed some powers, and the role of Premier was replaced by the position of Governor, to be held by the winner of the province-wide seat in the National Parliament of Papua New Guinea.

===Premiers (1977–1995)===

===Governors (1995–present)===

==Members of the National Parliament==

The province and each district are represented by a Member of the National Parliament. There is one provincial electorate, and each district is an open electorate.

==See also==
* Borpop Airfield, Japanese facility during World War Two

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q838690" start="0" end="20" title="New Ireland Province" label="New Ireland Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q838690" start="31" end="46" title="New Ireland Province" label="New Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q838690" start="55" end="68" title="New Ireland Province" label="Nova Hibernia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053630" start="94" end="102" title="Provinces of Papua New Guinea" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="106" end="122" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q215089" start="186" end="197" title="New Ireland (island)" label="New Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401458" start="266" end="286" title="Saint Matthias Group" label="Saint Matthias Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589522" start="288" end="294" title="Mussau Island" label="Mussau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337856" start="296" end="302" title="Emirau Island" label="Emirau"/>
<link wikidata="Q262035" start="305" end="316" title="New Hanover Island" label="New Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268601" start="318" end="323" title="Dyaul Island" label="Djaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401385" start="325" end="336" title="Tabar Group" label="Tabar Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672912" start="338" end="343" title="Tabar Island" label="Tabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687921" start="345" end="350" title="Tatau Island" label="Tatau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859939" start="352" end="359" title="Simberi Island" label="Simberi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405205" start="362" end="367" title="Lihir Island" label="Lihir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401361" start="369" end="380" title="Tanga Group" label="Tanga Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401407" start="403" end="415" title="Feni Islands" label="Feni Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q457596" start="417" end="424" title="Ambitle" label="Ambitle"/>
<link wikidata="Q797590" start="426" end="432" title="Babase" label="Babase"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="540" end="563" title="Exclusive Economic Zone" label="Exclusive Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="655" end="672" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q528925" start="805" end="843" title="Jacques-Julien Houtou de Labillardière" label="Jacques-Julien Houtou de Labillardière"/>
<link wikidata="Q156938" start="884" end="888" title="teak" label="teak"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1068" end="1073" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="1077" end="1085" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="1131" end="1135" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q177626" start="1220" end="1229" title="Migration (human)" label="migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021436" start="1279" end="1285" title="Lapita culture" label="Lapita"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="1441" end="1446" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q59771" start="1551" end="1562" title="New Britain" label="New Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q144540" start="1589" end="1604" title="Philip Carteret" label="Philip Carteret"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062236" start="1762" end="1777" title="Marquis de Rays" label="Marquis de Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062316" start="2001" end="2019" title="De Rays Expedition" label="De Rays Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="2080" end="2090" title="Missionary" label="Missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2159" end="2166" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q880704" start="2302" end="2314" title="Blackbirding" label="Blackbirding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405205" start="2508" end="2520" title="Lihir Island" label="Lihir Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401361" start="2525" end="2538" title="Tanga Islands" label="Tanga Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2596" end="2607" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="2664" end="2671" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2809" end="2821" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017358" start="3546" end="3553" title="Kavieng" label="Kavieng"/>
<link wikidata="Q473078" start="3603" end="3612" title="Namatanai" label="Namatanai"/>
<link wikidata="Q891655" start="3679" end="3697" title="Boluminski Highway" label="Boluminski Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="3762" end="3770" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="3817" end="3824" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701297" start="3876" end="3897" title="New Ireland languages" label="New Ireland languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="3915" end="3927" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33648" start="3960" end="3976" title="language isolate" label="language isolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q56537" start="3978" end="3982" title="Kuot language" label="Kuot"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="4026" end="4042" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="4222" end="4228" title="Church body" label="church"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="4239" end="4251" title="urbanisation" label="urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151161" start="4389" end="4396" title="Malagan" label="Malagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335387" start="4406" end="4411" title="Nalik language" label="Nalik"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="5154" end="5160" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q24563" start="5592" end="5631" title="National Parliament of Papua New Guinea" label="National Parliament of Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q24563" start="5800" end="5819" title="National Parliament of Papua New Guinea" label="National Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="5845" end="5855" title="electoral district" label="electorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946540" start="5914" end="5929" title="Borpop Airfield" label="Borpop Airfield"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407791" wikidata="Q169146" url="?curid=407791" title="Zdob și Zdub">
<text>Zdob și Zdub (; , onomatopoeic for the sound of a drum beat) is a Moldovan folk punk band, based in Chișinău. The band represented Moldova in the Eurovision Song Contest 2005 in Kyiv, Ukraine, on 21 May 2005, finishing 6th. They also represented Moldova in the Eurovision Song Contest 2011 in Düsseldorf, Germany, on 14 May 2011, finishing 12th, and represented Moldova again, in the Eurovision Song Contest 2022 in Turin, Italy, on 14 May 2022, finishing 7th. The band is often referred to by its fans as &quot;ZSZ&quot;. To date, Zdob si Zdub are the only artists to have qualified from a Eurovision Song Contest semi-final three times.

==Band history==
===1994–1999===
*&quot;Zdob și Zdub musical band was put together in 1994 in Moldova. Before that, the singer Roman Iagupov, the bass-player Mihai Gîncu and the drummer Anatol Pugaci had together attended a school in Strășeni. They found the missing musicians during their studies at the Sports College in Chișinău. The line-up of the band was constantly changing: sometimes the band had two singers, sometimes - two guitarists. As a result, one guitarist became a singer, the clarinettist - a drummer, and the drummer - a bass-player.
*In the spring of 1994, Roman Iagupov met the future producer of &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; - Igor Dînga, the singer of the seminal band &quot;Cuibul&quot;. In June, the band got some attention from the music media in Chișinău, while playing before the &quot;Cuibul&quot; performance.
*In November 1994, the first demo was recorded in a professional studio, and one song, &quot;The Lost World&quot; passed the selection of the &quot;Learn To Swim I&quot; Festival in Moscow, where the band appeared for the first time as &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot;. The band managed to immediately capture the attention and sympathies of Moscow extreme youth and made friends with the local alternative bands, especially with the &quot;IFK&quot;, that accepted &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; invitation to play at the &quot;10 Years After Chernobyl&quot; Action in Chișinău.
1996
*In July 1996, &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; participated at the &quot;Learn to Swim II&quot; Festival, where they played before the world-famous Rapcore band Rage Against the Machine. Two songs were recorded for the &quot;Learn To Swim II&quot; compilation: &quot;V dome moiom&quot; (&quot;In My House&quot;) in Russian, and &quot;Hardcore Moldovenesc&quot; in Romanian. The second song has become an absolute hit, and it still is the &quot;visit card&quot; of the band. All national radio stations broadcast &quot;Hardcore Moldovenesc&quot;, which became the hymn of the alternative youth in Moldova, being in the top of the hit parades. The same song was included in the &quot;Romanian Underground&quot; compilation in Romania, attracting attention due to the obvious Moldovan dialect.
*At the end of 1996, as a result of the deal with the Russian label &quot;FeeLee&quot;, &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; recorded their debut album &quot;Hardcore Moldovenesc&quot;. The entire album is in Russian, with the exception of the title track.
1997
*In January 1997, the band had an opening performance for Biohazard and Rollins Band in Moscow.
*In March 1997, the band made a promotion tour with the Russian band &quot;Tequilajazzz&quot; in Moscow, St. Petersburg, and Chișinău.
*In August 1997, &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; played at the &quot;Kazantip&quot; Festival in Crimea in front of thousands of people.
*In October 1997, the band recorded 10 songs of the album &quot;Hardcore Moldovenesc&quot; in Romanian, for distribution in Romania.
*In December 1997, &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; initiated the &quot;Learn to Swim&quot; Festival in Chișinău and invited the bands &quot;Kirpitchi&quot; from St. Petersburg and &quot;Neurotica&quot; from Timișoara.
1998
*In 1998, &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; toured a lot, and at the end of the year had a two weeks tour in Germany. After that, &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; started to work on a new album, heading away from the American hardcore-concept, making more use of ethnic instruments, using them in the same extreme way, but with a more melodic, lyrical Moldovan touch. All the new songs are written in the Moldavian dialect of Romanian language. This was the beginning of a new stage: preparation for the recording of a new album under the name &quot;Tabara Noastra&quot;. The album was recorded with the help of the famous Moldovan musicians, and, namely, Anatol Stefanet from &quot;Trigon&quot; (violin alt), Valeriu Cascaval from the folk music band &quot;Barbu Lautaru&quot; (dulcimer), and Eugen Didic from &quot;Cuibul&quot; (trumpet). The album consists of 12 songs, three of which are in Russian and the remaining in Romanian. Three songs have been recorded and submitted for promotion: &quot;Draga Otee&quot;, an old hit of the well-known Moldovan musician Iurie Sadovni, the soulful ballad &quot;Maria Blues&quot;, and &quot;Zdubii Bateti Tare&quot;, resembling the Moldovan hardcore. After the debut and triumphal concert in Bucharest, &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; has shot its first video clip on the title-track &quot;Zdubii Bateti Tare&quot; at the Romanian music channel Atomic TV in Bucharest.
1999
*In May 1999, &quot;FeeLee&quot; released the Russian version of the album &quot;Zdubii Bateti Tare&quot; under the name &quot;Tabara Noastra&quot;.
*The presentation of the new album &quot;Tabara Noastra&quot; took place in St. Petersburg on 26 May 1999, and in Moscow on 21–28 May, where the band had an opening performance for Soulfly (Max Cavalera, ex-Sepultura). On 14 August 1999, &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; was invited to one more unforgettable show in Moscow, the Russian MTV-Party, held on the Red Square. With other Russian bands, such as Gorky Park and &quot;IFK&quot;, they opened the concert of Red Hot Chili Peppers. There were about 150.000 people watching this show live, and, probably, even more on the transmission on MTV-Russia.
*On Christmas Eve, together with &quot;Taraf de Tigani din Clejani&quot;, the band performed a concert at the legendary &quot;Laptaria lui Enache&quot; in Bucharest. Gypsy &quot;Lautars&quot; made a strong impression on Roman Yagupov. Their influence is felt in the next album &quot;Agroromantica&quot;.

===2000–2009===
2000
*In January 2000, the band was invited at the EuroSonic Festival in Groningen, the Netherlands. The performance was broadcast by 14 radio stations. There the band got acquainted with the director of Sziget festival Mr. Dan Panaitescu.
*In August 2000, &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; played Pepsi Sziget Festival, sharing the same stage with the following stars of European and American music: Susanne Vega, Guano Apes, Lou Reed, Apollo 440, Bloodhound Gang, Therapy?, Oasis.
*Also, in August 2000, &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; played at the &quot;Nashestvie&quot; Festival, held in Ramenskoe, Russia.
*In September 2000, &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; participated at the Slavianski Bazaar Festival in Kyiv, Ukraine, together with &quot;Ivan Kupala&quot;, &quot;Lyapis Trubetskoi&quot;, and &quot;Vopli Vidoplyasova&quot; bands.
*In October 2000, &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; recorded the cover version of the song &quot;Videli Nochi&quot;, as a tribute to the legendary musical band &quot;Kino&quot; from St. Petersburg. The song became a hit, and won the 1st places in all mass-media charts and hit parades of the CIS countries for half a year. About 1.5 million copies of the album have been sold. &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; became the most touring band and received the prize of the &quot;Fuzz&quot; music-magazine (St. Petersburg) as the best CIS live group in Russia for 2000.
2001
*On 31 January 2001, in Moscow, &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; played together with musician and film director Emir Kusturica and his &quot;The No Smoking Orchestra&quot;.
*On 9 May 2001, in Moscow, the &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; participated at a concert with the occasion of the Victory Day, performing the cover-version of the famous wartime song &quot;Smugleanka-moldavanka&quot;. This song was recorded at the studio, entered many compilations and was sold in million copies.
*On 19 May 2001, &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; played at one of the most prestigious Russian festivals - &quot;Maxidrom&quot; for the second time.
*Regardless the tight concert schedule, from September 2000 until May 2001, the band had been working on its new album &quot;Agroromantica&quot;, which was recorded and mixed at the &quot;FM Division&quot; Studio in Moscow. According to the musicians, the new album is a mixture of country romantics, fiery Balkan gipsy music, Moldovan folklore, and hardcore elements. This diversity could be called &quot;music zdob&quot;.
*7 September 2001 was the official date of presentation of the album &quot;Agroromantica&quot; in Moldova. On 7–21 September 2001, a grandiose tour on Moldova, called &quot;Temporomantica&quot;, took place. 9 free concerts were performed in the biggest towns of the Republic.
*The presentation of the album &quot;Agroromantica&quot; in Moscow took place on 12 October 2001, in the &quot;B-2&quot; club. The presentation of the album &quot;Agroromantica&quot; in Romania took place on 1 March 2002, in the overcrowded &quot;Hanul lui Manuc&quot;.
*In 2001, the band participated at some International Festivals: 5 July - &quot;MUF + VOBAN 2001&quot;, Zrenjanin, Serbia; 19 July - &quot;Tavriiskie Igri&quot;, Kahovka, Ukraine; 7 August - &quot;PEPSI SZIGET 2001&quot;, Budapest, Hungary; 18 August - &quot;ROCK&#x27;N&#x27;TOUL&quot;, Saint-George, Italy; 5 October - &quot;Prosto Rock&quot;, Kyiv, Ukraine.
*In 2001, the band performed more than 110 concerts in 34 cities and 7 countries. Also, in 2001, the band shot two video clips on the songs &quot;Buna dimineata!&quot; (&quot;Good morning!&quot;) and &quot;Tigan i OZN&quot; (&quot;Gypsy and the UFO&quot;).
2002
*On 15 June 2002 was the participation to the MTV Romania opening in the &quot;Lia Manoliu&quot; stadium.
*On 6 August 2002 was the participation to the &quot;Krilya&quot; rock music festival, on the Tushino aerodrome, Moscow, Russia.
*On 25 August 2002 was the participation to the &quot;Slavianskii Bazar&quot; festival, Minsk, Belarus.
*In October 2002 the band shot a video on Doina Haiducului song. It became the first video that was shot on 35-mm film in the band&#x27;s history.
*In November 2002 ZsZ invited Romanian gipsy orchestra &quot;Yagalo&quot; to Chișinău. Together they recorded 2 songs, which they were included into &quot;450 Sheep&quot; album. These were &quot;Everybody in the Casa Mare&quot;, &quot;Cuculetul&quot; and the cover version of the Rolling Stones&#x27; &quot;Paint it black&quot;.
*On 14 October 2002 was the participation at the MTV European Music Awards ceremony in Barcelona. Zdob și Zdub was nominated at the &quot;Best Romanian Act&quot; section.
* In October 2002 ZsZ shot a video &quot;Everybody in the Casa Mare&quot; with the participation of gipsy singer from &quot;Yagalo&quot; orchestra Vasile Dinu (DJ Vasile), and in February 2003 Russian version of this song with Garik Sukachiov. Later the video with DJ Vasile won the first place in the top of Slovakian TV channel &quot;Musicbox&quot; the first place in the top-ten of MTV Romania.
*At the end of 2002, the drummer Andrei Cebotari left the band. Mihai Gincu had to take the drums on himself and temporary Vadim Eremeev from Moscow &quot;Nebo Zdes&quot; band was invited to the place of a bass player.
2003
*In February 2003 at a German independent label, TRIKONT came out a compilation &quot;Russian Disco Hits&quot;, which became a bestseller in Germany. It included Russian version of &quot;Gypsy and UFO&quot; song.
*On 5 June 2003 was the second award from MTV Romania in &quot;Best Video&quot; nomination for Doina Haiducului video.
*On 23 August 2003 was HODOKVAS Festival, Modra, Slovakia and the beginning of negotiations with Warner Music Austria on the distribution of a new album on the territory of Europe.
*On 5 July 2003, the band took part in &quot;Krilia&quot; festival in Tushino, Moscow, Russia. The performance was under threat of derangement, as there was an act of terrorism on the entrance to the festival, three women terrorists blew up bombs on themselves. The Mayor of Moscow decided to continue the festival, as it was impossible to evacuate 70 000 people. The band performed 3 songs. One of the songs was the premiere of &quot;Everybody in the casa mare&quot; with Garik Sukachiov.
*On 20 September 2003 was NOKIA TOTALBOARD FEST, Exhibition Center, Kyiv, Ukraine with 50 000 spectators.
*On 24 November 2003 the next album &quot;450 Sheep&quot; came out. The first edition took place in Europe on Warner Music Austria. The first presentation of &quot;450 Sheep&quot; took place in Slovakia, where in December there took place a tour in support of the album around 5 cities of this Central European country. According to the reports of &quot;Slovak Album Chart,&quot; the album &quot;450 Sheep&quot; became the first in the list of best selling albums of the foreign artists during the Christmas sales in December 2003.
*On 18 December 2003 &quot;450 Sheep&quot; presentation took place in Bucharest (Romania). The show was broadcast live on the internet and Romanian TV channel TVR1.
2004
*On 12 February 2004 in &quot;Moscova&quot; club &quot;450 Sheep&quot; album presentation took place in Chișinău. The house was full. The spectators were given a glass of wine and piece of brynza (traditional cheese) on the entrance. The show was shot by the National Television of Moldova.
*In March 2004 after 7 years of absence the drummer Anatol Pugaci returned to the band. Mihai Gincu took up the bass again.
*In March 2004 came out a new video of ZsZ on &quot;DJ Vasile&quot; track under the label of ZsZ. The gipsy MC Vasile (&quot;Yagalo&quot; orchestra) and Osoianu sisters (Moldavian folk group &quot;Talancuta&quot;) took part in the shooting. Osoianu sisters recorded backing vocals for this song.
*On 22 April 2004 ZsZ won the nomination &quot;Best Ethno&quot; on MTV Romanian Music Awards and received their 5th MTV statuette.
*At the end of March 2004 with the participation of shooting crew of MTV Romania ZsZ shot video on &quot;Nunta Extremala&quot; song.
*In June 2004 ZsZ with the album &quot;450 Sheep&quot; entered World Music Chart Europe on the 12th position. The songs from this album appeared in more than 20 European radio stations.
*On 9 July &quot;450 Sheep&quot; released in Ukraine by Moon records, and on 27 July &quot;CD Land records&quot; releases it in Russia.
*In summer 2004 Zdob și Zdub took part in following European festivals: Open Air Central Park, Lvov Ukraine, 27 June 2004; Tanz&amp;Folk Festival, Rudolstadt, Germany. 4 July 2004; &quot;Kraina Mrir&quot; Ethno Festival, Kyiv, Ukraine, 10 July 2004; Rock la Mures Festival, Periam, Romania, 11 July 2004; Peninsula festival, Tirgul Mures, Romania, 29 July 2004; Muveszetek Volgye Festival, Pula, Hungary, 31 July 2004; on 6 August 2004 ZsZ for the third time performed at the main stage of the biggest festival in Europe Sziget in Budapest (Hungary); OKEY Leto Festival, Slovakia, 7 August 2004; Hodokvas Festival, Slovakia, 20 August 2004; Vizovicke Trnkobrani, Visovice, Czech Republic, 21 August 2004.
*In 10–15 August 2004, in the frames of a cultural-historic project &quot;Following in the tracks of Geto-Dacians &quot; a ZsZ tour supporting &quot;450 Sheep&quot; album in 5 towns of Moldova took place.
*On 11 and 19 September 2004 ZsZ took part in &quot;Snickers Urbania&quot; in Kyiv and Kharkiv, Ukraine. More than 50 000 spectators were present.
*On Sunday 10 October Ukrainian TV channel M1 showed a premier of ZsZ video clip &quot;Nunta Extremala&quot; (The Extreme Wedding) in its &quot;Ministry of Premiers&quot; program. This song appeared in 1999 in our second album &quot;Tabara Noastra&quot;. It became one of the best songs of the band and is always performed in the ZsZ concerts. After 5 years ZsZ has re-recorded it with a new sound and arrangement.
*In October 2004, the band was working in its studio on the recording of a new album dedicated to its 10th anniversary. The best 10 songs from the 10 years of creative work will enter the album and there will be 5 absolutely new tracks.
*On 26 October 2004 the video clip &quot;Nunta Extremala&quot; reached the 1st place in Ukrainian &quot;Enter&quot; TV channel hit parade.
*On 4 November 2004 in Saint-Petersburg (&quot;Staryi Dom&quot; Club) and 26 November in Moscow &quot;B2&quot; Club &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; will give performances promoting the album &quot;450 Sheep&quot;. &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; have already toured Central and Eastern Europe with this album and won first places in TV and radio station&#x27;s musical tops. The album appeared in Russia at the end of summer and contained 12 tracks, 3 of which are in Russian. The heading hit &quot;Everybody in the casa mare&quot; was recorded together with Garik Sukachyov.
*On 17 December StarCHAT.ru project and internet-centers network &quot;Cafemax&quot; invited &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; to &quot;Cafemax&quot; on Novoslobodskaya.
*Russian release of the album with a conceptual title &quot;450 Sheep&quot;; the 10th anniversary of the band to be celebrated in 2004 and the concert in Hard Rock Cafe Moscow on 16 December.
*On 26 November 2004, the press-conference in Moscow, dedicated to &quot;450 Sheep&quot; album release, took place in the B-2 Club. The visitors were served with brynza – sheep&#x27;s milk cheese as well as Moldovan wine. The Romanian folk music ensemble &quot;Iagalo&quot; was tuning up on the stage. ZsZ invited these Romanian Gypsy musicians for to reveal the concept and the spirit of &quot;450 Sheep&quot; album, and to make a presentation. New Year&#x27;s Eve the Zdubs appeared in festive shows on TV different channels. The first shooting took part in Bratislava for Slovak channel TV Markíza, where &quot;Everybody in the Casa Mare&quot; song assumed one more original version. Instead of Gypsy MC Vasile the refrain was performed by Slovak folk ensemble &quot;Bezanka&quot; together with the show presenters Peter Marcin and Andy Kraus. In Moscow, the Zdubs took part in a telecast &quot;The first night with Oleg Menshikov&quot; on NTV Channel. ZsZ had specially prepared a cover version of &quot;Costume&quot; song from a classical Soviet movie &quot;Magicians&quot;. Emmanuil Vitorgan, a famous Russian actor performed the vocals together with Roman.
*On 18 December 2004, the shooting of the New Year&#x27;s Eve show in Bucharest. Romanian version of this song Roman had recorded together with a famous talk-show presenter from ProTV. Her name is Teo.
*On 14 December in Moscow &quot;Smuglyanka&quot;, a song from a popular movie about the Second World War has been chosen for an alternative music show on RenTV. Producers were planning to invite Sofia Rotaru to take part in a recording of this song, but she could not do that because of a tight concert tour schedule. Then ZsZ decided to invite &quot;Slivki&quot; (Cream) pop girls-band. The shooting was scheduled for
*As it was the previous time, the band met the New Year 2005 in the Romanian city of Iasi.
2005
On 18 January 2005, according to the German weekly MUSIKMARKT &quot;ZDOB Si ZDUB&quot; and 450 sheep was charted on place no. 38 in the annual charts for 2004, along with such ethnic music stars as Lhasa, Youssou N’Dour, Khaled, Sainkho Namchylak.
*On 25 September 2005 Zdubs were invited to participate in Michael Palin&#x27;s project documentary &quot;New Europe&quot; for BBC.
2006
*On 14 July 2006 Zdubs opened the Roskilde Festival.
*On 4 August 2006, the Zdubs’ gigantic productivity and the cosmic energy enable them to have an extra-full of shows and concerts program. It is not a wonder that this summer Zdubs were present at almost all the important festivals, beginning with Roskilde Festival (Denmark) and Peninsula (Romania) and recently ending with Krylia (Russia) and Staryi Melnik (Moldova).
*On 20.10.2006, at 22:00, in Malersaal, Deutsches Schauspielhaus, Hamburg, Germany, Zdob și Zdub participated in the final public presentation &quot;pictures from the East – relations docking tour 01&quot;. The &quot;relations&quot; docking tour focuses on seven cities where &quot;relations&quot; has engaged in an intensive exchange with cultural actors over the past four years: Chișinău, Sofia, Pristina, Sarajevo, Warsaw, Zagreb, and Ljubljana.
*On 30 November 2006, the presentation concert of the new album Ethnomecanica took place in Romania, Bucharest.
2007
*On 25 February 2007, in Trimedial CD Market, the band &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; met with their fans. &quot;It is very important for the musicians to have the possibility to meet and communicate with the people that listen to their music, with those who respect them. Especially when it happens at home&quot;, Roman says.
*On 18 March 2007, Austrian musician Hubert von Goisern, producer Wolfgang Spannberger and director-operator Markus Woolly, visited Moldova. The aims of their visit were to get acquainted with &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot;, to have some rehearsals with them, to go to the Moldovan part of the Danube. Wolfgang: &quot;The brightest impressions – everything that happened in Zdub&#x27;s dark rehearsal room. If we had more time for travelling around Moldova, we could have told you more. Anyway, everything was just great!&quot;
*On 24 April 2007, the website of the band &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; won the &quot;Web Top.MD 2007&quot; contest in two categories
*On 15 May 2007, Zdob și Zdub were the guests of Rambler&#x27;s &quot;Blue Sofa&quot;.
*The 18 May 2007 Zdubs participated in the &quot;Full Contact&quot; show on MTV Russia. On stage, they competed with the band &quot;Neschasnyi sluchai&quot;.
*22 June 2007 Linz Tour announced its beginning. This happened in Vienna (Austria), in the frame of the renowned DunauInselFest, on the stage of the not less renowned Austrian media company - company A1. Besides Hubert von Goisern, Willi Resetarits, Hohtraxlecker Sprungschanzen Musi (Bad Ischl) and Zdob și Zdub performed on the A1 stage.
*On 23 June 2007 concert in Ismail, Ukraine. The stage in this city was put up in &quot;Morvokzal&quot; where, in the evening, Zdob și Zdub, Hubert von Goisern (Austria) and Gaydamaki (Ukraine) started the action.
*On 1 July 2007, the Zdubs participated at B’estival, Romexpo, Bucharest, Romania.
*On 28 July, the Zdubes participated in the &quot;Staryi Melnik&quot; Festival, Chișinău, Moldova.
*On 29 July participated at the &quot;Peninsula&quot; Festival in Targu-Mures, Romania.
*On 4–5 August, in Bacau (Romania) &quot;Romanian Top Hits 2007&quot; the band were nominated in the category &quot;Rock Best Hit 2007&quot;, together with Directia 5, Animal X, Holograf and Voltaj.
*On 17 August, the next concerts took place on the Romanian seaside in Costinesti and Vama Veche (&quot;Stufstock Greenfest&quot;).
*On 31 October &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; band was nominated by the Russian TV Channel A-ONE in four categories of the RAMP 2007 Awards - Rock Alternative Music Prize: &quot;The Band of the Year&quot;, &quot;The Video of the Year&quot;, &quot;The Hit of the Year&quot; and &quot;The Album of the Year&quot;.
*From 3 October till 6th 2007 Hubert von Goisern visited Chișinău to continue the recording of the new songs in collaboration with Zdob și Zdub. One song made in studio with Hubert was included in the European release of Ethnomecanica album.
*For the fans, before the winter holidays, together with the Osoianu Sisters, the band recorded a Christmas carol &quot;Sus, boieri, nu mai dormiti&quot;. It could be found on a special edition CD, which contained the best songs of Zdob și Zdub and was offered as a gift in the promotional winter packages Alocard 70 and Fantasy from Moldcell.
*At the end of 2007, the Zdubish album &quot;Ethnomecanica&quot; was released at &quot;Sojuz&quot; Record Label, in Russia.
2008
*On 6 March, the band took part in the show &quot;Just tonight&quot; on Channel TV Centre, Russia.
*On 9 March, the Zdubes have participated in the show &quot;5 songs on Channel 5&quot; in Saint Petersburg with a live show.
*On 28 March, the European release of the &quot;Ethnomecanica&quot; album took place in Germany, Switzerland and Austria, under the &quot;Lawine Records&quot;, being distributed by Sony BMG.
*The 5 April marked the starting point of the &quot;Ethnomecanica&quot; album&#x27;s European release in cities from Hungary, Austria, Germany and Denmark such as in Budapest, Vienna, Innsbruck, Munich, Berlin, Hamburg, Koln, Dortmund and Copenhagen. The last concert in the framework of &quot;Europe Tour 2008&quot; was held in Chișinău on 29 April in the club Bier Platz.
*On 16 April, the website of the band won the &quot;Web Top.MD 2007&quot; contest in two categories.
*At midnight, towards 7 June, the &quot;Zdob și Zdub&quot; tour minibus was hit by a &quot;Volkswagen Sharan&quot; minivan causing the tour bus to roll over several times. As a result of this accident, 4 concerts were cancelled. According to the preliminary estimation, the total financial damage is around 50,000 Euro.
*On 17 June the Moldavian Rockers held a &quot;warm-up&quot; show for the Romanian football fans, before the match Romania–Netherlands of UEFA Euro 2008. The concert took place on the Waisenhausplatz with the host city being Bern, Switzerland.
*From the 7th till 11 July 2008 the adventure on Danube River of the Zdubes and Hubert von Goisern restarted in Ulm city, then in Karlsruhe, Rheinhafen.

===2010–2019===
2010
*October 2010 brings an entirely Russian album, called &quot;Beloe Vino / Krasnoe Vino&quot; (from Russian – &quot;White Wine / Red Wine&quot;). At different times and on different occasions Zdob și Zdub recorded songs that on just as many grounds were not released. Now they are all gathered under one cover. The album includes features, the Russian version of some own songs, and cover versions of folklore and others’ songs.
*The band&#x27;s activity was appreciated by various TV channels (among them, MTV Europe), magazines, radio stations, thus enriching its collection of awards.
*Their first Eurovision experience is Moldova&#x27;s debut in the Contest, dating back to 2005. At the 50th edition, Zdob și Zdub represented their country with the song &quot;Boonika Bate Doba&quot;, placed 6th in the Final.
*&quot;So Lucky&quot; is the first single from their newest album which was produced by Marc Elsner and recorded in Berlin in 2010. It is the result of the band&#x27;s and producer&#x27;s hard-work and creative quest. The exclusive new material, sung in English and Romanian, will be presented to the public in the near future. Zdob și Zdub will appear in a different light.
2011
*In 2011, the citizens of the Republic of Moldova empowered them once again to rock the stage at the Eurovision Song Contest. Zdob și Zdub participated with the song &quot;So Lucky&quot;, which came 12th in the Final of the European contest.
2012
*In January, Zdob și Zdub released a new album in English under the German label Asphalt Tango Records, named &quot;Basta Mafia!&quot;.
*For the first time in its career, the band worked with a foreign producer, namely Marc Elsner. The new album is the result of a very long and difficult creative process since it was recorded both at Headroom Studio in Germany, and Cuibul Studio in Chișinău. In February–March 2012 the band had played in the major cities of Austria, Hungary, Germany, Denmark and Switzerland as part of the European tour. There is also another version of the album, created especially for the Romanian speaking public. It was released in spring 2013 by MediaPro Music. The concert presentation of the new album in Romania took place on 12 April and was held in Hard Rock Cafe Bucharest.
*On 21 May, in Eugène Ionesco Theatre Chișinău, Zdob și Zdub presented this version of the album to the public from Moldova, as part of a great show Moldovenii s-au născut, the title of the first single for which the band has already made a video. Furthermore, the band is planning to release the album &quot;Basta Mafia&quot; in Russia and Ukraine.
*On 17 July, they played at the opening of the 27th Summer Universiade that took place in Kazan, Russia. On 10 November, the band hold a great concert in Montreal. This was the first time the band was playing in Canada.
*In autumn, the band will celebrate its 20 years anniversary, by holding several great concerts in Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russia and Ukraine.
* On the eve of the winter holidays, on 18 December, Zdob și Zdub hold a unique concert along with a symphonic orchestra. The event was the result of a successful collaboration with a master in musical arrangements, Marc Osinski, who selected ten songs and adapted them for a symphonic orchestra. Further, the band is planning to release a DVD with the concert, entitled &quot;Christmas Symphony&quot;.
*Before the end of the year, under the guidance of the German producer Jan Rubach, the band recorded two songs: &quot;La o margine de munte&quot; and &quot;Caloianul&quot;.
2015
*In January, the band released the video for the song Om cu inimă de lemn, included in its latest album, Basta Mafia! (Romanian version).
*On 5 and 6 June, they will hold two great concerts, at Moscow and Saint Petersburg. Both events are dedicated to the 15 years anniversary of the song &quot;Videli Noch’&quot; (the Zdob și Zdub version), performed for the first time at the KINOproby Festival Tribute Victor Tzoy. The song became very popular in the post-Soviet countries, won a lot of awards and continues to be performed at each concert of the band.

==Eurovision==

===2005===
On 26 February 2005, the band won a national pre-selection contest to claim the right to represent Moldova in its first ever appearance at the Eurovision Song Contest 2005, with their song &quot;Boonika Bate Toba&quot; (&quot;Grandmamma is beating da drum-a&quot;).
On 19 May they performed fourth in the running order of the semi-final and ended up in 2nd place with 207 points. Qualifying for the grand final on 21 May, they drew starting position 7. After voting, they claimed 6th place with 148 points.

===2011===
In February 2011, the band once again won the right to represent Moldova in the Eurovision Song Contest 2011 held in Düsseldorf. The song they performed was &quot;So Lucky&quot;. The band performed in the second semi final on 12 May, in position 7. After voting they achieved 10th place with 54 points, qualifying them for the grand final on 14 May. They performed in the 15th position in the grand final and ended up in 12th place with 97 points at the end of voting. The song became the band&#x27;s first and only to reach the UK Singles Chart, peaking at #153 on downloads alone.

===2022===
On 29 January 2022, their song &quot;Trenulețul&quot; was chosen by Teleradio-Moldova to represent the country at the Eurovision Song Contest 2022 in Turin after the planned national final, which the band was due to participate in with musicians Frații Advahov, was cancelled due to rising COVID-19 cases in Moldova. The group have ended up with 253 points, claiming the 7th place in the Grand Final.

==Line-up==
The following listing is by no means a comprehensive list of who has ever played in Zdob și Zdub. Early line-ups were very fluid, and many Moldovan musicians have been known to &quot;sit in&quot; for recording sessions or for individual concerts.

* Roman Iagupov (born 13 September 1973, Volgograd, Russia) – vocals, guitars, flute, ocarina, yorgaphone, turuiac, tartacuta, telinka, buhay, dramba, bagpipe, doba, lyricist (original member)
* Mihai Gîncu (born 5 March 1975, Străşeni, Moldova) – bass guitar, acoustic guitar, kobza, sitar, mandolin, organ, keyboards, mellotron, piano, accordion, percussion, backing vocals, composer, arranger, producer (original member)
* Sveatoslav Staruş (born 8 November 1976, Chişinău, Moldova) – guitar (1996 - 2004, 2010–present)
* Andrei Cebotari (born 4 August 1975, Soroca, Moldova) – drums (2000 - 2003, 2010–present)
* Victor Bîtca-Dandeș (born 3 April 1972, Chişinău, Moldova) – trombone, accordion, violin, kaval, flute, telinka, melodica (2001–present)
* Valeriu Mazîlu (born 12 September 1978, Chişinău, Moldova) – trumpet, bagpipe, flute (2001–present)

===Former members===
* Anatol Pugaci (born 6 October 1973, Chisinau, Moldova) – drums (original member; 1994–1997, February 2004 – May 2010)
* Igor Buzurniuc (born 23 June 1981, Soroca, Moldova) – guitar (January–June 2005, 2008 – May 2010)
* Serghei Vatavu (born 28 September 1967, Chisinau, Moldova) – guitar (May 2006 – 2008)
* Dimitri Kuharenco – vocals (1994–1995)
* Vitalii Kaceaniuc – drums (1998–2000)
* Serghei Cobzac – guitar (1994–1996)
* Serghei Pushnina – guitar (1996)
* Victor Cosparmac – guitar (April 2002 – December 2004)
* Vadim Bogdan – guitar (November 2005 – April 2006)
* Mihai Gincu – drums (January 2003 – January 2004)
* Pezza Butnaru – drums (January–March 2004)
* Alexandr Polenov – vocals, guitar (1991–1993)
* Valera Pugaci – flute (1991–1993)
* Vadim Eremeev – bass (January 2003 – February 2004)
* Eugen Didic – trumpet (January 1999 – September 2000)
* Ion Stavila – trumpet (September–December 2000)

==Discography==
===Albums===
* &quot;Hardcore Moldovenesc&quot; (&quot;Moldovan Hardcore&quot;) (1996)
* &quot;Tabăra Noastră&quot; (&quot;Our camp&quot;) (1999)
* &quot;Remixes&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Agroromantica&quot; (2001)
* &quot;450 De Oi&quot; (&quot;450 Sheep&quot;) (2003)
* &quot;Ethnomecanica&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Белое Вино/Красное вино&quot; (&quot;White Wine/Red Wine&quot;) (2010)
* &quot;Basta Mafia!&quot; (&quot;Stop Mafia!&quot;) (2012)
* &quot;20 De Veri&quot; (&quot;20 Summers&quot;) (2015)
* &quot;Bestiarium&quot; (2019)

===Singles===
*&quot;Bunica bate doba&quot; (2005)
*&quot;So Lucky&quot; (2011)

===Participation in compilation albums===
*&quot;Budzma! Tuzin. Perazagruzka-2&quot; (2011), track &quot;Стоп-мафія&quot;

==See also==
*List of music released by Moldovan artists that has charted in major music markets

==References==
==External links==

* Zdob și Zdub official page (in English, Romanian, and Russian)
* LiveJournal (only in Russian)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q169146" start="0" end="12" title="Zdob și Zdub" label="Zdob și Zdub"/>
<link wikidata="Q170239" start="18" end="30" title="onomatopoeia" label="onomatopoeic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="66" end="73" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425661" start="75" end="84" title="folk punk" label="folk punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="100" end="108" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q4300291" start="119" end="138" title="Moldova in the Eurovision Song Contest 2005" label="represented Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q10151" start="146" end="174" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2005" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="178" end="182" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="184" end="191" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10160" start="261" end="289" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2011" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="293" end="303" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="305" end="312" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q110647000" start="350" end="375" title="Moldova in the Eurovision Song Contest 2022" label="represented Moldova again"/>
<link wikidata="Q96929880" start="384" end="412" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2022" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="416" end="421" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="423" end="428" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="734" end="741" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006102" start="874" end="882" title="Strășeni" label="Strășeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="963" end="971" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387884" start="1334" end="1340" title="Cuibul" label="Cuibul"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="1409" end="1417" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="2031" end="2039" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249862" start="2187" end="2194" title="Rapcore" label="Rapcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="2200" end="2224" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="2354" end="2361" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="2763" end="2770" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q803876" start="3138" end="3147" title="Biohazard (band)" label="Biohazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891331" start="3152" end="3164" title="Rollins Band" label="Rollins Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="3168" end="3174" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050843" start="3251" end="3263" title="Tequilajazzz" label="Tequilajazzz"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="3301" end="3309" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="3400" end="3406" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="3669" end="3677" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963103" start="3706" end="3715" title="Kirpichi" label="Kirpitchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="3727" end="3741" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q83404" start="3773" end="3782" title="Timișoara" label="Timișoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q178642" start="5512" end="5519" title="Soulfly" label="Soulfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q307391" start="5521" end="5533" title="Max Cavalera" label="Max Cavalera"/>
<link wikidata="Q239074" start="5538" end="5547" title="Sepultura" label="Sepultura"/>
<link wikidata="Q41116" start="5683" end="5693" title="Red Square" label="Red Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q126877" start="5729" end="5739" title="Gorky Park (Moscow)" label="Gorky Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="5788" end="5809" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6300" end="6318" title="EuroSonic Festival" label="EuroSonic Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q749" start="6322" end="6331" title="Groningen" label="Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="6337" end="6348" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6453" end="6468" title="Sziget festival" label="Sziget festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q914820" start="6538" end="6550" title="Pepsi Sziget" label="Pepsi Sziget"/>
<link wikidata="Q236112" start="6641" end="6653" title="Susanne Vega" label="Susanne Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q491661" start="6655" end="6665" title="Guano Apes" label="Guano Apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189080" start="6667" end="6675" title="Lou Reed" label="Lou Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q619067" start="6677" end="6687" title="Apollo 440" label="Apollo 440"/>
<link wikidata="Q157497" start="6689" end="6704" title="Bloodhound Gang" label="Bloodhound Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130493" start="6706" end="6714" title="Therapy?" label="Therapy?"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="6716" end="6721" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="6837" end="6843" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q722902" start="6910" end="6927" title="Slavianski Bazaar" label="Slavianski Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="6940" end="6944" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="6946" end="6953" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q94882" start="7725" end="7739" title="Emir Kusturica" label="Emir Kusturica"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="10391" end="10399" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="13351" end="13359" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="20378" end="20386" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="22498" end="22506" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737004" start="22624" end="22629" title="Bacau" label="Bacau"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="22631" end="22638" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="23299" end="23307" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24029" end="24046" title="Channel TV Centre" label="Channel TV Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="24048" end="24054" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="24146" end="24162" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="24269" end="24276" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="24278" end="24289" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="24294" end="24301" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="24489" end="24496" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="24498" end="24505" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="24507" end="24514" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="24519" end="24526" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="24538" end="24546" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="24548" end="24554" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735" start="24556" end="24565" title="Innsbruck" label="Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="24567" end="24573" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="24575" end="24581" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="24583" end="24590" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="24592" end="24596" title="Koln" label="Koln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295" start="24598" end="24606" title="Dortmund" label="Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="24611" end="24621" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="24701" end="24709" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q721414" start="25282" end="25301" title="UEFA Euro 2008 Group C" label="Romania–Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q241864" start="25305" end="25319" title="UEFA Euro 2008" label="UEFA Euro 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040" start="25541" end="25550" title="Karlsruhe" label="Karlsruhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q573294" start="25552" end="25562" title="Rheinhafen" label="Rheinhafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="27381" end="27388" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="27487" end="27494" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="27496" end="27503" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="27514" end="27521" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="27526" end="27537" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q900" start="28273" end="28278" title="Kazan" label="Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="28395" end="28401" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="28502" end="28521" title="Republic of Moldova" label="Republic of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="28523" end="28530" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="29338" end="29354" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="29587" end="29608" title="post-Soviet countries" label="post-Soviet countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4300291" start="29806" end="29823" title="Moldova in the Eurovision Song Contest 2005" label="represent Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q10151" start="29860" end="29888" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2005" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445233" start="30291" end="30308" title="Moldova in the Eurovision Song Contest 2011" label="represent Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q10160" start="30316" end="30344" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2011" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445233" start="30393" end="30413" title="So Lucky (Zdob și Zdub song)" label="&amp;quot;So Lucky&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="30765" end="30781" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q110738813" start="30868" end="30878" title="Trenulețul" label="Trenulețul"/>
<link wikidata="Q612637" start="30899" end="30916" title="Teleradio-Moldova" label="Teleradio-Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q96929880" start="30949" end="30977" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2022" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="30981" end="30986" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56452706" start="31077" end="31091" title="Frații Advahov" label="Frații Advahov"/>
<link wikidata="Q87592982" start="31121" end="31146" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Moldova" label="COVID-19 cases in Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4300291" start="33851" end="33867" title="Bunica bate doba" label="Bunica bate doba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445233" start="33888" end="33896" title="So Lucky (Zdob și Zdub song)" label="So Lucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q64952542" start="33960" end="33989" title="Budzma! Tuzin. Perazagruzka-2" label="Budzma! Tuzin. Perazagruzka-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q131437646" start="34048" end="34130" title="List of music released by Moldovan artists that has charted in major music markets" label="List of music released by Moldovan artists that has charted in major music markets"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407792" wikidata="Q2946134" url="?curid=407792" title="Centreville, New Brunswick">
<text>Centreville is a former village in Carleton County, New Brunswick, Canada. It held village status prior to 2023 and is now part of the town of Carleton North.

Centreville is located only two miles from the border of Maine, US, at the Bridgewater crossing. Within Centreville there are three churches located in the town limits, the St. James Anglican Church, St. Pauls United Church and the Centreville Baptist Church. Centreville has a post office and is a service centre serving small communities such as Knoxford, Williamstown and Tracey Mills which are just outside the village. This is also a large farming community.

Centreville is also the host of annual tractor pulls. Alongside potatoes, it&#x27;s probably what the community is best known for.

== History ==
Centreville was first founded by Thomas Johnston, who immigrated to New Brunswick from Ireland in 1821. In October 1896 construction of a railroad was started but was later stopped because of funding in December 1896. In October 1912, construction of the railroad was resumed and completed on October 1, 1914.

Centreville received its first telephone line 1894, which connected it with the town of Woodstock. It was not until 1902 that lines were added to the surrounding areas.

In February 1924, the installation of the electric line was completed and Centreville was able to use electricity.

Without a doubt, Centreville&#x27;s biggest pastime is its annual tractor pull. The event started with farmers coming together with their best tractors and seeing who could tow the heaviest weight to gain bragging rights. Today it has developed into a weekend long event with modified tractors and trucks, instead of the traditional tractors.

On 1 January 2023, Centreville amalgamated with the town of Florenceville-Bristol, the village of Bath, and all or part of nine local service districts to form the new town of Carleton North. The community&#x27;s name remains in official use.

==Education==
There is a K-8 school, Centreville Community School, located in the centre of the village, housing approx. 250 students. This is part of ASD-W (Previously school district 14). Before the school became a community school there was an elementary school located on the same grounds as what was then the Centreville Middle School. Centreville Elementary School was closed in 2004 and the grades consolidated into one building: Centreville Community School. The old elementary school was torn down in 2011.

Centreville is one of several communities within Carleton County that historically participated in the annual Potato Break. Potato Break was a 2 &amp; 1/2 week break from school around potato harvesting time (mid-September through early October) that allowed students the opportunity to help with the potato harvest, although working on the break was not mandatory. Schools that participated in Potato Break began classes in early August to compensate for the time taken off for Potato Break. This affected all feeder schools for Carleton North High School. Many of the other schools in the nearby areas did not participate in Potato Break because of one simple reason; less potatoes grown. These schools start school after Labor Day. The need for Potato Break was under review by the DEC and School District 14. For many years now, mechanization in the fields has vastly reduced the need for student labor.

Update: Potato Break was once again publicly reviewed in 2010/2011 and it was decided by the DEC, the Superintendent for School District 14 and the Minister of Education that a new system be put in place. Students who choose to work for a farmer and who are of minimum age to be working in the harvest are allowed time out of class over the harvest period; resources have been put in place by the school district to enable these students to keep up with their studies.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Centreville had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

== Economy ==
BWS Manufacturing is a family run company located in Centreville where they specialize in the production of trailers for the agriculture, construction, forestry and commercial industries. BWS Manufacturing has been a major employer and contributor to the local economy for the past 48 years in Centreville.

Metalfab Ltd. is another company that has called Centreville home since 1967, employing 40 people from the surrounding areas. Metalfab Ltd. is specialized in building custom fire trucks for their customers depending on their needs.

HSF Foods Ltd. is also located in Centreville and has been located in the village since 2006. HSF Foods Ltd. processes fresh potatoes into dehydrated potato flakes for industries around the world.

Centreville Equipment Ltd. is an agricultural based company located in Centreville. They sell farm equipment and parts to the surrounding areas.

M&amp;D Convenience was notably the hub of Centreville as it provided the residents with easy access to fuel, groceries, and essential hardware until it shut down in late 2017 after the owner chose to retire.

Dingee&#x27;s Energy Systems also located in Centreville offering heating solutions to the surrounding areas.

==Notable people==
==See also==
*List of communities in New Brunswick

==References==
==External links==
* Village of Centreville</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2946134" start="0" end="11" title="Centreville, New Brunswick" label="Centreville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429216" start="35" end="50" title="Carleton County, New Brunswick" label="Carleton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="52" end="65" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q116243403" start="143" end="157" title="Carleton North, New Brunswick" label="Carleton North"/>
<link wikidata="Q913937" start="235" end="255" title="Bridgewater, Maine" label="Bridgewater crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198066" start="508" end="516" title="Knoxford, New Brunswick" label="Knoxford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="518" end="530" title="Williamstown Carleton County New Brunswick" label="Williamstown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="535" end="547" title="Tracey Mills, New Brunswick" label="Tracey Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074056" start="1772" end="1793" title="Florenceville-Bristol" label="Florenceville-Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891212" start="1810" end="1814" title="Bath, New Brunswick" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032041" start="1840" end="1863" title="Local service district (New Brunswick)" label="local service districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q116243403" start="1888" end="1902" title="Carleton North, New Brunswick" label="Carleton North"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2583" end="2595" title="Potato Break" label="Potato Break"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041231" start="3003" end="3029" title="Carleton North High School" label="Carleton North High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006100" start="3266" end="3284" title="New Brunswick School District 14" label="School District 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="3878" end="3903" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="3917" end="3934" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111821" start="5368" end="5404" title="List of communities in New Brunswick" label="List of communities in New Brunswick"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407793" wikidata="Q3359102" url="?curid=407793" title="Sleepy cod">
<text>The sleepy cod (&quot;Oxyeleotris lineolata&quot;) is a medium-sized fish in the family Butidae, native to tropical fresh waters of northern Australia and questionably from New Guinea. It is a member of the order Perciformes, thus is unrelated to the true cods in the order Gadiformes. Neither are they closely related to the Australian freshwater cods such as the Murray cod of the genus &quot;Maccullochella&quot;.

They are one of the most favoured freshwater fish in Australia for eating, having white, flaky flesh, low fat content, and a mild flavour.

==Morphology and biology==
The sleepy cod can reach a length of , though most do not exceed . Fish up to have been caught by anglers.

They are dark brown along the back and paler on the sides, with fuzzy dark lines running along scale rows. Juveniles have a white or cream patch running along the back and top of the head, with brown sides and a white belly.

Females spawn in the benthic zone from October to February. Males guard nests of up to 70,000 eggs until larvae hatch, usually after 5–7 days.

They are usually found in quiet or slow-flowing water in freshwater rivers, creeks, and billabongs throughout northern Australia.

==References==
==External links==
*Native Fish Australia - Sleepy Cod page
* Photograph</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3359102" start="4" end="14" title="Sleepy cod" label="sleepy cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017917" start="88" end="95" title="Butidae" label="Butidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="107" end="115" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="141" end="150" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="173" end="183" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127595" start="213" end="224" title="Perciformes" label="Perciformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q216241" start="274" end="284" title="Gadiformes" label="Gadiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23366" start="365" end="375" title="Murray cod" label="Murray cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237181" start="395" end="409" title="Maccullochella" label="Maccullochella"/>
<link wikidata="Q686881" start="940" end="952" title="benthic zone" label="benthic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q803749" start="1151" end="1160" title="billabong" label="billabong"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407794" wikidata="Q7096894" url="?curid=407794" title="Operation Chettyford">
<text>During World War II, Operation Chettyford (also known as Plan Chettyford) was the code name for a tactical deception mounted in January 1944 in support of the 1944 Allied invasion at Anzio. The plan was meant to convince the Germans that Allied forces led by George Patton would launch a pincer attack against Pisa on the west coast of Italy and Rimini on the east coast, and aimed to contain German reserves to northern Italy.

To promote the deception, double agents were deployed to the regions, and dummy Sherman tanks, vehicles and guns were set up to simulate the presence of Allied forces. The notional targets of Pisa and Rimini were scouted by air and bombed. Dummy radio traffic was put out by the US Seventh Army headquarters in Sicily, and pamphlets of the history and cultural artifacts of Pisa were distributed. Patton made a well-publicized visit to units based around Cairo, arranging photographs with senior Polish commanders.

Although the Operation Chettyford deceptions went largely unnoticed by the Germans, later tactical deceptions in Italy in 1944 were modeled after it.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7" end="19" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096894" start="21" end="41" title="Operation Chettyford" label="Operation Chettyford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096894" start="57" end="72" title="Operation Chettyford" label="Plan Chettyford"/>
<link wikidata="Q696844" start="171" end="188" title="Operation Shingle" label="invasion at Anzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q186492" start="259" end="272" title="George Patton" label="George Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q146889" start="288" end="301" title="pincer movement" label="pincer attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q13375" start="310" end="314" title="Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369" start="346" end="352" title="Rimini" label="Rimini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058375" start="455" end="468" title="double agents" label="double agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q191643" start="509" end="521" title="Sherman tank" label="Sherman tank"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407800" wikidata="Q30908" url="?curid=407800" title="William Tell">
<text>William Tell (, ; ; ; ) is a legendary folk hero of Switzerland. 
According to the legend, Tell was an expert mountain climber and marksman with a crossbow who assassinated Albrecht Gessler, a tyrannical reeve of the Austrian dukes of the House of Habsburg positioned in Altdorf, in the canton of Uri. Tell&#x27;s defiance and tyrannicide encouraged the population to open rebellion and to make a pact against the foreign rulers with neighbouring Schwyz and Unterwalden, marking the foundation of the Swiss Confederacy. Tell was considered the father of the Swiss Confederacy.
Set in the early 14th century (traditional date 1307, during the rule of Albert of Habsburg), the first written records of the legend date to the latter part of the 15th century, when the Swiss Confederacy was gaining military and political influence. Tell is a central figure in Swiss national historiography, along with Arnold von Winkelried, the hero of Sempach (1386). He was important as a symbol during the formative stage of modern Switzerland in the 19th century, known as the period of Restoration and Regeneration, as well as in the wider history of 18th- to 19th-century Europe as a symbol of resistance against aristocratic rule, especially in the Revolutions of 1848 against the House of Habsburg which had ruled Austria for centuries.

== Legend ==
The first reference to Tell, as yet without a specified given name, appears in the &quot;White Book of Sarnen&quot; (German: &quot;Weisses Buch von Sarnen&quot;). This volume was written in c. 1474 by Hans Schriber, state secretary (&quot;Landschreiber&quot;) Obwalden. 
It mentions the Rütli oath (German: &quot;Rütlischwur&quot;) and names Tell as one of the conspirators of the Rütli, whose heroic tyrannicide triggered the Burgenbruch rebellion.

An equally early account of Tell is found in the &quot;Tellenlied&quot;, a song composed in the 1470s, with its oldest extant manuscript copy dating to 1501. The song begins with the Tell legend, which it presents as the origin of the Confederacy, calling Tell the &quot;first confederate&quot;. The narrative includes Tell&#x27;s apple shot, his preparation of a second arrow to shoot Gessler, and his escape, but it does not mention any assassination of Gessler.
The text then enumerates the cantons of the Confederacy, and says was expanded with &quot;current events&quot; during the course of the Burgundy Wars, ending with the death of Charles the Bold in 1477.

Aegidius Tschudi, writing c. 1570, presents an extended version of the legend. Still essentially based on the account in the &quot;White Book&quot;, Tschudi adds further detail.
Tschudi is known to habitually have &quot;fleshed out&quot; his sources, so that all detail from Tschudi not found in the earlier accounts may be suspected of being Tschudi&#x27;s invention.
Such additional detail includes Tell&#x27;s given name Wilhelm, and his being a native of Bürglen, Uri in the Schächental, the precise date of the apple-shot, given as 18 November 1307 as well as the account of Tell&#x27;s death in 1354.
It is Tschudi&#x27;s version that became influential in early modern Switzerland and entered public consciousness as the &quot;William Tell&quot; legend. According to Tschudi&#x27;s account, William Tell was known as a strong man and an expert shot with the crossbow. In his time, the House of Habsburg emperors of Austria were seeking to dominate Uri, and Tell became one of the conspirators of Werner Stauffacher who vowed to resist Habsburg rule. Albrecht Gessler was the newly appointed Austrian &quot;Vogt&quot; of Altdorf, Switzerland. He raised a pole under the village linden tree, hung his hat on top of it, and demanded that all the townsfolk bow before it.

In Tschudi&#x27;s account, on 18 November 1307, Tell visited Altdorf with his young son. He passed by the hat, but publicly refused to bow to it, and was consequently arrested. Gessler was intrigued by Tell&#x27;s famed marksmanship, but resentful of his defiance, so he devised a cruel punishment. Tell and his son were both to be executed; however, he could redeem his life by shooting an apple off the head of his son Walter in a single attempt. Tell split the apple with a bolt from his crossbow. Gessler then noticed that Tell had removed two crossbow bolts from his quiver, so he asked why. Tell was reluctant to answer, but Gessler promised that he would not kill him; he replied that, had he killed his son, he would have killed Gessler with the second bolt. Gessler was furious and ordered Tell to be bound, saying that he had promised to spare his life, but would imprison him for the remainder of his life.

Tschudi&#x27;s continues that Tell was being carried in Gessler&#x27;s boat to the dungeon in the castle at Küssnacht when a storm broke on Lake Lucerne, and the guards were afraid that their boat would sink. They begged Gessler to remove Tell&#x27;s shackles so that he could take the helm and save them. Gessler gave in, but Tell steered the boat to a rocky place and leaped out. The site is known in the &quot;White Book&quot; as the &quot;Tellsplatte&quot; (&quot;Tell&#x27;s slab&quot;); it has been marked by a memorial chapel since the 16th century. Tell ran cross-country to Küssnacht with Gessler in pursuit. Tell assassinated him using the second crossbow bolt, along a stretch of the road cut through the rock between Immensee and Küssnacht, which is known as the &quot;Hohle Gasse.&quot; Tell&#x27;s act sparked a rebellion, which led to the formation of the Old Swiss Confederacy. According to Tschudi, Tell fought again against Austria in the 1315 Battle of Morgarten. Tschudi also has an account of Tell&#x27;s death in 1354, according to which he was killed trying to save a child from drowning in the Schächental River in Uri.

==Early modern reception==
=== Chronicles ===

There are a number of sources for the Tell legend later than the earliest account in the &quot;White Book of Sarnen&quot; but earlier than Tschudi&#x27;s version of ca. 1570.

These include the account in the chronicle of Melchior Russ from Lucerne. Dated to 1482, this is an incoherent compilation of older writings, including the &quot;Song of the Founding of the Confederation&quot;, Conrad Justinger&#x27;s &quot;Bernese Chronicle,&quot; and the &quot;Chronicle of the State of Bern&quot; (in German, &quot;Chronik der Stadt Bern&quot;).
Another early account is in Petermann Etterlin&#x27;s &quot;Chronicle of the Swiss Confederation&quot; (German: &quot;Kronika von der loblichen Eydtgenossenschaft&quot;) of 1507, the earliest printed version of the Tell story.

The &quot;Chronicon Helveticum&quot; was compiled by Aegidius Tschudi of Glarus in the years leading up to his death in early 1572. 
For more than 150 years, it existed only in manuscript form, before finally being edited in 1734–1736. Therefore, there is no clear &quot;date of publication&quot; of the chronicle, and its date of composition can only be given approximately, as &quot;ca. 1570&quot;, or &quot;before 1572&quot;. It is Tschudi&#x27;s account of the legend, however, which became the major model for later writers, even prior to its edition in print in the 1730s,

=== Popular veneration ===

A widespread veneration of Tell, including sight-seeing excursions to the scenes of his deeds, can be ascertained for the early 16th century.
Heinrich Brennwald in the early 16th century mentions the chapel (&quot;Tellskapelle&quot;) on the site of Tell&#x27;s leap from his captors&#x27; boat. Tschudi mentions a &quot;holy cottage&quot; (&quot;heilig hüslin&quot;) built on the site of Gessler&#x27;s assassination. Peter Hagendorf, a soldier in the Thirty Years&#x27; War, mentions a visit to &#x27;the chapel where William Tell escaped&#x27; in his diary.

The first recorded Tell play (&quot;Tellspiel&quot;), known as the &quot;Urner Tellspiel&quot; (&quot;Tell Play of Uri&quot;), was probably performed in the winter of either 1512 or 1513 in Altdorf.

The church of Bürglen had a bell dedicated to Tell from 1581, and a nearby chapel has a fresco dated to 1582 showing Tell&#x27;s death in the Schächenbach.

=== The Three Tells ===
The Three Tells (&quot;die Drei Tellen&quot;, also &quot;die Drei Telle&quot;) were symbolic figures of the Swiss Peasant War of 1653. They expressed the hope of the subject population to repeat the success story of the rebellion against Habsburg in the early 14th century.

By the 18th century, the Drei Tellen had become associated with a sleeping hero legend. They were said to be asleep in a cave at the Rigi. The return of Tell in times of need was already foretold in the Tellenlied of 1653 and symbolically fulfilled in the impersonation of the Three Tells by costumed individuals, in one instance culminating in an actual assassination executed by these impersonators in historical costume.

Tell during the 16th century had become closely associated and eventually merged with the Rütlischwur legend, and the &quot;Three Tells&quot; represented the three conspirators or &quot;Eidgenossen&quot; Walter Fürst, Arnold von Melchtal and Werner Stauffacher.

In 1653, three men dressed in historical costume representing the Three Tells appeared in Schüpfheim. Other impersonations of the Three Tells also appeared in the Freie Ämter and in the Emmental.

The first impersonators of the Three Tells were Hans Zemp, Kaspar Unternährer of Schüpfheim and Ueli Dahinden of Hasle. They appeared at a number of important peasant conferences during the war, symbolizing the continuity of the present rebellion with the resistance movement against the Habsburg overlords at the origin of the Swiss Confederacy. Unternährer and Dahinden fled to the Entlebuch alps before the arrival of the troops of general Sebastian Peregrin Zwyers; Zemp escaped to the Alsace. After the suppression of the rebellion, the peasants voted for a tyrannicide, directly inspired by the Tell legend, attempting to kill the Lucerne Schultheiss Ulrich Dulliker.

Dahinden and Unternährer returned in their roles of Tells, joined by Hans Stadelmann replacing Zemp. In an ambush, they managed to injure Dulliker and killed a member of the Lucerne parliament, Caspar Studer. The assassination attempt — an exceptional act in the culture of the Old Swiss Confederacy — was widely recognized and welcomed among the peasant population, but its impact was not sufficient to rekindle the rebellion.

Even though it did not have any direct political effect, its symbolic value was considerable, placing the Lucerne authorities in the role of the tyrant (Habsburg and Gessler) and the peasant population in that of the freedom fighters (Tell). The Three Tells after the deed went to mass, still wearing their costumes, without being molested. Dahinden and Unternährer were eventually killed in October 1653 by Lucerne troops under Colonel Alphons von Sonnenberg. In July 1654, Zemp betrayed his successor Stadelmann in exchange for pardon and Stadelmann was executed on 15 July 1654.

The Three Tells appear in a 1672 comedy by Johann Caspar Weissenbach.
The &quot;sleeping hero&quot; version of the Three Tells legend was published in &quot;Deutsche Sagen&quot; by the Brothers Grimm in 1816 (no. 298). It is also the subject of Felicia Hemans&#x27;s poem &quot;The Cavern of the Three Tells&quot; of 1824.
== Modern reception ==

Throughout the long nineteenth century, and into the World War II period, Tell was perceived as a symbol of rebellion against tyranny both in Switzerland and in Europe.

Antoine-Marin Lemierre wrote a play inspired by Tell in 1766 and revived it in 1786. The success of this work established the association of Tell as a fighter against tyranny with the history of the French Revolution.
The French revolutionary fascination with Tell was reflected in Switzerland with the establishment of the Helvetic Republic. Tell became, as it were, the mascot of the short-lived republic, his figure being featured on its official seal. The French Navy also had a named , which was captured by the British Royal Navy in 1800.

Benito Juarez, President of Mexico and national hero, chose the alias &quot;Guillermo Tell&quot; (the Spanish version of William Tell) when he joined the Freemasons; he picked this name because he liked and admired the story and character of Tell whom he considered a symbol of freedom and resistance.

Tschudi&#x27;s &quot;Chronicon Helveticum&quot; continued to be taken at face value as a historiographical source well into the 19th century, 
so that Tschudi&#x27;s version of the legend is not only used as a model in Friedrich Schiller&#x27;s play &quot;William Tell&quot; (1804)
but is also reported in historiographical works of the time, including Johannes von Müller&#x27;s &quot;History of the Swiss Confederation&quot; (German: &quot;Geschichte Schweizerischer Eidgenossenschaft&quot;, 1780).

Johann Wolfgang von Goethe learned of the Tell saga during his travels through Switzerland between 1775 and 1795. He obtained a copy of Tschudi&#x27;s chronicles and considered writing a play about Tell, but ultimately gave the idea to his friend Friedrich von Schiller, who in 1803–04 wrote the play &quot;Wilhelm Tell,&quot; first performed on 17 March 1804, in Weimar. 
Schiller&#x27;s Tell is heavily inspired by the political events of the late 18th century, the French and American revolutions, in particular. Schiller&#x27;s play was performed at Interlaken (the &quot;Tellspiele&quot;) in the summers of 1912 to 1914, 1931 to 1939 and every year since 1947. In 2004 it was first performed in Altdorf itself.

Gioachino Rossini used Schiller&#x27;s play as the basis for his 1829 opera &quot;William Tell.&quot; The &quot;William Tell Overture&quot; is one of his best-known and most frequently imitated pieces of music; in the 20th century, the finale of the &quot;overture&quot; became the theme for the radio, television, and motion picture incarnations of The Lone Ranger, a fictional American frontier hero.

Around 1836 the first William Tell patterned playing cards were produced in Pest, Hungary. They were inspired by Schiller&#x27;s play and made during tense relations with the ruling Habsburgs. The cards became popular throughout the Austrian Empire during the Revolution of 1848. Characters and scenes from the opera William Tell are recognisable on the court cards and Aces of William Tell cards, playing cards that were designed in Hungary around 1835. These cards are still the most common German-suited playing cards in that part of the world today. Characters from the play portrayed on the Obers and Unters include: Hermann Geszler, Walter Fürst, Rudolf Harras and William Tell.

In 1858, the Swiss Colonization Society, a group of Swiss and German immigrants to the United States, founded its first (and only) planned city on the banks of the Ohio River in Perry County, Indiana. The town was originally dubbed Helvetia, but was quickly changed to Tell City to honor the legendary Swiss hero. The city became known for its manufacturing, especially of fine wood furniture. William Tell and symbols of an apple with an arrow through it are prominent in the town, which includes a bronze statue of Tell and his son, based on the one in Altdorf, Switzerland. The statue was erected on a fountain in front of city hall in 1974. Tell City High School uses these symbols in its crest or logo, and the sports teams are called &quot;The Marksmen.&quot; The William Tell Overture is often played by the school&#x27;s pep band at high school games. Each August since 1958, Tell City&#x27;s centennial year, the town has held &quot;Schweizer Fest,&quot; a community festival of entertainment, stage productions, historical presentations, carnival rides, beer garden, sporting events and class reunions, to honor its Swiss-German heritage. Many of the activities occur on the grounds of City Hall and Main Street, at the feet of the Tell statue.

John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of Abraham Lincoln, was inspired by Tell. Lamenting the negative reaction to his action, Booth wrote in his journal on 21 April 1865 &quot;with every man&#x27;s hand against me, I am here in despair. And why; For doing what Brutus was honored for and what made Tell a Hero. And yet I for striking down a greater tyrant than they ever knew am looked upon as a common cutthroat.&quot; (He himself was shot to death, without standing trial, days later.)

Following a national competition, won by Richard Kissling, Altdorf in 1895 erected a monument to its hero. Kissling casts Tell as a peasant and man of the mountains, with strong features and muscular limbs. His powerful hand rests lovingly on the shoulder of little Walter, but the apple is not shown. The depiction is in marked contrast with that used by the Helvetic Republic, where Tell is shown as a landsknecht rather than a peasant, with a sword at his belt and a feathered hat, bending down to pick up his son who is still holding the apple.
The painting of Tell by Ferdinand Hodler (1897) became iconic. Tell is represented as facing the viewer, with his right hand raised, the left holding the crossbow. The representation was designed as part of a larger scene showing &quot;Gessler&#x27;s death&quot;, one of seven scenes created for the Swiss National Museum competition. 
Hodler&#x27;s depiction of Tell was often described as sacral, and compared to classical depictionons of God Father, Moses, John the Baptist, Jesus, or the Archangel Michael. In Tell&#x27;s bearded face, Hodler combines self-portrait with allusion the face of Christ.

The first film about Tell was made by French director Charles Pathé in 1900; only a short fragment survives.
A version of the legend was retold in P.G. Wodehouse&#x27;s &quot;William Tell Told Again&quot; (1904), written in prose and verse with characteristic Wodehousian flair.
The design of the Federal 5 francs coin issued from 1922 features the bust of a generic &quot;mountain shepherd&quot; designed by Paul Burkard, but due to a similarity of the bust with Kissling&#x27;s statue, in spite of the missing beard, it was immediately widely identified as Tell.

Adolf Hitler was enthusiastic about Schiller&#x27;s play, quoting it in his &quot;Mein Kampf,&quot; and approving of a German/Swiss co-production of the play in which Hermann Göring&#x27;s mistress Emmy Sonnemann appeared as Tell&#x27;s wife. However, on 3 June 1941, Hitler had the play banned. The reason for the ban is not known, but may have been related to the failed assassination attempt on Hitler in 1938 by young Swiss Maurice Bavaud (executed on 14 May 1941, and later dubbed &quot;a new William Tell&quot; by Rolf Hochhuth), or the subversive nature of the play. Hitler is reported to have exclaimed at a banquet in 1942: &quot;Why did Schiller have to immortalize that Swiss sniper!&quot;

Charlie Chaplin parodies William Tell in his famous 1928 silent movie &quot;The Circus.&quot;
Salvador Dalí painted &quot;The Old Age of William Tell&quot; and &quot;William Tell and Gradiva&quot; in 1931, and &quot;The Enigma of William Tell&quot; in 1933.
Spanish playwright Alfonso Sastre re-worked the legend in 1955 in his &quot;Guillermo Tell tiene los ojos tristes&quot; (William Tell has sad eyes); it was not performed until the Franco regime in Spain ended.

In Switzerland, the importance of Tell had declined somewhat by the end of the 19th century, outside of Altdorf and Interlaken which established their tradition of performing Schiller&#x27;s play in regular intervals in 1899 and 1912, respectively. 
During the World Wars, Tell was again revived, somewhat artificially, as a national symbol. 
For example, in 1923 the Swiss Post introduced horns for their coach service based on the overture of Rossini&#x27;s &quot;Tell&quot; opera, 
and in 1931, the image of a crossbow was introduced as a logo indicating Swiss products. The &quot;Tell-Museum&quot; in Bürglen, Uri, opened in 1966.

After 1968, with ideological shift of academic mainstream from a liberal-radical to a deconstructivist leftist 
outlook, Swiss historians were looking to dismantle the foundational legends of Swiss statehood as unhistorical national myth.
Max Frisch&#x27;s &quot;William Tell for Schools&quot; (1971) deconstructs the legend by reversing the characters of the protagonists: Gessler is a well-meaning and patient administrator who is faced with the barbarism of a back-corner of the empire, while Tell is an irascible simpleton.
Tell still remains a popular figure in Swiss culture. According to a 2004 survey, a majority of Swiss believed that he actually existed.

&quot;Schweizer Helden&quot; (&quot;Swiss Heroes&quot;, English title &quot;Unlikely Heroes&quot;) is a 2014 film about the performance of a simplified version of Schiller&#x27;s play by asylum seekers in Switzerland.

The Japanese historical fantasy manga series &quot;Wolfsmund&quot;, written and illustrated by Mitsuhisa Kuji and published by Enterbrain, is a retelling of the rebellion started by William Tell. The story revolves around the oppression that took place during the Middle Ages in the middle cantons of Switzerland.

In the 2019 Spanish comedy film &quot;The Little Switzerland&quot;, a Spanish town () discovers the tomb of Tell&#x27;s son and tries to become a Swiss canton (), affecting a Swiss identity.

== Historicity debate ==
The historicity of William Tell has been subject to debate. François Guillimann, a statesman of Fribourg and later historian and advisor of the Habsburg Emperor Rudolf II, wrote to Melchior Goldast in 1607: &quot;I followed popular belief by reporting certain details in my &quot;Swiss antiquities&quot; [published in 1598], but when I examine them closely the whole story seems to me to be pure fable.&quot;

In 1760, Simeon Uriel Freudenberger from Luzern anonymously published a tract arguing that the legend of Tell in all likelihood was based on the Danish saga of Palnatoke. A French translation of his book by Gottlieb Emanuel von Haller (&quot;Guillaume Tell, Fable danoise&quot;), published under Haller&#x27;s name to protect Freudenberger, was burnt in Altdorf.

The skeptical view of Tell&#x27;s existence remained very unpopular, especially after the adoption of Tell as depicted in Schiller&#x27;s 1804 play as national hero in the nascent Swiss patriotism of the Restoration and Regeneration period of the Swiss Confederation. In the 1840s, Joseph Eutych Kopp (1793–1866) published skeptical reviews of the folkloristic aspects of the foundational legends of the Old Confederacy, causing &quot;polemical debates&quot; both within and outside of academia. 
De Capitani (2013) cites the controversy surrounding Kopp in the 1840s as the turning point after which doubts in Tell&#x27;s historicity &quot;could no longer be ignored&quot;.

From the second half of the 19th century, it has been largely undisputed among historians that there is no contemporary (14th-century) evidence for Tell as a historical individual, let alone for the apple-shot story.
Debate in the late 19th to 20th centuries mostly surrounded the extent of the &quot;historical nucleus&quot; in the chronistic traditions surrounding the early Confederacy.

The desire to defend the historicity of the &quot;Befreiungstradition&quot; (&quot;liberation tradition&quot;) of Swiss history had a political component, as since the 17th century its celebration had become mostly confined to the Catholic cantons, so that the declaration of parts of the tradition as ahistorical was seen as an attack by the urban Protestant cantons on the rural Catholic cantons. 
The decision, taken in 1891, to make 1 August the Swiss National Day is to be seen in this context, an ostentative move away from the traditional &quot;Befreiungstradition&quot; and the celebration of the deed of Tell to the purely documentary evidence of the Federal Charter of 1291. In this context, Wilhelm Oechsli was commissioned by the federal government with publishing a &quot;scientific account&quot; of the foundational period of the Confederacy in order to defend the choice of 1291 over 1307 (the traditional date of Tell&#x27;s deed and the Rütlischwur) as the foundational date of the Swiss state.
The canton of Uri, in defiant reaction to this decision taken at the federal level, erected the Tell Monument in Altdorf in 1895, with the date 1307 inscribed prominently on the base of the statue.

Later proposals for the identification of Tell as a historical individual, such as a 1986 publication deriving the name &quot;Tell&quot; from the placename &quot;Tellikon&quot; (modern Dällikon in the Canton of Zürich), are outside of the historiographical mainstream.

== Comparative mythology ==

The Tell legend has been compared to a number of other myths or legends, specifically in Norse mythology, involving a magical marksman coming to the aid of a suppressed people under the sway of a tyrant.
The story of a great outlaw successfully shooting an apple from his child&#x27;s head is an archetype present in the story of Egil in the Thidreks saga (associated with the god Ullr in Eddaic tradition) as well as in the stories of Adam Bell from England, Palnatoke from Denmark, and a story from Holstein.

Such parallels were pointed out as early as 1760 by Gottlieb Emanuel von Haller and the pastor Simeon Uriel Freudenberger in a book titled &quot;William Tell, a Danish Fable&quot; (German: &quot;Der Wilhelm Tell, ein dänisches Mährgen&quot;). This book offended Swiss citizens, and a copy of it was burnt publicly at the Altdorf square. Von Haller underwent a trial, but the authorities spared his life, as he made abject apologies.

Rochholz (1877) connects the similarity of the Tell legend to the stories of Egil and Palnatoke with the legends of a migration from Sweden to Switzerland during the Middle Ages. He also adduces parallels in folktales among the Finns and the Lapps (Sami). From pre-Christian Norse mythology, Rochholz compares Ullr, who bears the epithet of &quot;Boga-As&quot; (&quot;bow-god&quot;), Heimdall and also Odin himself, who according to the &quot;Gesta Danorum&quot; (Book 1, chapter 8.16) assisted Haddingus by shooting ten bolts from a crossbow in one shot, killing as many foes. Rochholz further compares Indo-European and oriental traditions and concludes (pp. 35–41) that the legend of the master marksman shooting an apple (or similar small target) was known outside the Germanic sphere (Germany, Scandinavia, England) and the adjacent regions (Finland and the Baltic) in India, Arabia, Persia and the Balkans (Serbia).

The Danish legend of Palnatoke, first attested in the twelfth-century &quot;Gesta Danorum&quot; by Saxo Grammaticus, is the earliest known parallel to the Tell legend. As with William Tell, Palnatoke is forced by the ruler (in this case King Harald Bluetooth) to shoot an apple off his son&#x27;s head as proof of his marksmanship. 
A striking similarity between William Tell and Palnatoke is that both heroes take more than one arrow out of their quiver. When asked why he pulled several arrows out of his quiver, Palnatoke, too, replies that if he had struck his son with the first arrow, he would have shot King Harald with the remaining two arrows. 
According to Saxo, Palnatoke later joins Harald&#x27;s son Swein Forkbeard in a rebellion and kills Harald with an arrow.

== See also ==
* Arnold Winkelried, Swiss cultural hero
* Stauffacherin, Swiss cultural hero
* Tell City, Indiana

Non-Swiss figures:
* Punker of Rohrbach
* Robin Hood
* Toni Bajada
* William Wallace, (historical) medieval Scottish hero

General:
* Historiography of Switzerland

== Notes and references ==
== Bibliography ==
*Bergier, Jean-François. &quot;Wilhelm Tell: Realität und Mythos&quot;. München: Paul List Verlag, 1990.
* 
*Everdell, William R. &quot;William Tell: The Failure of Kings in Switzerland,&quot; in &quot;The End of Kings: A History of Republics and Republicans.&quot; Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000. 
*Fiske, John. &quot;Myths and Myth-Makers: Old Tales and Superstitions Interpreted by Comparative Mythology&quot;, 1877. Ch. 1: (On-line) Quotes Saxo Grammaticus, the ballad of William of Cloudeslee, and instances other independent occurrences.
*Head, Randolph C. &quot;William Tell and His Comrades: Association and Fraternity in the Propaganda of Fifteenth- and Sixteenth-Century Switzerland.&quot; in &quot;The Journal of Modern History&quot; 67.3 (1995): 527–557.
*Marabello, Thomas Quinn (2023). &quot;The Origins of Democracy in Switzerland,&quot; &quot;Swiss American Historical Society Review&quot;, Vol. 59: No. 1. Page 95-97. Available at: https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/sahs_review/vol59/iss1/4
*Rochholz, Ernst Ludwig, &quot;Tell und Gessler in Sage und Geschichte. Nach urkundlichen Quellen&quot;, Heilbronn, 1877 (online copy).
*Salis, J.-R. v.: &quot;Ursprung, Gestalt, und Wirkung des schweizerischen Mythos von Tell&quot;, Bern, 1973.

== External links ==

*&quot;The Legend of William Tell&quot; by Markus Jud.
*&quot;The birth of the Swiss Confederation&quot;.
*Translation of Grimm&#x27;s Saga No. 298 &quot;The Three Tells&quot;
*Tell City, Indiana
*Translation of Grimm&#x27;s Saga No. 517 &quot;Wilhelm Tell&quot;
*&quot;The Contradiction&quot;
*Wilhelm Tell Festival, New Glarus
*William Tell is a lie; Coopzeitung 28/2004, interview with historian Roger Sablonier, Zurich, translated
*William Tell, Swissinfo special</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30908" start="0" end="12" title="William Tell" label="William Tell"/>
<link wikidata="Q84164296" start="39" end="48" title="folk hero" label="folk hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="52" end="63" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q181947" start="147" end="155" title="crossbow" label="crossbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q679128" start="173" end="189" title="Albrecht Gessler" label="Albrecht Gessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939408" start="204" end="209" title="Vogt (Switzerland)" label="reeve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="217" end="256" title="Duchy of Austria#House of Habsburg" label="Austrian dukes of the House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q68150" start="271" end="278" title="Altdorf, Uri" label="Altdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404" start="287" end="300" title="canton of Uri" label="canton of Uri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369583" start="327" end="338" title="tyrannicide" label="tyrannicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q668589" start="368" end="382" title="Burgenbruch" label="open rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q674223" start="397" end="401" title="Rütlischwur" label="pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q68155" start="447" end="453" title="Schwyz" label="Schwyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q214069" start="458" end="469" title="Unterwalden" label="Unterwalden"/>
<link wikidata="Q668589" start="483" end="518" title="foundation of the Old Swiss Confederacy" label="foundation of the Swiss Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153956" start="650" end="668" title="Albert I of Germany" label="Albert of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q435583" start="765" end="782" title="Old Swiss Confederacy" label="Swiss Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="857" end="886" title="Historiography of Switzerland#Building a national history" label="Swiss national historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q42717" start="899" end="920" title="Arnold von Winkelried" label="Arnold von Winkelried"/>
<link wikidata="Q661759" start="934" end="941" title="Battle of Sempach" label="Sempach"/>
<link wikidata="Q355857" start="1009" end="1027" title="Switzerland as a federal state" label="modern Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1072" end="1100" title="Restoration and Regeneration in Switzerland#Restoration" label="Restoration and Regeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q690959" start="1237" end="1256" title="Revolutions of 1848 in the Austrian Empire" label="Revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="1269" end="1286" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="1303" end="1310" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q362537" start="1429" end="1449" title="White Book of Sarnen" label="White Book of Sarnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12573" start="1600" end="1608" title="Obwalden" label="Obwalden"/>
<link wikidata="Q674223" start="1627" end="1637" title="Rütlischwur" label="Rütli oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302465" start="1701" end="1713" title="Eidgenossen" label="conspirators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369583" start="1741" end="1752" title="tyrannicide" label="tyrannicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q668589" start="1767" end="1778" title="Burgenbruch" label="Burgenbruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697581" start="1846" end="1856" title="Tellenlied" label="Tellenlied"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302465" start="2068" end="2079" title="Eidgenossenschaft" label="confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q618367" start="2122" end="2132" title="Shooting an apple off one&amp;#x27;s child&amp;#x27;s head" label="apple shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q315342" start="2392" end="2405" title="Burgundian Wars" label="Burgundy Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q151120" start="2432" end="2448" title="Charles the Bold" label="Charles the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q380654" start="2459" end="2475" title="Aegidius Tschudi" label="Aegidius Tschudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q69321" start="2918" end="2930" title="Bürglen, Uri" label="Bürglen, Uri"/>
<link wikidata="Q690565" start="2938" end="2949" title="Schächental" label="Schächental"/>
<link wikidata="Q618367" start="2975" end="2985" title="apple-shot" label="apple-shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895113" start="3122" end="3146" title="early modern Switzerland" label="early modern Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q181947" start="3324" end="3332" title="crossbow" label="crossbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="3351" end="3368" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q674223" start="3446" end="3458" title="Rütlischwur" label="conspirators"/>
<link wikidata="Q117061" start="3462" end="3480" title="Werner Stauffacher" label="Werner Stauffacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q679128" start="3516" end="3532" title="Albrecht Gessler" label="Albrecht Gessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q677907" start="3572" end="3576" title="Vogt" label="Vogt"/>
<link wikidata="Q68150" start="3586" end="3606" title="Altdorf, Switzerland" label="Altdorf, Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513572" start="3643" end="3654" title="Gerichtslinde" label="linden tree"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4212" end="4216" title="Crossbow#Projectiles" label="bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q64183" start="4762" end="4771" title="Küssnacht" label="Küssnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q14381" start="4794" end="4806" title="Lake Lucerne" label="Lake Lucerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765686" start="5171" end="5186" title="Tellskapelle" label="memorial chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q668589" start="5480" end="5489" title="Burgenbruch" label="rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5508" end="5546" title="Growth of the Old Swiss Confederacy#Nucleus" label="formation of the Old Swiss Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q326989" start="5616" end="5635" title="Battle of Morgarten" label="Battle of Morgarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q690565" start="5772" end="5783" title="Schächental" label="Schächental"/>
<link wikidata="Q118048" start="6068" end="6081" title="Melchior Russ" label="Melchior Russ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4191" start="6087" end="6094" title="Lucerne" label="Lucerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q119313" start="6233" end="6249" title="Conrad Justinger" label="Conrad Justinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894120" start="6263" end="6280" title="Bernese Chronicle" label="Bernese Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q121400" start="6416" end="6434" title="Petermann Etterlin" label="Petermann Etterlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114042" start="6448" end="6484" title="Chronicle of the Swiss Confederation" label="Chronicle of the Swiss Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087826" start="6626" end="6646" title="Chronicon Helveticum" label="Chronicon Helveticum"/>
<link wikidata="Q380654" start="6669" end="6685" title="Aegidius Tschudi" label="Aegidius Tschudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q63912" start="6689" end="6695" title="Glarus" label="Glarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q321852" start="7642" end="7657" title="Peter Hagendorf" label="Peter Hagendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="7676" end="7698" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30908" start="7804" end="7813" title="Tellspiel" label="Tell play"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900776" start="7858" end="7873" title="Urner Tellspiel" label="Urner Tellspiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q68150" start="7975" end="7982" title="Altdorf, Uri" label="Altdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q670936" start="8274" end="8291" title="Swiss Peasant War" label="Swiss Peasant War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131291" start="8507" end="8520" title="sleeping hero" label="sleeping hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q15291" start="8574" end="8578" title="Rigi" label="Rigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q674223" start="8956" end="8967" title="Rütlischwur" label="Rütlischwur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302465" start="9052" end="9063" title="Eidgenossen" label="Eidgenossen"/>
<link wikidata="Q117410" start="9084" end="9103" title="Arnold von Melchtal" label="Arnold von Melchtal"/>
<link wikidata="Q117061" start="9108" end="9126" title="Werner Stauffacher" label="Werner Stauffacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q14559" start="9219" end="9229" title="Schüpfheim" label="Schüpfheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q667187" start="9292" end="9303" title="Freie Ämter" label="Freie Ämter"/>
<link wikidata="Q684648" start="9315" end="9323" title="Emmental" label="Emmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q14555" start="9439" end="9444" title="Hasle, Lucerne" label="Hasle"/>
<link wikidata="Q435583" start="9654" end="9671" title="Old Swiss Confederacy" label="Swiss Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14547" start="9710" end="9719" title="Entlebuch" label="Entlebuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="9816" end="9822" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369583" start="9889" end="9900" title="tyrannicide" label="tyrannicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q690928" start="9971" end="9982" title="Schultheiss" label="Schultheiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266294" start="11170" end="11184" title="Deutsche Sagen" label="Deutsche Sagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793" start="11198" end="11212" title="Brothers Grimm" label="Brothers Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q272537" start="11258" end="11272" title="Felicia Hemans" label="Felicia Hemans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368990" start="11375" end="11398" title="long nineteenth century" label="long nineteenth century"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11413" end="11425" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q343159" start="11530" end="11552" title="Antoine-Marin Lemierre" label="Antoine-Marin Lemierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="11729" end="11746" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q206696" start="11854" end="11871" title="Helvetic Republic" label="Helvetic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="11990" end="12001" title="French Navy" label="French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="12047" end="12054" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="12055" end="12065" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182276" start="12076" end="12089" title="Benito Juarez" label="Benito Juarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087826" start="12400" end="12420" title="Chronicon Helveticum" label="Chronicon Helveticum"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="12598" end="12616" title="Friedrich Schiller" label="Friedrich Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q937281" start="12635" end="12647" title="William Tell (play)" label="William Tell"/>
<link wikidata="Q116032" start="12732" end="12751" title="Johannes von Müller" label="Johannes von Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="12881" end="12907" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="13128" end="13150" title="Friedrich von Schiller" label="Friedrich von Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q937281" start="13188" end="13200" title="William Tell (play)" label="Wilhelm Tell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955" start="13245" end="13251" title="Weimar" label="Weimar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="13349" end="13355" title="French Revolution" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="13360" end="13379" title="American Revolution" label="American revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q68103" start="13435" end="13445" title="Interlaken" label="Interlaken"/>
<link wikidata="Q30908" start="13457" end="13467" title="Tellspiele" label="Tellspiele"/>
<link wikidata="Q68150" start="13581" end="13588" title="Altdorf, Uri" label="Altdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q9726" start="13598" end="13615" title="Gioachino Rossini" label="Gioachino Rossini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="13668" end="13673" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q729659" start="13680" end="13692" title="William Tell (opera)" label="William Tell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046246" start="13710" end="13731" title="William Tell Overture" label="William Tell Overture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346054" start="13834" end="13840" title="Finale (music)" label="finale"/>
<link wikidata="Q202287" start="13854" end="13862" title="overture" label="overture"/>
<link wikidata="Q954212" start="13948" end="13963" title="The Lone Ranger (TV series)" label="The Lone Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="13977" end="13994" title="American frontier" label="American frontier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14024" end="14060" title="German playing cards#William Tell" label="William Tell patterned playing cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="14235" end="14250" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q690959" start="14262" end="14280" title="Revolutions of 1848 in the Austrian Empire" label="Revolution of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424652" start="14380" end="14398" title="William Tell cards" label="William Tell cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424652" start="14495" end="14522" title="German-suited playing cards" label="German-suited playing cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q572267" start="14598" end="14603" title="Ober (playing card)" label="Obers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497014" start="14608" end="14614" title="Unter (playing card)" label="Unters"/>
<link wikidata="Q512799" start="14866" end="14887" title="Perry County, Indiana" label="Perry County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738191" start="14957" end="14966" title="Tell City, Indiana" label="Tell City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697388" start="15333" end="15354" title="Tell City High School" label="Tell City High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q180914" start="15944" end="15961" title="John Wilkes Booth" label="John Wilkes Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="15979" end="15994" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q172248" start="16200" end="16206" title="Marcus Junius Brutus" label="Brutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q120459" start="16469" end="16485" title="Richard Kissling" label="Richard Kissling"/>
<link wikidata="Q156733" start="16832" end="16843" title="landsknecht" label="landsknecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q214564" start="17001" end="17017" title="Ferdinand Hodler" label="Ferdinand Hodler"/>
<link wikidata="Q691896" start="17277" end="17298" title="Swiss National Museum" label="Swiss National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q704717" start="17636" end="17649" title="Charles Pathé" label="Charles Pathé"/>
<link wikidata="Q207515" start="17729" end="17743" title="P.G. Wodehouse" label="P.G. Wodehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019237" start="17757" end="17780" title="William Tell Told Again" label="William Tell Told Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344" start="17887" end="17900" title="Swiss Franc" label="5 francs coin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17991" end="18003" title="Paul Burkard" label="Paul Burkard"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="18148" end="18160" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q48244" start="18230" end="18240" title="Mein Kampf" label="Mein Kampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="18315" end="18329" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q60763" start="18346" end="18360" title="Emmy Sonnemann" label="Emmy Sonnemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q115657" start="18576" end="18590" title="Maurice Bavaud" label="Maurice Bavaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q60820" start="18668" end="18681" title="Rolf Hochhuth" label="Rolf Hochhuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="18850" end="18865" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q669929" start="18926" end="18936" title="The Circus (1928 film)" label="The Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="18944" end="18957" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18972" end="18999" title="The Old Age of William Tell" label="The Old Age of William Tell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19016" end="19040" title="William Tell and Gradiva" label="William Tell and Gradiva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19066" end="19092" title="The Enigma of William Tell" label="The Enigma of William Tell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210254" start="19127" end="19141" title="Alfonso Sastre" label="Alfonso Sastre"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="19288" end="19294" title="Francisco Franco" label="Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q68150" start="19423" end="19430" title="Altdorf, Uri" label="Altdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q68103" start="19435" end="19445" title="Interlaken" label="Interlaken"/>
<link wikidata="Q671914" start="19580" end="19590" title="Switzerland during the World Wars" label="World Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q614803" start="19687" end="19697" title="Swiss Post" label="Swiss Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q666809" start="19725" end="19738" title="PostBus Switzerland" label="coach service"/>
<link wikidata="Q670753" start="19877" end="19891" title="Swiss made" label="Swiss products"/>
<link wikidata="Q69321" start="19924" end="19936" title="Bürglen, Uri" label="Bürglen, Uri"/>
<link wikidata="Q257758" start="19961" end="19965" title="Protests of 1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="20020" end="20027" title="classical liberal" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q913401" start="20028" end="20035" title="Radicalism (historical)" label="radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q180348" start="20041" end="20057" title="Deconstruction" label="deconstructivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="20058" end="20065" title="leftist" label="leftist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138385" start="20076" end="20092" title="Historiography of Switzerland" label="Swiss historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647001" start="20179" end="20192" title="national myth" label="national myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q115483" start="20194" end="20204" title="Max Frisch" label="Max Frisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11571783" start="20891" end="20900" title="Wolfsmund" label="Wolfsmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q306334" start="20967" end="20977" title="Enterbrain" label="Enterbrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="21130" end="21137" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="21141" end="21152" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q63371936" start="21193" end="21215" title="The Little Switzerland" label="The Little Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517710" start="21376" end="21387" title="historicity" label="historicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q36378" start="21468" end="21476" title="Fribourg" label="Fribourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q150586" start="21533" end="21542" title="Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Rudolf II"/>
<link wikidata="Q119611" start="21553" end="21569" title="Melchior Goldast" label="Melchior Goldast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4191" start="21823" end="21829" title="Luzern" label="Luzern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450837" start="21942" end="21951" title="Palnatoke" label="Palnatoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539769" start="21989" end="22016" title="Gottlieb Emanuel von Haller" label="Gottlieb Emanuel von Haller"/>
<link wikidata="Q68150" start="22136" end="22143" title="Altdorf, Uri" label="Altdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="22268" end="22283" title="Friedrich von Schiller" label="Schiller&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q937281" start="22284" end="22293" title="Wilhelm Tell (play)" label="1804 play"/>
<link wikidata="Q568452" start="22350" end="22385" title="Restoration and Regeneration in Switzerland" label="Restoration and Regeneration period"/>
<link wikidata="Q355857" start="22393" end="22412" title="Switzerland as a federal state" label="Swiss Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q668589" start="22550" end="22565" title="Growth of the Old Swiss Confederacy" label="Old Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788" start="23650" end="23658" title="1 August" label="1 August"/>
<link wikidata="Q38087" start="23663" end="23681" title="Swiss National Day" label="Swiss National Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q662637" start="23873" end="23896" title="Federal Charter of 1291" label="Federal Charter of 1291"/>
<link wikidata="Q119670" start="23915" end="23930" title="Wilhelm Oechsli" label="Wilhelm Oechsli"/>
<link wikidata="Q674223" start="24167" end="24178" title="Rütlischwur" label="Rütlischwur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402286" start="24321" end="24334" title="Tell Monument" label="Tell Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q66755" start="24609" end="24617" title="Dällikon" label="Dällikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11943" start="24625" end="24641" title="Canton of Zürich" label="Canton of Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="24812" end="24827" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q131714" start="25019" end="25028" title="archetype" label="archetype"/>
<link wikidata="Q11481956" start="25053" end="25057" title="Agilaz" label="Egil"/>
<link wikidata="Q195789" start="25065" end="25078" title="Thidreks saga" label="Thidreks saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q213479" start="25104" end="25108" title="Ullr" label="Ullr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678697" start="25159" end="25168" title="Adam Bell" label="Adam Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="25174" end="25181" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450837" start="25183" end="25192" title="Palnatoke" label="Palnatoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="25198" end="25205" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q111224" start="25224" end="25232" title="Holstein" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q213479" start="25979" end="25983" title="Ullr" label="Ullr"/>
<link wikidata="Q131196" start="26053" end="26061" title="Heimdall" label="Heimdall"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="26071" end="26075" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q939074" start="26112" end="26125" title="Gesta Danorum" label="Gesta Danorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637882" start="26164" end="26173" title="Haddingus" label="Haddingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="26596" end="26602" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450837" start="26613" end="26622" title="Palnatoke" label="Palnatoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q939074" start="26668" end="26681" title="Gesta Danorum" label="Gesta Danorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q106837" start="26691" end="26707" title="Saxo Grammaticus" label="Saxo Grammaticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201041" start="26834" end="26850" title="Harald Bluetooth" label="Harald Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q181896" start="27305" end="27320" title="Swein Forkbeard" label="Swein Forkbeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q42717" start="27386" end="27403" title="Arnold Winkelried" label="Arnold Winkelried"/>
<link wikidata="Q102360156" start="27427" end="27440" title="Stauffacherin" label="Stauffacherin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738191" start="27464" end="27482" title="Tell City, Indiana" label="Tell City, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118408" start="27505" end="27523" title="Punker of Rohrbach" label="Punker of Rohrbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="27526" end="27536" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957651" start="27539" end="27550" title="Toni Bajada" label="Toni Bajada"/>
<link wikidata="Q82457" start="27553" end="27568" title="William Wallace" label="William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138385" start="27618" end="27647" title="Historiography of Switzerland" label="Historiography of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008708" start="27804" end="27824" title="William Everdell" label="Everdell, William R."/>
<link wikidata="Q106837" start="28151" end="28167" title="Saxo Grammaticus" label="Saxo Grammaticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q121289" start="28850" end="28865" title="Jean Rudolf von Salis" label="Salis, J.-R. v."/>
<link wikidata="" start="29335" end="29346" title=":de:Coopzeitung" label="Coopzeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q117534" start="29381" end="29396" title="Roger Sablonier" label="Roger Sablonier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407801" wikidata="Q4664740" url="?curid=407801" title="Abdel Basset Turki">
<text>Abdel Basset Turki al-Hadithi was Minister of Human Rights in the cabinet appointed by the Iraq Interim Governing Council in September 2003. He resigned in April 2004 in protest at the deaths of over 600 Iraqis during the siege of Falluja.

In November 2003 Turki demanded access to the captured &quot;Most-wanted Iraqi playing cards&quot;, saying they were not all prisoners of war. He condemned human rights violations by US and allied troops in the Combined Joint Task Force 7. He called for victims to be paid compensation.

After the emergence of the Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse scandal in May 2004, Turki stated that he had complained to Paul Bremer, the US head of the Coalition Provisional Authority in November 2003 of human rights violations in Iraqi jails but had &quot;received no answer&quot;.

Abdel Basit Turki al-Sae&#x27;ed was Iraq&#x27;s acting central bank governor from October 2012 until October 2014, during that period he was simultaneously the head of the country&#x27;s Supreme Audit Board. This questionable appointment was followed after he led an audit in September 2012 of the central bank currency auctions convincing him that $800 million is &quot;transferred illegally under false pretenses&quot; outside of the country every week. This was related in the October 31st 2012 report from the US government&#x27;s Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction (SIGIR). &quot;Turki was not available for comment on his report&quot;.

In December 2014 the Supreme Court of Iraq concluded that the findings from Turki&#x27;s audit report were unfounded. Again &quot;Turki was not available for comment&quot;.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4664740" start="0" end="29" title="Abdel Basset Turki" label="Abdel Basset Turki al-Hadithi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026987" start="34" end="58" title="Ministry of Human Rights (Iraq)" label="Minister of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672361" start="91" end="121" title="Iraq Interim Governing Council" label="Iraq Interim Governing Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q191170" start="231" end="238" title="Falluja" label="Falluja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123232" start="302" end="333" title="Most-wanted Iraqi playing cards" label="Most-wanted Iraqi playing cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="366" end="382" title="prisoners of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150866" start="452" end="479" title="Combined Joint Task Force 7" label="Combined Joint Task Force 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q334720" start="556" end="593" title="Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse" label="Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q217683" start="654" end="665" title="Paul Bremer" label="Paul Bremer"/>
<link wikidata="Q965174" start="686" end="717" title="Coalition Provisional Authority" label="Coalition Provisional Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574592" start="1354" end="1403" title="Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction" label="Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001100" start="1498" end="1519" title="Supreme Court of Iraq" label="Supreme Court of Iraq"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407806" wikidata="Q1561861" url="?curid=407806" title="Nationalist Congress Party">
<text>The Nationalist Congress Party is one of the state parties in India and is one of the major political parties in Maharashtra with a recognised state party status in Nagaland and Kerala. The party has its presence in legislative assemblies of Maharashtra, Nagaland, and Arunachal Pradesh, with being in the governing coalition in all of these states. Besides this, the party is also part of the current governing coalition National Democratic Alliance led by the Bharatiya Janata Party. 

The original incarnation of the party was founded in 1999 by Sharad Pawar, P.A. Sangma, and Tariq Anwar after a split within the Congress. After major disagreements between top party leaders in 2023, a split between the party occurred. This resulted in two major faction emerging, one led by the founder president Sharad Pawar and the other led by Ajit Pawar. After a legal battle, the Supreme Court of India gave judgement in favour of the faction led by Ajit Pawar, and was allocated the party symbol and name. Subsequently, the Sharad Pawar led faction formed the NCP (SP). Under the leadership of Ajit Pawar, the NCP revamped itself and adopted the color pink to associate with the party.

The Nagaland state unit which was supporting the NDPP-BJP state government and the Jharkhand state unit of the party went with the Ajit Pawar-led NCP while the Kerala state unit of the party which was a part of the Left Democratic Front went with the Sharad Pawar-led NCP(SP).

==Party history and performance==

=== First incarnation led by Sharad Pawar === 
==== Split from Congress ==== 
The NCP was formed on 10 June 1999, by Sharad Pawar, P. A. Sangma, and Tariq Anwar after they were expelled from the Indian National Congress on 20 May 1999, for disputing the right of Italian-born Sonia Gandhi to lead the party. When the NCP formed, the Indian Congress (Socialist) – Sarat Chandra Sinha party merged into the new party.

==== In government ==== 
Despite the NCP being founded on opposition to the leadership of Sonia Gandhi, the party joined the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance (UPA) to form the government of Maharashtra in October 1999. In 2004, the party joined the UPA to form the national government led by Manmohan Singh. The NCP&#x27;s leader, Sharad Pawar served as the Minister of Agriculture for both five-year terms of the Singh-led government. The party remained part of the Congress-led Maharashtra state government until 2014. On 20 June 2012, P. A. Sangma left the NCP to contest the presidential election, which he lost. 

==== In opposition ====
In the April and May 2014 Lok Sabha elections, the UPA lost to the rival National Democratic Alliance (NDA) led by Narendra Modi and the NCP was out of government for the first time in ten years. The NCP broke its alliance with the Congress Party just before the October 2014 Maharashtra Legislative Assembly elections to contest them on its own. In the assembly election the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) emerged as the largest party and formed a minority government, initially with support from the NCP.

In April 2019, voting took place for the 48 Lok Sabha seats from Maharashtra. The Congress and NCP had a seat-sharing arrangement. Similarly, despite their differences, the BJP and Shiv Sena once again contested the elections together under the NDA banner. The election was another landslide victory for the NDA, with the BJP and Shiv Sena winning 23 and 18 seats, respectively, out of the total of the state&#x27;s 48 Lok Sabha seats. The Congress Party won only one seat in the state whereas the NCP won five seats from its stronghold of western Maharashtra.

==== Formation of Maharashtra Vikash Aghadi and subsequent split ====
During the October 2019 Maharashtra Legislative Assembly elections, the BJP–Shiv-Sena and NCP–Congress alliances remained intact for seat sharing. The BJP and Shiv Sena together gained the majority of seats in the assembly but could not form a government due to disagreements between the two parties. The BJP, with 105 seats, was far short of the 145 seats required to form a majority and declined to form a minority government. As a result, Shiv Sena started talks with the NCP and Congress to form a government. However, in a controversial move, on 23 November 2019, the BJP formed a government with support from the NCP, with Ajit Pawar as Deputy Chief Minister. This government collapsed three days later with Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis and Pawar resigning their respective positions. Finally, the NCP came back into power at the state level as part of the Maha Vikas Aghadi coalition formed with Shiv Sena and the Congress. On 28 November 2019, the Governor of Maharashtra swore in Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray as the new Chief Minister of Maharashtra. Thackeray&#x27;s cabinet included ministers from the NCP in key portfolios.

However, this alliance lost power in June 2022 after a rebel faction led by Shiv Sena leader Eknath Shinde gathered the support of a majority of Sena MLAs and reestablished the previous Sena-BJP coalition. Subsequently, on 20 July, NCP President Sharad Pawar dissolved almost all units of the party.

=== Second incarnation led by Ajit Pawar ===

In July 2023, Ajit Pawar, along with many of his supporters, left the Sharad Pawar-led NCP and joined the ruling Shiv Sena-BJP government as a Deputy Chief Minister of Maharashtra. This caused the NCP to split into two factions, with Ajit Pawar claiming in a letter to the Election Commission that he had been elected party president on June 30. In his first meeting after the split, he expressed a desire to retain the party&#x27;s symbol and name, urged Sharad Pawar to retire and give opportunities to new people, and criticised many of Sharad&#x27;s decisions, including the formation of a government with the Shiv Sena instead of the BJP in 2019.
On 7 February 2024, The Election Commission Of India (ECI) awarded the party name and symbol to the faction headed by Ajit Pawar. The faction led by Sharad Pawar will be henceforth known as Nationalist Congress Party (SharadChandra Pawar) 

==Party symbol, flag and color==
The election symbol of NCP is an analogue alarm clock. The clock is drawn in blue and has two legs and an alarm button. It is situated on a tri-coloured Indian flag.

==Controversies and criticism==

The Nationalist Congress Party has been extensively criticized for several reasons such as political corruption, insensitive comments, links to the underworld, and moral policing.

NCP leader Sharad Pawar was accused of having links to the underworld. This was revealed by former Supreme Court lawyer Ram Jethmalani, who had confirmed that after the March 1993 bombings in Bombay, Dawood Ibrahim had called him from London, saying that he was prepared to come to India and stand trial, on the condition that he should not be subjected to any third degree treatment from the police. When Jethmalani had conveyed this to Sharad Pawar, the political leaders in power did not agree to this proposal. As per Jethmalani, their refusal to allow Dawood&#x27;s return was due to their fears that he would expose their secrets.

In May 2005, Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) workers stormed a pub in Pune, Maharashtra, broke window panes, damaged furniture, and thrashed visitors. The move came days after Pune Police had forced five pubs to shut before the closing time of 12:30 am.

On 29 November 2008, in the aftermath of the terrorist attack in Mumbai, NCP leader and Deputy Chief Minister R.R. Patil was forced to resign after making insensitive comments after the attack. He was quoted as saying, &quot;They (the terrorists) came to kill 5,000 people but we ensured minimal damage&quot;. When asked at a press conference whether the terror strike was an intelligence failure Patil said, &quot;It is not like that. In big cities like this, incidents like this do happen. It&#x27;s is not a total failure.&quot;

On 7 April 2013, NCP leader Ajit Pawar&#x27;s statement at a speech in Indapur sparked controversy due to its alleged callousness. In response to a 55-day fast by activists protesting the Maharashtra governments inability to provide water during a drought, he asked whether he should &quot;urinate into [the dam]&quot; to make up for the lack of water in it. After a public outcry against his statement, he publicly apologized, saying that the comment was the &quot;biggest mistake of [his] life&quot;.

In 2021, Senior Inspector Sachin Vaze, an encounter specialist, was arrested for his involvement in the Antilia bomb scare. Through an investigation, Vaze revealed that he was acting at the behest of Anil Deshmukh, who was then minister of Home Affairs. Vaze and Deshmukh were also involved in collecting extortion money in December 2020 from members of the Indian Hotel and Restaurant Association (AHAR). Deshmukh was also under investigation by the Central Bureau of Investigation and Enforcement Directorate for money laundering, following accusations made by the former Mumbai Police commissioner Param Bir Singh.

On 23 February 2022, NCP President and leader Nawab Malik was arrested by the Enforcement Directorate in a money laundering case and his alleged links with underworld don Dawood Ibrahim. He was charged and placed under arrest under the provisions of Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA) after several hours of grilling.

On 14 May 2022, Marathi television actress Ketaki Chitale was arrested by Mumbai Police for allegedly sharing an objectionable post about Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar. At the time of her arrest, NCP workers mobbed and attacked her and the officers who had arrested her. Chitale, who was molested, and her modesty was outraged by the NCP workers, and was later granted bail, was booked under IPC sections 500 (defamation), 501 (printing or engraving defamatory matter) and 153A (promoting enmity between different groups on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony) of the Indian Penal Code.

==Electoral performance==
===General elections===
=== State Legislative Assembly elections ===

== List of Rajya Sabha Members ==
== List of Members of Lok Sabha ==

== List of State Ministers ==
=== List of Deputy Chief Ministers ===

=== List of Ministers under Vilasrao Deshmukh ===

=== List of Ministers under Sushilkumar Shinde ===

=== List of Ministers under Vilasrao Deshmukh ===

=== List of Ministers under Ashok Chavan ===
=== List of Ministers under Prithviraj Chavan ===

=== List of Ministers under Devendra Fadnavis ===

=== List of Ministers under Uddhav Thackeray ===

=== List of Ministers under Eknath Shinde ===
=== Ministers under Devendra Fadnavis ===
==See also==
* Politics of India
* List of political parties in India
* Maha Aghadi
* Politics of Maharashtra
* Indian National Developmental Inclusive Alliance

==Notes==
:1.Praful Patel, Sunetra Pawar and Nitin Patil from Rajya Sabha and Sunil Tatkare from Lok Sabha.

==References==
==External links==
* Original Hosted Website Of NCP from 2007 AD (originally https://www.nationalistcongressparty.com)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1561861" start="4" end="30" title="Nationalist Congress Party" label="Nationalist Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45" end="67" title="List of political parties in India#State parties" label="state parties in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733343" start="113" end="124" title="Maharashtra Legislative Assembly" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056691" start="165" end="173" title="Nagaland Legislative Assembly" label="Nagaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462542" start="178" end="184" title="Kerala Legislative Assembly" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733343" start="242" end="253" title="Maharashtra Legislative Assembly" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056691" start="255" end="263" title="Nagaland Legislative Assembly" label="Nagaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q427049" start="269" end="286" title="Arunachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly" label="Arunachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q129815" start="422" end="450" title="National Democratic Alliance" label="National Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="462" end="484" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q982813" start="549" end="561" title="Sharad Pawar" label="Sharad Pawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741772" start="563" end="574" title="P. A. Sangma" label="P.A. Sangma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686140" start="580" end="591" title="Tariq Anwar (politician)" label="Tariq Anwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="617" end="625" title="Indian National Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q120598097" start="690" end="722" title="2023 Nationalist Congress Party split" label="split between the party occurred"/>
<link wikidata="Q120962117" start="829" end="846" title="Nationalist Congress Party (Ajit Pawar Faction)" label="led by Ajit Pawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="874" end="896" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699799" start="944" end="954" title="Ajit Pawar" label="Ajit Pawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q124988169" start="1055" end="1063" title="Nationalist Congress Party – Sharadchandra Pawar" label="NCP (SP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q429220" start="1147" end="1151" title="pink" label="pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q48733786" start="1231" end="1235" title="Nationalist Democratic Progressive Party" label="NDPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="1236" end="1239" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="BJP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595599" start="1397" end="1418" title="Left Democratic Front (Kerala)" label="Left Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q982813" start="1612" end="1624" title="Sharad Pawar" label="Sharad Pawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741772" start="1626" end="1638" title="P. A. Sangma" label="P. A. Sangma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686140" start="1644" end="1655" title="Tariq Anwar (politician)" label="Tariq Anwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="1690" end="1714" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="1758" end="1765" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q163225" start="1771" end="1783" title="Sonia Gandhi" label="Sonia Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020069" start="1828" end="1877" title="Indian Congress (Socialist) – Sarat Chandra Sinha" label="Indian Congress (Socialist) – Sarat Chandra Sinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323719" start="2050" end="2077" title="United Progressive Alliance" label="United Progressive Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589241" start="2096" end="2121" title="government of Maharashtra" label="government of Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q41914" start="2212" end="2226" title="Manmohan Singh" label="Manmohan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634069" start="2278" end="2301" title="Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers&amp;#x27; Welfare" label="Minister of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="2400" end="2411" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085704" start="2495" end="2520" title="2012 Indian presidential election" label="the presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587169" start="2570" end="2608" title="2014 Indian general election" label="April and May 2014 Lok Sabha elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q129815" start="2636" end="2664" title="National Democratic Alliance" label="National Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058" start="2678" end="2691" title="Narendra Modi" label="Narendra Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071101" start="2826" end="2881" title="2014 Maharashtra Legislative Assembly election" label="October 2014 Maharashtra Legislative Assembly elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="2939" end="2961" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q62662565" start="3072" end="3090" title="2019 Indian general election in Maharashtra" label="April 2019, voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q28164181" start="3113" end="3122" title="2019 Indian general election" label="Lok Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q59177" start="3250" end="3259" title="Shiv Sena (1966–2022)" label="Shiv Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q55696556" start="3712" end="3767" title="2019 Maharashtra Legislative Assembly election" label="October 2019 Maharashtra Legislative Assembly elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699799" start="4330" end="4340" title="Ajit Pawar" label="Ajit Pawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728896" start="4430" end="4447" title="Devendra Fadnavis" label="Devendra Fadnavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80379968" start="4568" end="4585" title="Maha Vikas Aghadi" label="Maha Vikas Aghadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634346" start="4710" end="4726" title="Uddhav Thackeray" label="Uddhav Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q18750400" start="4939" end="4952" title="Eknath Shinde" label="Eknath Shinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261005" start="5336" end="5372" title="Deputy Chief Minister of Maharashtra" label="Deputy Chief Minister of Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724317" start="5865" end="5903" title="Election Commission of India" label="The Election Commission Of India (ECI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q212758" start="6161" end="6172" title="alarm clock" label="alarm clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q982813" start="6511" end="6523" title="Sharad Pawar" label="Sharad Pawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530303" start="6620" end="6634" title="Ram Jethmalani" label="Ram Jethmalani"/>
<link wikidata="Q889358" start="6669" end="6698" title="1993 Bombay bombings" label="March 1993 bombings in Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q553191" start="6700" end="6714" title="Dawood Ibrahim" label="Dawood Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="6735" end="6741" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="6861" end="6873" title="Third-degree methods" label="third degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q982813" start="6938" end="6950" title="Sharad Pawar" label="Sharad Pawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538" start="7209" end="7213" title="Pune" label="Pune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="7215" end="7226" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3390523" start="7315" end="7326" title="Pune Police" label="Pune Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q76421" start="7439" end="7465" title="2008 Mumbai attacks" label="terrorist attack in Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953747" start="7504" end="7514" title="R.R. Patil" label="R.R. Patil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699799" start="7955" end="7965" title="Ajit Pawar" label="Ajit Pawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753960" start="7998" end="8005" title="Indapur" label="Indapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396750" start="8457" end="8468" title="Sachin Vaze" label="Sachin Vaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q106371624" start="8535" end="8553" title="Antilia bomb scare" label="Antilia bomb scare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764631" start="8631" end="8644" title="Anil Deshmukh" label="Anil Deshmukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053734" start="8882" end="8913" title="Central Bureau of Investigation" label="Central Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280618" start="8918" end="8941" title="Enforcement Directorate" label="Enforcement Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101758" start="9012" end="9031" title="Police commissioner" label="Police commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q87113358" start="9032" end="9047" title="Param Bir Singh" label="Param Bir Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q22279012" start="9096" end="9107" title="Nawab Malik" label="Nawab Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280618" start="9128" end="9151" title="Enforcement Directorate" label="Enforcement Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q553191" start="9221" end="9235" title="Dawood Ibrahim" label="Dawood Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935316" start="9450" end="9463" title="Mumbai Police" label="Mumbai Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q982817" start="10337" end="10354" title="Vilasrao Deshmukh" label="Vilasrao Deshmukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504490" start="10388" end="10406" title="Sushilkumar Shinde" label="Sushilkumar Shinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q982817" start="10440" end="10457" title="Vilasrao Deshmukh" label="Vilasrao Deshmukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345623" start="10491" end="10503" title="Ashok Chavan" label="Ashok Chavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520217" start="10536" end="10553" title="Prithviraj Chavan" label="Prithviraj Chavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728896" start="10587" end="10604" title="Devendra Fadnavis" label="Devendra Fadnavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634346" start="10638" end="10654" title="Uddhav Thackeray" label="Uddhav Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q18750400" start="10688" end="10701" title="Eknath Shinde" label="Eknath Shinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728896" start="10726" end="10743" title="Devendra Fadnavis" label="Devendra Fadnavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123156" start="10763" end="10780" title="Politics of India" label="Politics of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369087" start="10783" end="10817" title="List of political parties in India" label="List of political parties in India"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10820" end="10831" title="Maha Aghadi" label="Maha Aghadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q356341" start="10834" end="10857" title="Politics of Maharashtra" label="Politics of Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q120739928" start="10860" end="10908" title="Indian National Developmental Inclusive Alliance" label="Indian National Developmental Inclusive Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595186" start="10923" end="10935" title="Praful Patel" label="Praful Patel"/>
<link wikidata="Q126924435" start="10937" end="10950" title="Sunetra Pawar" label="Sunetra Pawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q244730" start="10972" end="10983" title="Rajya Sabha" label="Rajya Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640353" start="10988" end="11001" title="Sunil Tatkare" label="Sunil Tatkare"/>
<link wikidata="Q230003" start="11007" end="11016" title="Lok Sabha" label="Lok Sabha"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407810" wikidata="Q7748183" url="?curid=407810" title="The Long Count Fight">
<text>The Long Count Fight, or the Battle of the Long Count, was a professional boxing 10-round rematch between world heavyweight champion Gene Tunney and former champion Jack Dempsey, which Tunney won in a unanimous decision. It took place on September 22, 1927, at Soldier Field in Chicago. &quot;Long Count&quot; is applied to the fight because, when Tunney was knocked down in the seventh round, the count was delayed due to Dempsey&#x27;s failure to go to and remain in a neutral corner. Whether this &quot;long count&quot; actually affected the outcome remains a subject of debate.

== Background ==
Just 364 days before, on September 23, 1926, Tunney had beaten Dempsey in ten rounds by unanimous decision to lift the world heavyweight title, at Sesquicentennial Stadium in Philadelphia. The first fight between Tunney and Dempsey had been moved out of Chicago because Dempsey had learned that Al Capone was a big fan of his, and he did not want Capone to be involved in the fight. Capone reportedly bet $50,000 on Dempsey for the rematch, which fueled false rumors of a fix. Dempsey was favored by odds makers in both fights, largely because of public betting which heavily tilted towards Dempsey.

The rematch was held at Chicago&#x27;s Soldier Field, and would draw a gate of $2,658,660 (). It was the first $2 million gate in entertainment history. Tunney received a record purse of $990,445.

The match was broadcast by announcers Graham McNamee and Phillips Carlin to more than 60 NBC radio stations.

Despite the fact that Tunney had won the first fight by a wide margin on the scorecards, the prospect of a second bout created tremendous public interest. Dempsey was one of the so-called &quot;big five&quot; sports legends of the 1920s, and it was widely rumored that he had refused to join the military during World War I. He actually had attempted to enlist in the Army, but had been turned down; a jury later exonerated Dempsey of draft evasion. Tunney, who enjoyed literature and the arts, was a former member of the United States Marine Corps. His nickname was &quot;The Fighting Marine&quot;.

The fight took place under new rules regarding knockdowns: the fallen fighter would have 10 seconds to rise to his feet under his own power after his opponent had moved to a neutral corner (i.e., one with no trainers). The Dempsey camp requested the new rule, which was not yet universal, be used. Dempsey, in the final days of training prior to the rematch, apparently ignored the setting of the new rule. Also, the fight was staged inside a 20-foot ring, which favored the boxer with superior footwork, in this case Tunney. Dempsey liked to crowd his opponents, and normally fought in a 16-foot ring that offered less space to maneuver.

==The fight==
Tunney was, by most accounts, dominating the fight from rounds one to six, using his familiar style of boxing from a distance while looking for openings and, at the same time, building a points lead. Up until the end of round six, nothing indicated this fight would be far different from their original meeting.

In round seven, however, the 104,943 in attendance witnessed a moment that would live on in boxing history. With Tunney trapped against the ropes and near a corner, Dempsey unleashed a combination of punches that floored the champion. Two rights and two lefts landed on Tunney&#x27;s chin and staggered him, and four more punches put him on the canvas. It was the first time in Tunney&#x27;s career that he had been knocked down.

Apparently dizzy and disoriented, Tunney grabbed on to the ring&#x27;s top rope with his left hand. Dempsey, who often stood over downed opponents and rushed back at them after they got up, looked down on Tunney. Referee Dave Barry ordered Dempsey into a neutral corner to no avail; Dempsey remained standing near Tunney, observing his opponent. This gave Tunney precious seconds to recuperate. By the time Dempsey finally walked to a neutral corner, Tunney had been down for around 3 to 8 seconds. Barry could not start to count on Tunney until Dempsey reached the neutral corner, but he was still able to count to nine before Tunney got up. Some believe that if Dempsey had responded to the referee&#x27;s order in time, he would have likely regained the world heavyweight crown with a seventh-round knockout. The validity of this argument has been debated to this day. In the fight film, a clock was superimposed that recorded Tunney&#x27;s time on the floor as 13 seconds, from the moment he fell until he got up. Because of this delay, it became known as &quot;The Long Count Fight&quot;.

By the eighth round, Tunney had resumed boxing from a distance, and he floored Dempsey with a punch. This time, however, the referee started counting right away, before Tunney had moved to a neutral corner. Tunney then dominated the final two rounds and went on to retain the world title by a unanimous decision. After the fight, Dempsey lifted Tunney&#x27;s arm and said, &quot;You were best. You fought a smart fight, kid.&quot; It was Dempsey&#x27;s last career fight, and Tunney&#x27;s next-to-last.

==Controversy==
Controversy over the match promptly erupted. A significant factor in prolonging the controversy was that, at the time, U.S. law prohibited the transportation of boxing match movies across state lines (the law had been passed in 1912 in reaction to riots that broke out after Jack Johnson&#x27;s 1910 victory over James J. Jeffries; the fight had been filmed, though was banned in areas of the US.) As a result, almost nobody was able to see the counts for themselves. Once the law was repealed, and it became possible for many to watch the footage and judge the fallen fighters&#x27; alertness (particularly Tunney&#x27;s), the controversy dwindled.

To this day, however, boxing fans argue over whether Dempsey could or should have won the fight. What is not in dispute is that the public&#x27;s affection for Dempsey grew in the wake of his two losses to Tunney. &quot;In defeat, he gained more stature,&quot; wrote the &quot;Washington Post&#x27;s&quot; Shirley Povich. &quot;He was the loser in the battle of the long count, yet the hero.&quot;

Tunney said that he had picked up the referee&#x27;s count at &quot;two,&quot; and could have gotten up at any point after that, preferring to wait until &quot;nine&quot; for obvious tactical reasons. Dempsey said, &quot;I have no reason not to believe him. Gene&#x27;s a great guy.&quot;

Dempsey later joined the United States Coast Guard, and he and Tunney became good friends who visited each other frequently. Tunney and Dempsey are both members of the International Boxing Hall of Fame. In March 2011, the family of Gene Tunney donated the gloves he wore in the fight to The Smithsonian&#x27;s National Museum of American History.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7748183" start="4" end="20" title="The Long Count Fight" label="Long Count Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748183" start="29" end="53" title="The Long Count Fight" label="Battle of the Long Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631720" start="61" end="80" title="professional boxing" label="professional boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q281678" start="112" end="123" title="heavyweight" label="heavyweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q406742" start="133" end="144" title="Gene Tunney" label="Gene Tunney"/>
<link wikidata="Q313686" start="165" end="177" title="Jack Dempsey" label="Jack Dempsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132413" start="261" end="274" title="Soldier Field" label="Soldier Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="278" end="285" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390739" start="747" end="771" title="John F. Kennedy Stadium (Philadelphia)" label="Sesquicentennial Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="775" end="787" title="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80048" start="895" end="904" title="Al Capone" label="Al Capone"/>
<link wikidata="Q747376" start="1072" end="1075" title="Match fixing" label="fix"/>
<link wikidata="Q664702" start="1100" end="1110" title="bookmaker" label="odds maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132413" start="1240" end="1253" title="Soldier Field" label="Soldier Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527029" start="1272" end="1276" title="gate receipts" label="gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113264" start="1437" end="1451" title="Graham McNamee" label="Graham McNamee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185885" start="1456" end="1471" title="Phillips Carlin" label="Phillips Carlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q58037172" start="1488" end="1491" title="NBC Radio Network" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1821" end="1832" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="1877" end="1881" title="United States Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379902" start="1944" end="1957" title="draft evasion" label="draft evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="2031" end="2057" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="2063" end="2071" title="nickname" label="nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q868847" start="2605" end="2613" title="footwork (martial arts)" label="footwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259259" start="3422" end="3428" title="canvas" label="canvas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3729" end="3739" title="Dave Barry (referee)" label="Dave Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104249" start="4578" end="4588" title="Long Count" label="Long Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117816" start="5372" end="5376" title="Johnson–Jeffries riots" label="riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q316689" start="5399" end="5418" title="Jack Johnson (boxer)" label="Jack Johnson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q19376008" start="5424" end="5431" title="Jack Johnson vs. James J. Jeffries" label="victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q458292" start="5437" end="5454" title="James J. Jeffries" label="James J. Jeffries"/>
<link wikidata="Q19376008" start="5456" end="5481" title="The Johnson–Jeffries Fight" label="the fight had been filmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="6052" end="6067" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482361" start="6081" end="6095" title="Shirley Povich" label="Shirley Povich"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="6489" end="6514" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q572227" start="6632" end="6665" title="International Boxing Hall of Fame" label="International Boxing Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407812" wikidata="Q734249" url="?curid=407812" title="Soyuz 27">
<text>Soyuz 27 (, &quot;Union 27&quot;) was a 1978 Soviet crewed spacecraft which flew to the orbiting Salyut 6 space station, during the mission EP-1. It was the third crewed flight to the station, the second successful docking and the first visitation mission. Once docked, it marked the first time that three spacecraft were docked together.

The main function of the EP-1 mission was to swap Soyuz craft with the orbiting crew, in so doing freeing a docking port for a forthcoming supply tanker. Cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Oleg Makarov returned to Earth in the Soyuz 26 spacecraft after spending five days on the station. The descent module is displayed at the Sergei Pavlovich Korolyov Museum of Cosmonautics in Zhytomyr, Ukraine.

==Crew==
===Backup crew===
==Mission parameters==
* Mass: 
* Perigee: 
* Apogee: 
* Inclination: 51.65°
* Period: 88.73 minutes

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q734249" start="0" end="8" title="Soyuz 27" label="Soyuz 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="45" end="51" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q613601" start="97" end="105" title="Salyut 6" label="Salyut 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406981" start="140" end="144" title="Salyut 6 EP-1" label="EP-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="494" end="504" title="Cosmonauts" label="Cosmonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q466513" start="505" end="525" title="Vladimir Dzhanibekov" label="Vladimir Dzhanibekov"/>
<link wikidata="Q467623" start="530" end="542" title="Oleg Grigoryevich Makarov" label="Oleg Makarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q847024" start="568" end="576" title="Soyuz 26" label="Soyuz 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q538095" start="668" end="716" title="Sergei Pavlovich Korolyov Museum of Cosmonautics" label="Sergei Pavlovich Korolyov Museum of Cosmonautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q156713" start="720" end="728" title="Zhytomyr" label="Zhytomyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="730" end="737" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407813" wikidata="Q16667463" url="?curid=407813" title="List of accidents and incidents involving airliners by location">
<text>This list of accidents and incidents on airliners by location summarizes airline accidents by state location, airline company with flight number, date, and cause. It is also available grouped
* by year as List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft;
* by airline;
* by category.

If the aircraft crashed on land, it will be listed under a continent and a country. If the aircraft crashed on a body of water, it will be listed under that body of water (unless that body of water is part of the area of a country). Accidents and incidents written in bold were the deadliest in that country.

== Africa ==

=== Algeria ===
* Air France Flight 406 exploded and shattered into pieces when a bomb was smuggled inside its cargo on 10 May 1961, killing all 78 on board.
* TWA Flight 847, a Boeing 727-231, was hijacked shortly after takeoff on 14 June 1985. One person was killed.
* Air France Flight 8969 was hijacked on the ground at Algiers and flown to France on 24 December 1994.
* Air Algérie Flight 6289, at 5 seconds after takeoff, the left engine of the Boeing 737-200 exploded on 6 March 2003. The subsequent loss of control killed all but one of the 103 people on board, the deadliest aviation disaster in Algeria until the 2018 Algerian Air Force Ilyushin Il-76 crash, in which a Ilyushin Il-76 crashed shortly after take-off on 11 April 2018, killing all 257 people on board.
* In the 2018 Algerian Air Force Ilyushin Il-76 crash, an Ilyushin Il-76 crashed shortly after takeoff from Boufarik. All 257 people on board were killed.

=== Angola ===
* N844AA was a Boeing 727 leased to TAAG Angola Airlines that was stolen from Quatro de Fevereiro Airport in Luanda on 25 May 2003. The aircraft disappeared after takeoff, and a mechanic confirmed to be on board has not been heard from since.
* A Trans Service Airlift Lockheed L-188 crashed on 18 December 1995 shortly after takeoff from Jamba Airport, killing 141 passengers and crew. The aircraft had been filled with 40 people beyond specifications. One crewmember and two passengers survived.
* TAAG Angola Airlines Flight 462 had is left wing strike the ground on 8 November 1983 after an apparent mechanical failure, and it crashed and exploded, killing all 130 people aboard.

=== Benin ===
* UTA Flight 141 crashed on 25 December 2003 after overloading caused the plane to take off too slowly; it was not airborne by the end of the runway, and struck an airport structure. The Boeing 727 slid and broke into three parts, all of which plunged into the Atlantic. Of 150 passengers and 10 crew, 22 people survived.

=== Botswana ===
* On 4 April 1974, a Douglas DC-4 crashed while making an emergency landing due to engine failure, killing 78 of the 84 passengers and crew.
* 1999 Air Botswana incident: On 11 October 1999, Chris Patswe, a former Air Botswana pilot, hijacked an aircraft and crashed it into another plane. He was the only person who died.

=== Cameroon ===
* Caledonian Airways Flight 153 crashed into a swamp shortly after takeoff from Douala International Airport on 4 March 1962, killing all 111 aboard. The cause was never determined.
* Cameroon Airlines Flight 786: The Boeing 737-2H7C was taxiing for takeoff from Douala International Airport when engine number 2 suffered a turbine engine failure, which resulted in a fire. All 116 passengers and crews were able to evacuate from the burning aircraft, but two passengers died due to fire outside of the aircraft.
* Cameroon Airlines Flight 3701: Upon approach to Douala International Airport, the Boeing 737-200 nose-dived and crashed into a swamp, killing 71 people and injuring five. Engine thrust asymmetry and subsequent loss of control are suspected as the cause of the incident.
* Kenya Airways Flight 507: The night of 5 May 2007, shortly after takeoff from Douala International Airport, a Boeing 737-800 suddenly banked heavily to the right, nose-dived, and crashed into a swamp, killing all 114 aboard. The incident was caused by pilot error. The investigation identified a lack of crew coordination, spatial disorientation, and confusion in the use of the autopilot as contributing factors to Cameroon&#x27;s deadliest plane crash.

=== Chad ===
* Air West Flight 612 was hijacked shortly after takeoff from Khartoum, Sudan, and flown to N&#x27;Djamena, Chad, on 24 January 2007. No casualties occurred, and the hijacker gave himself up upon reaching Chad.

=== Comoros ===
* Ethiopian Airlines Flight 961 was hijacked on 23 November 1996 en route from Addis Ababa to Nairobi by three Ethiopians seeking political asylum. The plane crash-landed in the Indian Ocean near Comoros after running out of fuel, killing 125 of the 175 passengers and crew on board.
* Yemenia Flight 626: The Airbus A310 was on approach to Moroni when it stalled. The flight crew did not take the appropriate action to recover it and the plane crashed into the Indian Ocean off the northern coast of Comoros on 30 June 2009. Of 153 aboard, 152 died; a 12-year-old passenger was found alive.

=== Democratic Republic of the Congo ===
* Hewa Bora Airways Flight 122 crashed into a residential and market area of Goma on 15 April 2008 after its engines failed during takeoff. Three passengers and 37 people on the ground died; 83 passengers and eight crew survived. Additionally, 111 injuries were reported, 40 of whom were passengers.
* An Antonov An-26 operated by Africa One crashed and burned shortly after takeoff from Kinshasa on 4 October 2007. Deaths numbered 51, including 30 on the ground. One, possibly two, passengers survived. The cause is under investigation.
* An L-410 aircraft operated by Free Airlines crashed in a swamp shortly after takeoff from Kamina Airport on 21 June 2007. The plane was overloaded, carrying 21 passengers and crew rather than the 17 maximum specified. One person died, and four others were badly injured.
* In the 1996 Air Africa crash, the plane failed to take off due to being over maximum takeoff weight. The aircraft overran the runway and ploughed into a crowded market, which killed more than 220 people.

=== Egypt ===
* In the 1969 Aswan Ilyushin Il-18 crash, the aircraft banked to right, hit the runway, and burst into flames while attempting to land on Aswan International Airport in Aswan. 100 of 105 people on board were killed.
* United Arab Airlines Flight 749, while descending too low on approach to Cairo Airport, crashed around 5 km from the airport during a thunderstorm on 18 March 1966. All 30 people perished in the accident.
* Pan Am Flight 93 was hijacked as a part of the Dawson&#x27;s Field hijackings on 6 September 1970 and flown to Beirut and then to Cairo. The aircraft was blown up by the hijackers seconds after the passengers were deplaned.
* Flash Airlines Flight 604 crashed into the Red Sea shortly after takeoff from Sharm el-Sheikh International Airport on 3 January 2004. All 148 aboard were killed. The findings of the crash investigation are controversial, with accident investigators from the different countries involved disagreeing on the cause.
* Libyan Arab Airlines Flight 114 was shot down by Israeli fighter jets on 21 February 1973 after it entered Israeli airspace and its pilots ignored instructions from the fighter pilots. Deaths were 108 of those aboard; one of the five survivors included the copilot.
* KLM Flight 823 crashed and burst into flames while on approach to Cairo International Airport, killing 20 people.

* Pakistan International Airlines Flight 705 crashed while attempting to land at Cairo International Airport on 20 May 1965 when the pilot descended too quickly. Six passengers survived; the other 121 people aboard died.
* TWA Flight 903 crashed during a forced emergency landing in the desert near Cairo after an engine caught fire and separated from the aircraft midflight on 1 September 1950. All 55 aboard were killed.

* Metrojet Flight 9268 was destroyed by a bomb while cruising in midair over the Sinai Peninsula, killing all 224 people on board. Russia and the West blamed ISIS for the downing of the aircraft, while Egypt denied such allegations.

=== Equatorial Guinea ===
* Aeroflot Flight 418, a Tupolev Tu-154A carrying 46 people, on 1 June 1976, crashed into the mountain in Bioko. Everyone perished.
* In the 2005 Equatorial Express Airlines An-24 crash on the night of 16 July 2005, an Antonov An-24 clipped some trees and crashed due to being overloaded; it is Equatorial Guinea&#x27;s deadliest plane crash.

=== Ethiopia ===
* Ethiopian Air Lines Flight 372 crashed into a mountain south of Jimma on 15 July 1960, killing one on board.
*Ethiopian Airlines Flight 604 suffered multiple bird strikes and attempted an emergency landing at Bahir Dar. Upon landing, the plane caught fire, killing 35 people.
*Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302, a Boeing 737 MAX 8, crashed shortly after takeoff from Addis Ababa Bole International Airport, killing all 157 people on board on 10 March 2019.

=== Ghana ===
* Allied Air Flight 111, a Boeing 727, overran the runway on 2 June 2012, and crashed into a perimeter fence, minibus, cyclist, and taxicab, resulting in 12 deaths on the ground. All four crew members survived.

=== Guinea ===
*A Chosonminhang-owned Ilyushin Il-62 flying on a charter flight from Pyongyang to Conakry with stopovers in Kabul and Cairo in July 1983, crashed into the Guinean mountains on approach to Conakry International Airport. All 23 occupants died.
* In September 2022, TAP plane from Lisbon crashed into some vehicles as it was landing, at Ahmed Abdullah Tokere airport. There were some deaths; the people in some of the vehicles.

=== Ivory Coast ===
* Kenya Airways Flight 431 aircraft was flying at normal takeoff speed, when the Airbus A310 stall warning suddenly went on. The pilots then pushed the controllers, so the stall warning stopped. The plane actually never flew at stall speed. Flight 431 then crashed into the Atlantic Ocean shortly after takeoff from Abidjan on 30 January 2000. Ten passengers survived. Of the 169 fatalities, 146 bodies were recovered, and 103 of those bodies were identified.
* Varig Flight 797 crashed into the jungle near Abidjan after engine failure on 3 January 1987. Of 51 on board, only a single passenger survived.

=== Kenya ===
* Lufthansa Flight 540, a Boeing 747, stalled shortly after takeoff, grazed some bushes and grass, and hit elevated road access. The left wing burst into flames and spread, killing 59 people.
* 2006 Kenya plane crash

=== Liberia ===
* Pan Am Flight 151 crashed into a hill in Bong County on 22 June 1951 due to pilot error. All 40 on board were killed.
* Varig Flight 837 was a flight from Fiumicino Airport, Rome, to Roberts International Airport, Monrovia, Liberia. On 5 March 1967, due to pilot error, the flight crashed during the approach to Runway 04 of Roberts International Airport. Of the 71 passengers and 19 crew on board, 50 passengers, and the flight engineer perished. In addition, five people on the ground were also killed. The aircraft caught fire and was written off. This is the deadliest aviation accident in Liberia.

=== Libya ===
* Central African Airways Flight 890 was a Vickers Viscount carrying 54 people when it crashed into high ground near Benina International Airport on 9 August 1958, killing 36 people. At the time, it was the deadliest plane crash in Libya. Pilot fatigue and indisposition were blamed.
* Afriqiyah Airways Flight 771, an Airbus A330, was on approach to Tripoli International Airport on 12 May 2010 when it crashed to the ground in a nose-down attitude, slid, disintegrated, and exploded. Among the 104 aboard, one survived, nine-year-old Ruben van Assouw from the Netherlands.
* Korean Air Flight 803 crashed onto an orchard while on approach to Tripoli International Airport on 27 July 1989 in thick fog and low visibility, killing 79 people. The cause was pilot error.
* Libyan Arab Airlines Flight 1103 was approaching to Tripoli Airport on 22 December 1992 when it collided with a fighter jet, killing all 157 people aboard the flight, while the two pilots of the fighter jet ejected and survived. Some have contested this conclusion, though, claiming Muammar Gaddafi ordered the aircraft&#x27;s destruction.

=== Mali ===
* Air Algérie Flight 5017 was traveling from Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, to Algiers, Algeria, when it suddenly banked heavily to the left, spiraled, and crashed into a desert near Gossi, Mali, on 24 July 2014. The McDonnell Douglas MD-80 was carrying 110 passengers and six crew, all of whom perished.
* An Il-76 reportedly operated by the Wagner Group crashed upon landing at Gao Airport, Mali. The aircraft touched down and apparently experienced brake failure before overrunning the runway.

=== Mauritania ===
* Air Mauritanie Flight 625, a Fokker F28 Fellowship, was carrying 93 people when it flew into a sandstorm that limited pilot visibility. The aircraft hit the terrain and killed 80 people in the worst crash involving a Fokker 28 and one of the deadliest in Mauritania.

=== Mauritius ===
* In 1960, Qantas Flight 4606, a Lockheed Constellation, lost engine power before taking off at Mauritius Airport. The captain pulled off the power, braked hard, and pulled selected reverse thrust. The airplane bounced over a low embankment, crashed into a gully, and caught fire. The flight was bound for Cocos Island. Of the 50 passengers, all survived.
* South African Airways Flight 295, a Boeing 747-200, was en route to Johannesburg Airport from Taoyuan International Airport with a stopover at Mauritius Airport. In the middle of the flight, the cargo caught fire, leading to the death of some passengers due to suffocation. The aircraft crashed near the east coast of Mauritius, killing all 159 passengers and crew on board.
* Malaysia Airlines Flight 370: In 2016, the flap on a wing of the Boeing 777 was found on the coast of Mauritius. Other debris was found on other islands in the Indian Ocean. Today, the whereabouts of the rest of the aircraft is still unknown.

=== Morocco ===
* Air France Flight 2005: On 12 September 1961, a Sud Aviation Caravelle was on approach to Rabat when it crashed to the ground, killing all 77 people on board.
* In the 1975 Agadir Royal Air Maroc Boeing 707 crash, on 3 August 1975, a Boeing 707-321C crashed into a mountain and exploded, killing all 188 people on board in Morocco&#x27;s deadliest air disaster. The plane was totally destroyed.
* On 21 August 1994, Royal Air Maroc Flight 630, an ATR 42-312, was carrying 44 people while en route to Mohammed V Airport, when it was deliberately crashed by the pilot, killing all on board.

=== Namibia ===
* South African Airways Flight 228, named &quot;Pretoria&quot; crashed on 20 April 1968 while on approach to Windhoek, killing 123 people.
* LAM Mozambique Airlines Flight 470 crashed on 29 November 2013 into the Bwabwata National Park in Namibia en route to Quatro de Fevereiro Airport, Angola. All 27 passengers and six crew on board were killed. The final report concluded that the pilot intentionally crashed the plane into terrain.

=== Niger ===
* UTA Flight 772, operated by French airline Union des Transports Aériens, was flying over the Sahara Desert. The McDonnell Douglas DC-10 exploded over Niger on 19 September 1989. All 156 passengers and 14 crew members died, including the wife of the American ambassador to Chad. The investigation found that Libyan terrorists backed by the Libyan government smuggled a bomb in the cargo hold.

=== Nigeria ===
* Nigeria Airways Flight 825, a Vickers VC10, struck trees and exploded while on approach to Lagos International Airport on 20 November 1969, killing all 87 people on board. 
* In the 1973 Kano Nigeria Airways Boeing 707 crash, a Boeing 707 was landing at Kano Airport on 22 January 1973 when the nose wheel suddenly collapsed. Then, the right main gear started to collapse, as well. The aircraft spun 180°, left the runway, and burst into flames, killing 176.
* ADC Airlines Flight 86 was in a collision course with another plane. The pilots averted the disaster by doing a drastic maneuver, but lost control and crashed, killing all 144 passengers and crew on board. The causes were air traffic control and pilot errors.
* Nigeria Airways Flight 357, a Boeing 737-2F9, was landing at Kaduna Airport on 13 November 1995, when it overran the runway and burst into flames, killing 11 people. The aircraft also was destroyed by the flames.
* EAS Airlines Flight 4226, while taking off from Kano, overran the runway. The engine ingested a massive amount of dust, causing it to fail. The aircraft then crashed into a heavily populated residential area. Deaths included 73 people aboard the aircraft and 30 people on the ground, killing 103 in total. 
* Bellview Airlines Flight 210, shortly after takeoff, immediately nose-dived and crashed at high speed. All 117 passengers and crew on board were killed. The cause remains undetermined.
* Sosoliso Airlines Flight 1145 crash-landed on the runway at Port Harcourt International Airport on 10 December 2005 due to pilot error, killing 108 of the 110 passengers and crew on board.
* ADC Airlines Flight 53 crashed immediately after takeoff due to wind shear and pilot error on 29 October 2006, killing 96 of the 105 passengers and crew on board.
* Dana Air Flight 992 had its fuel line, which is vital for the operation of the engine, damaged, which caused the engine to fail. The plane then slammed into a neighborhood in Lagos, killing all 153 passengers and crew on board, as well as 6 people on the ground.

=== Rwanda ===
* RwandAir Flight 205 crashed into a building after an engine throttle became jammed during landing in Kigali on 12 November 2009, killing one passenger.

=== Somalia ===
* Somali Airlines Flight 40, a few minutes after taking off from Mogadishu, entered violent turbulence. The plane shook violently, went into a spiral dive, and lost control after its right wing separated. It then crashed near Balad, killing all 50 people on board.
* Daallo Airlines Flight 159, an Airbus A321, was en route to Djibouti when a part of its cabin exploded shortly after taking off from Mogadishu&#x27;s Aden Adde International Airport. Two injuries were reported. A passenger was sucked out from the aircraft and his body was found near Balad.
* 2020 East African Express Airways Shootdown 4 May 2020 - An Embraer EMB-120 Brasilia operated by East African Express Airways crashes, killing all 6 on board, allegedly due to a shootdown.

=== South Africa ===
* 13 March 1967 - South African Airways Flight 406 crashed into the Eastern Cape after the pilot suffered a fatal heart attack while on approach to East London, South Africa. All 25 aboard were killed.

* 19 October 1986 - 1986 Mozambican Tupolev Tu-134 crash: A Tupolev Tu-134 carrying President of Mozambique Samora Machel crashed into terrain while en route to Maputo, killing 34. Machel was among the dead.
* 1 March 1988 - Comair Flight 206 breaks up on approach to Johannesburg due to a bomb, killing all 17 on board.
* 24 September 2009 - SA Airlink Flight 8911 crash lands on a sports field after an engine failure, killing 1 on board.

=== South Sudan ===
* 1986 Sudan Airways Fokker F-27 shootdown: On 16 August 1986, a Fokker F-27 Friendship 400M was shot down by Sudan People&#x27;s Liberation Army. The plane disintegrated and crashed near Malakai. Everyone on board was killed.

=== Sudan ===
* Sudan Airways Flight 109 crashed, broke apart, and caught fire upon landing at Khartoum on 10 June 2008. The aircraft had been dispatched with its port engine thrust reverser deactivated. This condition caused it to veer to the right when the captain activated reverse thrust in both engines to stop the aircraft within 2,080 meters (6,820 ft) of runway left. Thirty people were confirmed dead.
* Sudan Airways Flight 139 crashed in Port Sudan on 8 July 2003, killing all 117 aboard. The flight crew was not able to see the runway in the low visibility, and crashed when attempting a missed approach. A toddler initially survived the crash but died from his injuries the next day.

=== Togo ===
*In the 1974 Togo plane crash, a plane carrying several Togolese politicians crashed near Sarakawa. President Gnassingbé Eyadéma was the sole survivor.

=== Tunisia ===
* EgyptAir Flight 843: On 7 May 2002, a Boeing 737 carrying 62 people was on approach to Tunisia&#x27;s capital Tunis when it crashed into a nearby hill. The aircraft broke up, killing 14 people.

=== Zimbabwe ===
* Air Rhodesia Flight 825 was shot down by Zimbabwe People&#x27;s Revolutionary Army (ZIPRA). Initially, 18 people survived the crash, but the ZIPRA guerrillas massacred 10 people.
* Air Rhodesia Flight 827 also was shot down by ZIPRA guerrillas, all 59 passengers and crew on board died.

==Antarctica==
* Air New Zealand Flight 901 crashed into the side of Mount Erebus, Antarctica, on 28 November 1979 for various reasons including pilot error, maintenance crew error, and whiteout conditions. All 257 aboard died.

==Asia==


===Afghanistan===
* A Bakhtar Afghan Airlines Antonov An-26 was shot down on 4 September 1985 by a ground-to-air missile, all 52 on board were killed.

* 19 March 1998 - An Ariana Afghan Airlines Boeing 727-228 crashes into a mountain, killing all 45 aboard. 
* Kam Air Flight 904 crashed in the Pamir Mountains during a snow storm on 3 February 2005. All 105 people on board were killed, and the cause remains under investigation.
* Pamir Airways Flight 112 crashed in northern Afghanistan on 17 May 2010, killing 43 or 44 people.
* 6 July 2011 - A Silk Way Airlines Ilyushin Il-76 hits a mountain, killing all 9 aboard. 
* National Airlines Flight 102, a Boeing 747-428BCF crashes after takeoff from Bagram Airfield on 29 April 2013. All 7 crew members are killed. The rope that secured the cargo snapped. The cargo managed to shift and slammed onto the rear bulkhead, causing the plane to lose its control.
* 18 May 2016 - A Silk Way Airlines Antonov An-12, crashes due to engine failure, killing 7.

===Armenia===
* 18 July 1981 - A Transporte Aéreo Rioplatense Canadair CL-44 and a Soviet Air Defense Forces Sukhoi Su-15 collide in mid-air. All 4 on board the Canadair died. The fighter pilot survived. 
* Belavia Flight 1834 crashed during takeoff from Yerevan&#x27;s Zvartnots International Airport on 14 February 2008 after suffering mechanical failure due to icing. There were no casualties.

===Azerbaijan===
* 18 August 1973 - Aeroflot Flight 13, an Antonov An-24B operated by Aeroflot crashes on takeoff due to engine failure, killing 56.
* 5 December 1995 - Azerbaijan Airlines Flight 56 – Shortly after taking off from Nakhchivan Airport, the Tupolev Tu-134&#x27;s no. 1 engine failed. The pilots seemed to misread it as a failure on engine no 2. Therefore, they shut down engine no 2. After realizing their failure, the pilots gave full power to engine no 2. But the engine had already stopped. The plane banked heavily and crashed into a field. Fifty-two people were killed.
* 23 December 2005 - Azerbaijan Airlines Flight 217 – The Antonov An-140 suffered an instrument failure. While it was returning to Baku, the plane crashed into a beach. All 23 people on board were killed in the disaster.

===Bahrain===
* Air France Douglas DC-4 accidents: On 12 June 1950, a flight from Saigon to Paris crashed in the Persian Gulf while on approach to Bahrain International Airport killing 46 of the 52 on board. Two days later, a second Douglas DC-4 operating on the same flight route, crashed in the Persian Gulf while on approach to Bahrain International Airport, killing 40 of 53 on board.
* Gulf Air Flight 072 crashed in the Persian Gulf while on approach to Bahrain International Airport on 23 August 2000, due to pilot error and spatial disorientation, killing all 143 people on board.

===Bangladesh===
* 28 September 1977 - Japan Airlines Flight 472, a Japan Airlines Douglas DC-8 is hijacked. Everyone survives. 
* 5 August 1984 - A Biman Bangladesh Airlines Fokker F27 crashed into a marsh near Zia International Airport (now Shahjalal International Airport) in Dhaka, Bangladesh while landing in poor weather. With a total death toll of 49 people, it is the deadliest aviation disaster to occur on Bangladeshi soil and also the airline&#x27;s worst accident.
* 9 March 2016 - A True Aviation Antonov An-26B, crashes into the Bay of Bengal, killing 3.

===Cambodia===
* PMTair Flight 241 – On 25 June 2007, an Antonov An-24B carrying 22 people crashed and burst into flames in upside-down condition. No one survived. An official investigation by the Cambodian Government blamed pilot error.
* Vietnam Airlines Flight 815 – On 3 September 1997, a Tupolev Tu-134B-3 operated by Vietnam&#x27;s flag carrier Vietnam Airlines crashed and skidded over dry rice paddies and exploded 800 meters from the runway. Only one survived. The first officer and the flight engineer had warned the captain twice to abort the landing. An official investigation blamed pilot error.

===China===
* 31 March 1922 - A Beijing-Han Airlines Handley Page O/7 crashes struck trees and crashed upon landing. All 14 on board died.
* 24 August 1938 - A China National Aviation Corporation Douglas DC-2 was shot down by Japanese aircraft, killing 14.
* 23 July 1954 - A Cathay Pacific Airways Douglas C-54A-10-DC Skymaster was shot down, killing 10.
* 26 April 1982 - CAAC Flight 3303, while on approach to Guilin Qifengling Airport, crashed into a mountain in heavy rain near Yangshuo, killing all 112 people on board. 
* 24 December 1982 - CAAC Flight 2311, a CAAC Airlines Ilyushin Il-18D was destroyed by fire after landing, killing 25.
* 14 September 1983 - A CAAC Airlines Hawker Siddeley Trident and a PLAAF Harbin H-5 collided at Guilin Qifengling Airport, killing at least 11.
* 18 January 1988 - China Southwest Airlines Flight 4146&#x27;s engine No. 4 detached due to an in-flight fire causing a loss of control, killing all 108 on board.
* 2 October 1990 - In the 1990 Guangzhou Baiyun airport collisions Xiamen Airlines Flight 8301, a Boeing 737, was hijacked while attempting to land. It sideswiped a Boeing 707, then the aircraft crashed into a Boeing 757. 128 people died in the incident.
* 31 July 1992 - China General Aviation Flight 7552 lost control upon take-off and crashes into a pond nearby, killing 107 people.
* 24 November 1992 - China Southern Airlines Flight 3943 was descending when the flight crew accidentally caused an engine thrust asymmetry. The plane rolled to the right and lost control, then it crashed into a mountain near Guilin. All 141 on board died.
* 23 July 1993 - China Northwest Airlines Flight 2119, while rolling on the runway for take-off, suffers a right-side flap actuator failure, causing the flaps to retract. The crew aborted the take-off, and the plane overran the runway and crashed into a lake, killing 55 people.
* 26 October 1993 - China Eastern Airlines Flight 5398 overran the runway during an attempted go-around and stops in a pond. 2 people died.
* 13 November 1993 - China Northern Airlines Flight 6901, while on approach to Ürümqi Diwopu International Airport, the pilots received a &quot;pull up!&quot; alert. Rather than pulling the nose up, the captain asked the first officer the meaning of the word. The plane crashed into terrain, killing 12 people.
* 6 June 1994 - China Northwest Airlines Flight 2303 was climbing when the autopilot responsible for the bank and yaw control malfunctioned, causing subsequent loss of control. The aircraft overstressed, and the airframe could not handle the pressure. It broke up in mid-air and crashed near Xi&#x27;an. 160 people were killed. 
* 8 May 1997 - China Southern Airlines Flight 3456 was on approach to Shenzhen. After two failed landing attempts, the pilots tried a third attempt. It crashed into terrain and broke up in severe weather conditions. 35 people were killed. Pilot error was the cause of the accident.
* 24 February 1999 - China Southwest Airlines Flight 4509 lost pitch control and dived, leading to an in-flight breakup, killing 61. The loss of control was caused by poor maintenance.
* 15 April 1999 - Korean Air Cargo Flight 6316 nosedove into the town of Xinzhuang due to pilot error. 8 people were killed, including 5 on the ground.
* 22 June 2000 - Wuhan Airlines Flight 343 was a Xian Y-7 carrying 42 people when it was struck by lightning and crashed into a village, killing 49 people including 7 on the ground. Lightning strike was the cause of the accident.
* 7 May 2002 - China Northern Airlines Flight 6136 took off when one of its passengers, Zhen Piling, set fire on board. The fire spread, causing the MD-82 to lose control and crash into Bohai Bay. All 103 passengers and 9 crew were killed in the incident.
* 21 November 2004 - China Eastern Flight 5210 was taking off when suddenly it crashed into a park, killing all 53 people on board and 2 on the ground. The cause of the accident was ice accumulation on the wings.
* 28 November 2009 - Avient Aviation Flight 324, an Avient Aviation McDonnell Douglas MD-11F crashes on takeoff due to an improper flap and slat setting, killing 3.
* 24 August 2010 - Henan Airlines Flight 8387 an Embraer E-190 carrying 96 people was approaching Lindu Airport when it crashed into terrain and burst into flames. 44 people were killed, the other 52 survivors were injured. The crew ignored the safety rules while landing in foggy conditions.
* 21 March 2022 - China Eastern Airlines Flight 5735 was a Boeing 737 89P carrying 123 people when it nosedived into the ground at Teng County, killing all 123 passengers and 9 crew members on board. The cause is unknown.
* 12 May 2022 - Tibet Airlines Flight 9833 aborted take-off from Chongqing, veered off the runway and burst into flame. All 122 occupants evacuated safely.

=== Georgia ===
* Aeroflot Flight 207, an Ilyushin Il-14M operated by Aeroflot crashes in the mountain of Recch on 10 June 1960. All 24 passengers and 7 crew died. 
* Aeroflot Flight 244, an Antonov An-24B operated by Aeroflot was hijacked on 15 October 1970. 1 flight attendant died and 3 others were injured. 
* Aeroflot Flight 6833, a Tupolev Tu-134-A operated by Aeroflot was hijacked on 18 November 1983. 7 people die.
* A Tupolev Tu-154B crashed during takeoff at Tbilisi International Airport, killing all 24 on board and 4 on the ground.

====September 1993 crashes====
* Georgian Tu-134A crash (20 September) - A parked empty aircraft was destroyed by missiles. No one was injured. 
* Transair Georgia Crash (21 September) - Shot down on approach at Sukhumi Babushara Airport. All 22 passengers and 5 crew died. 
* Orbi Georgian Airways Crash (22 September) – Shot down as it was trying to land at Sukhumi. 108 people died. 
* Transair Georgia Crash (23 September) - Shot at during boarding. 1 crew member died.

=== Hong Kong ===
* At Kai Tak airport in 1988, CAAC Flight 301 clipped approach lights, overran the runway, crashed into the runway, and slid through the grass, killing seven people.
* China Airlines Flight 605 overran the runway at Kai Tak International Airport on 4 November 1993. The pilot failed to initiate a mandatory missed approach procedure after observing severe airspeed fluctuations. Nobody on board was seriously injured in the incident.
* China Airlines Flight 642 crashed while attempting to land at Hong Kong International Airport on 22 August 1999 during a typhoon. The aircraft flipped and caught fire, killing three on board. There were 312 survivors.
* In 1967, Thai Airways International Flight 601 undershoots the runway on landing and impacts water killing 24.
* On 19 April 1961, a US military Douglas DC-3 (C-47 Skytrain) bound for Formosa crashed into Mount Parker after takeoff. Of the 16 on board, 15 were killed.
* On 24 August 1965, the 1965 Hong Kong US Marines KC-130F Crash occurred when a United States Marine Corps KC-130F crashed shortly after takeoff, killing 59 of the 71 people on board. This was the deadliest accident at Kai Tak.

=== India ===
* 1996 Charkhi Dadri mid-air collision, a Boeing 747-168B of Saudi Arabian Airlines collided with Kazakhstan Airlines Ilyushin Il-76. The collision killed 349 people onboard both aircraft.
* Air India Flight 855, a Boeing 747-237B of Air India crashed 101 seconds after taking off from Sahar Airport killing all 213 occupants onboard.
* Air India Express Flight 1344, a Boeing 737-8HG(SF) of Air India Express suffered a runway excursion and killed 21 out of the 190 occupants onboard.
* Air India Express Flight 812, another Boeing 737-8HG(SF) of Air India Express suffered a runway excursion killing 158 out of the 166 occupants onboard.
* 2016 Indian Air Force An-32 crash, an Antonov An-32 belonging to the Indian Air Force crashed into the Indian Ocean near Mainland India killing all 29 occupants onboard.
* 2019 Indian Air Force An-32 crash, an Antonov An-32 belonging to the Indian Air Force crashed in hilly terrain killing all 13 occupants onboard.
* Indian Airlines Flight 605, an Airbus A320-231 of Indian Airlines crashed during an approach to Bangalore killing 92 of the 146 occupants onboard.
* Indian Airlines Flight 257, a Boeing 737-200 of Indian Airlines crashed in Thangjing Hill killing all 69 occupants onboard.
* Indian Airlines Flight 491, a Boeing 737-200 of Indian Airlines crashed during takeoff roll due to pilot error killing 55 out of the 118 occupants onboard.
* Indian Airlines Flight 410, a Boeing 737-200 of Indian Airlines was hijacked with 132 occupants onboard (including the hijackers). All 132 occupants onboard survived.
* Indian Airlines Flight 113, a Boeing 737-200 of Indian Airlines crashed killing 133 out of the 135 occupants onboard.
* Indian Airlines Flight 503, a Dornier 228 of Indian Airlines crashed due to improper maintenance killing all six occupants onboard.
* Indian Airlines Flight 427, a Boeing 737-200 of Indian Airlines with 141 occupants onboard was hijacked by a lone hijacker over Indian airspace. The aircraft soon landed at Raja Sansi Airport after circling over Lahore, Pakistan for quite a while. The aircraft was stormed in by the Commandos and the hijacker was taken down.

=== Indonesia ===
* 11 April 1955 - Kashmir Princess, a Lockheed L-749A Constellation operated by Air India is bombed and crashes into the sea killing 16.
* 16 July 1957 - KLM Flight 844, a Lockheed 1049E Super Constellation operated by KLM crashes into the sea after takeoff killing 58.
* 16 February 1967 - Garuda Indonesia Flight 708, a Lockheed L-188 Electra operated by Garuda Indonesia crashes short of the runway, killing 22.
* 10 November 1971 - A Merpati Nusantara Airlines Vickers Viscount 828 crashes into the sea killing all 69 on board. 
* 24 September 1975 - Garuda Indonesia Flight 150, a Fokker F-28 Fellowship operated by Garuda Indonesia Airways crashes into trees on approach killing 26.
* 11 July 1979 - A Garuda Indonesia Fokker F28 Mk-1000 crashes into Mount Sibayak killing all 61 on board.
* 28 March 1981 - Garuda Indonesia Flight 206, a McDonnell Douglas DC-9 operated by Garuda Indonesia is hijacked killing 5.
* 20 March 1982 - A Garuda Indonesia Fokker F28 Mk-1000 overruns the runway on landing killing all 27 on board. 
* 24 June 1982 - British Airways Flight 9, a Boeing 747-236B operated by British Airways flies into a volcanic cloud causing all four engines to fail. Pilots successfully restart the engines and land the aircraft. Everyone survives.
* 4 April 1987 - Garuda Indonesia Flight 035, a Douglas DC-9-32 operated by Garuda Indonesia crashes on approach killing 23.
* 7 December 1996 - Dirgantara Air Service Flight 5940, CASA C-212 Aviocar operated by Dirgantara Air Service crashes due to engine failure killing 18.
* 26 September 1997 - Garuda Indonesia Flight 152, an Airbus A300B4-220 operated by Garuda Indonesia crashes high terrain on approach killing all 234 people on board. 
* 18 November 2000 - Dirgantara Air Service Flight 3130, a Britten Norman BN-2 Islander operated by Dirgantara Air Service crashes into a forest due to overloading. Everyone survives. 
* 14 January 2002 - Lion Air Flight 386, a Boeing 737-200 operated by Lion Air crashes on takeoff due to an inappropriate flap setting. Everyone survives. 
* 16 January 2002 - Garuda Indonesia Flight 421, a Boeing 737-3Q8 operated by Garuda Indonesia ditches into Bengawan Solo River due to dual engine failure killing 1.
* 30 November 2004 - Lion Air Flight 583, McDonnell Douglas MD-82 operated by Lion Air overruns the runway on landing due to pilot error, killing 25.
* 5 September 2005 - Mandala Airlines Flight 091, a Boeing 737-230 Adv crashes shortly after takeoff due to an improper flap and slat setting, killing 149.
* 4 March 2006 - Lion Air Flight 8987, a McDonnell Douglas MD-82 operated by Lion Air veers off the runway on landing due to differential thrust. Everyone survives. 
* 24 December 2006 - Lion Air Flight 792, a Boeing 737-400 operated by Lion Air lands hard causing the landing gear to collapse. Everyone survives. 
* 1 January 2007 - Adam Air Flight 574, a Boeing 737-4Q8 operated by Adam Air breaks up in mid-air and crashes into the sea due to pilot error, killing all 102 on board. 
* 21 February 2007 - Adam Air Flight 172, a Boeing 737-33A operated by Adam Air lands hard and suffers structural damage. No one is killed. 
* 7 March 2007 - Garuda Indonesia Flight 200, a Boeing 737-497 operated by Garuda Indonesia overruns the runway on landing killing 21.
* 9 April 2009 - An Aviastar British Aerospace 146-300 crashes into Pikei Hill killing all 6.
* 10 November 2010 - Lion Air Flight 712, a Boeing 737-400 operated by Lion Air overruns the runway on landing. Everyone survives. 
* 9 May 2012 - A Sukhoi Superjet 100-95 crashes into Mount Salak killing all 45 on board.
* 13 April 2013 - Lion Air Flight 904, a Boeing 737-8GP operated by Lion Air crashes into the sea on approach. Everyone survives. 
* 28 December 2014 - Indonesia AirAsia Flight 8501, an Airbus A320-216 operated by Indonesia AirAsia stalls and crashes into the Java Sea killing all 162 on board. 
* 2 October 2015 - Aviastar Flight 7503, a de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter operated by Aviastar crashes into Latimojong Mountain killing all 10 on board.
* 4 April 2016 - Batik Air Flight 7703, a Boeing 737-8GP(WL) operated by Batik Air collides with an ATR 42-600 operated by TransNusa Air Services crossing the runway. Everyone survives.
* 29 October 2018 - Lion Air Flight 610, a Boeing 737 MAX 8 operated by Lion Air crashes into the Java Sea shortly after takeoff due to MCAS flaw, killing all 189 on board. 
*9 January 2021 - Sriwijaya Air Flight 182, a Boeing 737-524 operated by Sriwijaya Air nosedives into the Java Sea minutes after takeoff. All 62 on board are presumed dead. This accident was caused by autothrottle failure

=== Iran ===

*6 September 1929 – Imperial Airways de Havilland DH.66 Hercules G-EBMZ stalls when it flares too early while attempting a night landing at Jask Airport in Jask, Persia. It crashes and bursts into flames when its wing fuel tanks ruptured and emergency flares in its wingtips ignite the fuel. Both crew members and one of the three passengers died.
*4 December 1946 – Aeroflot Lisunov Li-2 crashed at Mashhad, Iran, killing 24.
*14 September 1950 – An Iran Air Douglas C-47 Skytrain (registration EP-AAG) crashed on takeoff from Mehrabad Airport, killing all eight on board.
*1 December 1950 – An Iran Air C-47A (registration EP-AAJ) struck a mountain near Chamaran en route to Tehran from Tabriz, killing all eight on board.
*22 December 1951 – An Egypt Air SNCASE Languedoc circled Tehran twice in a snowstorm and crashed 10 km W of Tehran, killing 22 on board.
*25 December 1952 – Iran Air Douglas DC-3; Tehran, Iran: 27 fatalities and two survivors.
*10 September 1958 – A Mariner P-303 was being ferried to the Netherlands from Biak, Indonesia. Due to technical problems, a forced landing was carried out at Abadan, Iran. About two weeks later, repairs had been accomplished, and the aircraft took off. Shortly after takeoff, an oil leak was observed on engine number one. While on finals for landing at Abadan, the aircraft suddenly lost height and crashed, killing all aboard. It appeared that the remaining propeller reversed thrust, causing the crew to lose control.
*15 March 1963 – A TMA Cargo Avro York crashed seven miles southeast of Karaj, killing all 4 on board.
*15 March 1974 – A Sud Aviation Caravelle of Sterling Airlines damaged beyond repair while taxiing in Mehrabad International Airport, causing 15 casualties.
*21 January 1980 – Iran Air Boeing 727-86; near Tehran, Iran. The aircraft hit high ground in a snowstorm during the approach to land. All 8 crew members and 120 passengers were killed.
*24 May 1991 – A forced landing near Kermanshah, Iran, due to fuel shortage had to be made after three missed approaches by Soviet Metro Cargo Ilyushin Il-76. 4 on-board casualties.
*8 February 1993 – Iran Air Tours Flight 962 a Tupolev Tu-154 was departing on a non-scheduled flight from Mehrabad International Airport, Tehran, to Mashhad International Airport when it became involved in a mid-air collision with an Iranian Air Force Sukhoi Su-24 fighter plane that was on approach to the same airport. All 12 crew members and 119 passengers on board, plus both pilots of the Su-24, were killed, totaling 133 fatalities.
*12 October 1994 – Iran Aseman Airlines Flight 746, a Fokker F28 Fellowship (registered EP-PAV) en route from Isfahan to Tehran suffered a sudden loss of power in both engines at 23:05 local time, 35 minutes after take-off from Isfahan International Airport. The aircraft went into an uncontrolled descent and crashed near Natanz, killing all 59 passengers and 7 crew members on board.
*17 May 2001 – A Faraz Qeshm Airlines Yakovlev Yak-40 departed from Tehran on a flight to Gorgan Airport carrying 30 people; including the Iranian Transport Minister Rahman Dadman, two deputy ministers and seven more members of parliament. It was forced to divert due to bad weather conditions and was later discovered crashed in the Alborz Mountains, near Sari, Iran. All on board perished.
*12 February 2002 – Iran Air Tours Flight 956, a Tupolev Tu-154, crashed into the Sefid Kooh mountains during heavy rain, snow, and dense fog while descending for Khorramabad Airport. All twelve crew members and 107 passengers were killed.
*23 December 2002 – Aeromist-Kharkiv Flight 2137, (registration UR-14003), an Antonov An-140 crashed near Ardestan, Iran, killing all 44 on board.
*20 April 2005 – Saha Airlines Flight 171, a Boeing 707-320C, registration EP-SHE, flying from Kish Island, crashed on landing at Mehrabad Airport, Tehran following an unstabilized approach with a higher than recommended airspeed. Gear and/or a tire failed after touchdown and the flight overran the far end of the runway. Of the 12 crew and 157 passengers, 3 passengers were killed.
*1 September 2006 – Iran Air Tours Flight 945, A Tupolev Tu-154 from Bandar Abbas Airport with 11 crew and 137 passengers on board burst into flames upon landing at Mashhad International Airport, Iran killing 28 of those on board.
*15 July 2009 – Caspian Airlines Flight 7908, a Tupolev Tu-154M, was traveling from Tehran to Yerevan when one of its engines suffered a catastrophic failure. The engine&#x27;s explosive disintegration severed the hydraulic lines and the fuel lines. The hot hydraulic fluid contacted oxygen and fuel, resulting in a fire that ultimately caused the aircraft to lose its control. The aircraft crashed, killing all 168 people (156 passengers, 12 crew) on board.
*24 July 2009 – Aria Air Flight 1525, an Ilyushin IL-62M, (registration UP-I6208), crashed on landing at Mashhad International Airport, killing 16 out of 173 on board.
*24 January 2010 – Taban Air Flight 6437, a Tupolev Tu-154, crashed whilst making an emergency landing at Mashhad International Airport due to a medical emergency; all 157 and 13 crew survived the accident with 42 receiving minor injuries.
*9 January 2011 – Iran Air Flight 277, a Boeing 727, (registration EP-IRP), on a scheduled domestic service from Tehran to Urmia, Iran, crashed after aborting its approach into Urmia Airport in poor weather. Of 105 aboard, 77 were killed.
*18 October 2011 – Iran Air Flight 742; a Boeing 727, (registration EP-IRR), on a scheduled service from Moscow, Russia, to Tehran, made an emergency landing at Tehran&#x27;s Mehrabad International Airport after the nose landing gear failed to deploy. All 113 on board escaped injury.
*10 August 2014 – Sepahan Airlines Flight 5915 an IrAn-140-100 (registration EP-GPA), was taking off when one of its engines malfunctioned. The aircraft lost its altitude, skidded, crashed into a wall, and burst into flames. The wreckage then stopped on a highway. 40 people were killed.

*18 February 2018 – Iran Aseman Airlines Flight 3704 an ATR 72-212, (registration EP-ATS), during its approach to Yasuj Airport, crashed into Mount Dena in the Zagros Mountains, killing all 60 passengers and 6 crew members on board.
*11 March 2018 – 2018 Iran Bombardier Challenger crash; a Başaran Holding Bombardier Challenger, registration TC-TRB, crashed in Zagros Mountains on Iranian soil, while returning to Turkey from the United Arab Emirates.
*14 January 2019 – Saha Airline Boeing 707, (registration EP-CPP), crashed at Fath Air Base, near Karaj, killing all 16 people on board. This aircraft was also the last civil Boeing 707 in operation.
*8 January 2020 – Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752, a Boeing 737-8KV operated by Ukraine International Airlines is shot down by a missile shortly after takeoff killing all 176 people on board.
*27 January 2020 - Caspian Airlines Flight 6936 overruns the runway while landing at Mahshahr Airport. Everybody survives.

===Iraq===
*22 November 2003 - A DHL Airbus A300 suffers a missile strike, causing loss of hydraulic pressure. The plane lands safely at Baghdad International Airport.
*9 January 2007 - An AerianTur-M Antonov An-26 crashes on approach to Balad Air Base. 34 people are killed.

=== Japan ===
* All Nippon Airways Flight 60 crashed into Tokyo Bay while on approach to Tokyo International Airport on 4 February 1966, killing 133 people in the deadliest single-plane incident until 1971. The cause of is undetermined.
* All Nippon Airways Flight 61 – Hijacked and taken back over Tokyo, Japan.
* BOAC Flight 911 was flying above Mount Fuji when it encountered a clear-air turbulence. The aircraft spiraled down with parts of the aircraft detaching one by one. It crashed into the ground, killing everyone on board. A photo of the aircraft falling was captured by a photographer. 
* Toa Domestic Airlines Flight 63 – The aircraft, a NAMC YS-11A-217, crashed into the face of Yokotsu Mountain, all 68 people on board were killed.
* Canadian Pacific Airlines Flight 402 – During landing phase at Tokyo International Airport in fog, the plane descended below the glideslope (similar to Asiana Airlines Flight 214). The plane hit approach lights and a seawall. Of the 62 passengers and 10 crew, 8 passengers survived.
* Japan Airlines Flight 350 – Flight 350 was on approach to Haneda Airport when the pilot deliberately nose-dived the plane to crash it. The pilot was then subdued by other flight crews, yet the plane remained descending. It then crashed into Tokyo Bay. The pilot who deliberately nose-dived the plane was suffering from mental illness before the incident.

* Japan Airlines Flight 123 – Flight 123 was flying over Japan when part of its vertical stabilizer detached, causing some hydraulic loss which led to losing control. Flight crews tried to recover the plane and head back to Tokyo, but it was too late. The Boeing 747 then crashed into Mount Takamagahara, Japan. Only 4 people survived. It is the deadliest single-aircraft crash to date and the deadliest in Japan. Investigators concluded that the rear pressure bulkhead was improperly repaired after being damaged in a tailstrike a few years earlier, resulting in the detachment.
* China Airlines Flight 140 stalled, impacted the runway, exploded and burst into flames. Only seven people survived. The first officer accidentally pushed the TO/GA button (Takeoff/Go-around button) which raises the throttle position to the same as take offs and go-arounds. The pilots tried to correct the situation, but their action caused the autopilot to raise the nose sharply, causing it to stall.
* Garuda Indonesia Flight 865 was a DC-10 taking off from Fukuoka when one of its engines had a failure. The pilots then rejected take-off but were too late. The plane overshot the runway, skidded, and burst into flames. The accident claimed 3 lives.
* Japan Airlines Flight 907 and Japan Airlines Flight 958 – Nearly collided near Yaizu, Japan.

* China Airlines Flight 120 – A bolt that had come loose from the slat track managed to puncture the fuel tank, causing a fire after normal landing.
* On 2 January 2024, Japan Airlines Flight 516, an A350-900 flight from New Chitose Airport in Sapporo to Haneda Airport in Tokyo, collided with a Japan Coast Guard De Havilland Canada Dash 8 while landing. The aircraft caught fire and was damaged beyond repair. All 379 passengers and crew were evacuated from the aircraft. Five of the six crew members aboard the Coast Guard aircraft were killed. The Japan Coast Guard aircraft it collided with was participating in relief efforts following the 2024 Noto earthquake the previous day.

=== Jordan ===
* In July 2000, a hijacker stormed the cockpit of a Royal Jordanian plane as it was flying from Queen Alia Airport in Jordan to Damascus Airport, Syria. He made the plane return to Jordan. The hijacker attacked a flight attendant too and an air marshal shot him dead.

===Kazakhstan===
* Aeroflot Flight 4225 – Shortly after takeoff, the Tupolev Tu-154B-2 encountered a massive blow of wind from above, causing it to stall and lose altitude rapidly. The plane stalled, nose-dived, slid, and exploded near Alma-Ata. All 166 people were killed in Kazakhstan&#x27;s deadliest plane crash.
* Aeroflot Flight 5463 – The aircraft crashed into the western slope of Dolan Mountain while on approach to Almaty. All 90 passengers and crews on board were killed.

* SCAT Airlines Flight 760 – A Bombardier CRJ200 operated by Kazakh-based SCAT Airlines suddenly nose-dived and impacted terrain while on final approach to Almaty International Airport. All 21 people aboard killed. Investigators concluded that an elevator deflection caused the crash, but they could not determine the cause of the deflection.
* Azerbaijan Airlines Flight 8243 - The Embraer E190AR crashed during an emergency landing at Aktau International Airport after reportedly declaring an emergency while flying over the Caspian Sea, killing 38 of the 67 occupants aboard. Preliminary reports indicate the accident might’ve been caused by a bird strike, with survivors reported an explosion and shrapnel striking the aircraft.

=== Kyrgyzstan ===
* Avia Traffic Company Flight 768 – The Boeing 737 touched the ground too hard, overran the runway and slid, detaching the engines and causing some significant damages to the plane. Although the plane suffered great damage, none killed.
* Iran Aseman Airlines Flight 6895 – The Boeing 737 operated by Itek Air was on final approach to Dushanbe on 24 August 2008 when it crashed into terrain. Only 22 people survived. Russian investigators concluded that the pilots maintained the aircraft altitude below the glideslope.
* Turkish Airlines Flight 6491 – A Boeing 747-400F crashed into a residential area upon attempting landing in thick fog in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan on 16 January 2017. The 4 crew members and 35 people on the ground were killed.

=== Laos ===
* Lao Airlines Flight 301 an ATR 72-600 operated by Lao Airlines was about to land. As they approach, the plane crashed to the ground, bounced a few times, skidded, and plunged into the Mekong River killing all 49 people on board the aircraft. Investigators concluded that the cause of the accident was due to pilot error while approaching.

=== Lebanon ===
* Ariana Afghan Airlines Flight 202: On 21 November 1959, a Douglas DC-4 carrying 27 people crashed into the side of a hill at Aramoun near Beirut shortly after take-off. Only one person survived.
* Ethiopian Airlines Flight 409 crashed after taking off from Beirut, killing all 90 aboard.

=== Malaysia ===

*Malaysian Airline System Flight 653 – The plane was hijacked en route from Penang to Kuala Lumpur. It eventually crashed at Tanjung Kupang, killing all 100 on board.
*Double Six Crash – a Sabah Air aircraft crashed killing state ministers on board.
*Malaysian Airline System Flight 684 – The Airbus A300 struck trees, slid, and struck a stream embankment, losing its nose and both engines. All aboard survived.
*Japan Air Lines Flight 715 – The McDonnell Douglas DC-8 descended below MDA of 750 feet, then at 300 feet it crashed into the side of a hill 4 miles from the airport, near Ladang Elmina estate. It broke on impact killing 34 out of 77.
*Malaysia Airlines Flight 2133 – The Fokker 50 crashed into a shantytown in Tawau, killing 34 people.
*Royal Brunei Airlines Flight 238 – The Dornier 228 crashed into the forest of Lambir Hills National Park near Miri, killing everyone on board.
*Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 – The Boeing 777-200ER disappeared on 8 March 2014 while flying from Kuala Lumpur International Airport to Beijing Capital International Airport. All 227 passengers and 12 crew on board were presumed dead.
*Elmina plane crash - A Beechcraft Raytheon 390 Premier I operated by Jet Valet flying from Langkawi International Airport to Kuala Lumpur-Subang-Sultan Abdul Aziz Shah Airport Selangor crashed on an interchange of the Guthrie Corridor Expressway, approximately 2 minutes (5 km) before landing. All 8 on board the plane perished, as well as 2 road users on the ground.

===Myanmar=== 
* On 11 October 1987, a Burma Airways Fokker F-27 Friendship 500 flew into a mountain and exploded, killing all 49 people on board.
* Korean Air Flight 858 – The Boeing 707 crashed into the sea near the coast of Myanmar after a bomb planted by North Korean agents exploded; all 115 occupants on board died.
* Myanma Airways Flight 635 – While on approach to Tachilek Airport, the Fokker F-27 Friendship crashed into a mountain, killing all 36 people on board.
* Air Bagan Flight 11 – The Fokker 100 crashed into a paddy field and burst into flames after the pilots thought a road was the runway. Two people were killed, including one on the ground.
* On 7 June 2017, a Myanmar Air Force Shaanxi Y-8F-200 stalled and crashed off the coast of Dawei after ice accumulated on its wings, killing all 122 people on board.

=== Nepal ===

* Thai Airways International Flight 311 – On 31 July 1992, an Airbus A310 on the route, registration HS-TID, crashed on approach to Tribhuvan International Airport in Kathmandu. All 113 on board were killed in the second-deadliest plane crash in Nepal.
* Pakistan International Airlines Flight 268 – On 28 September 1992, a Pakistan International Airlines Airbus A300B4-203 crashed into a mountain while on final approach to Kathmandu&#x27;s Tribhuvan, killing all 167 people on board in the worst aviation accident in Nepal.
* 7 July 1999 - Hinduja Cargo Services Flight 8533, a Boeing 727, impacts the Champadevi hills after takeoff killing all 5 crew.
* Necon Air Flight 128 – On 5 September 1999, a BAe 748-501 Super 2B (9N-AEG) of Necon Air, crashed while approaching Tribhuvan International Airport on a flight from Pokhara to Kathmandu. The aircraft collided with a telecommunications tower, killing all 15 occupants of the plane.
* Indian Airlines Flight 814 – On 26 December 1999, an Indian Airlines plane was hijacked en route from Kathmandu to Delhi. The aircraft ended up in Kandahar, Afghanistan. Indian Airlines suspended all flights to and from Nepal for some time, fearing a lack of security at check-in.
* Yeti Airlines Flight 103 – On 8 October 2008, a De Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter carrying 19 people crashed into terrain in bad weather. The Captain was the sole survivor. An investigation concluded that the cause was CFIT.
* Agni Air Flight 101 – On 24 August 2010, an Agni Air Dornier 228-101 crashed into a mountain, killing all 14 aboard. Investigation concluded that the pilots became spatially disoriented after the plane&#x27;s attitude indicator gave the wrong information following a generator failure.
* 2010 Okhaldhunga Twin Otter crash – On 15 December 2010, a Tara Air DHC-6 crashed into Bilandu forest just five minutes after take-off. All 22 passengers and crews perished.
* Buddha Air Flight 103, On 25 September 2011, a Buddha Air Beechcraft 1900D, struck terrain while on approach to Tribhuvan International Airport. There were 16 passengers and three crew members on board. One person survived the crash but died en route to the hospital.
* 2012 Agni Air Dornier 228 crash – On 14 May 2012, an Agni Air operated Dornier 228 crashed into rocky terrain after a failed go-around. 15 out of 21 passengers and crews were killed, including Indian child actress Taruni Sachdev.
* Sita Air Flight 601 – On 28 September 2012, a Sita Air Dornier 228 suffered an engine failure in mid-air. The pilots tried to make their way back to the airport but failed. The plane crashed and burst into flames, killing all 19 people on board.
* Nepal Airlines Flight 555 – On 16 May 2013, a Nepal Airlines DHC-6 overran the runway at Jomsom Airport with 21 passengers on board. The plane went down a hill and impacted the Gandaki River nose-first. All on board survived.
* Nepal Airlines Flight 183 – On 16 February 2014, a Nepal Airlines DHC-6 crashed into the jungle near Dikhara, killing all 18 people on board. CFIT was the cause.
* Tara Air Flight 193 – On 24 February 2016, a Tara Air DHC-6 crashed into the mountainside near Dana village, Myagdi district, killing all 23 people on board.
* 2016 Air Kasthamandap crash – On 26 February 2016, an Air Kasthamandap PAC 750XL crash-landed in Chilkhaya, killing two.
* Summit Air Flight 409 – On 27 May 2017, a Summit Air Let L-140 crashed short of the runway threshold while attempting a landing at Tenzing–Hillary Airport in Nepal. The captain and the first officer died as a result of the accident, another crew member received injuries.
* US-Bangla Airlines Flight 211 – On 12 March 2018, a US-Bangla Airlines Bombardier Q400, on an international flight from Dhaka to Kathmandu suffered a hard landing, veered off the runway and plowed into a field at Tribhuvan International Airport. 51 people were killed in the disaster.
* Yeti Airlines Flight 691 - On 15 January 2023, a Yeti Airlines ATR 72-500 crashed during a domestic flight from Kathmandu to Pokhara on approach to land. The cause of the accident is under investigation. All 72 occupants were killed.

=== Pakistan ===
* PIA Flight 631 – The aircraft, a Fokker F-27 Friendship, struck a hill near Maidan, Pakistan. All 26 people on board were killed.
* Pakistan International Airlines Flight 404 – A Fokker F27 Friendship operated by Pakistan national airline Pakistan International Airlines went missing while en route to Islamabad.
* Pan Am Flight 73 – Hijacked in Karachi, Pakistan.
* PIA Flight 688 – when an engine failure occurred in-flight, the pilots apparently lost spatial awareness and became confused. The aircraft crashed in an inverted attitude. All aboard were killed
* AirBlue Flight 202 – an Airbus A321 was on final approach to Islamabad&#x27;s Benazir Bhutto International Airport when it crashed into Margalla Hills, killing all 152 people on board in Pakistan&#x27;s deadliest plane crash. The Captain forgot to pull the heading indicator button, causing the plane to fly straight into the hill. The first officer aware of this, but failed to inform the captain.
* Bhoja Air Flight 213 – a Boeing 737 was carrying 127 people when a microburst occurred. The plane lost altitude rapidly. Later on, it encountered a second microburst, in which both pilots failed to respond appropriately. The plane crashed into the ground and exploded into pieces, killing all on board.
* Pakistan International Airlines Flight 661 – on 7 December 2016, flight PK 661 crashed in Havelian en route to Islamabad from Chitral killing 47 total, including famous Pakistani former singer and converted preacher of Islam Junaid Jamshed and his family members along with two sky marshals, five crew members and the Deputy Commissioner of District of Chitral.
* Pakistan International Airlines Flight 8303 Airbus 320 crashed on houses near Karachi airport 22 May 2020, the Plane was carrying 82 passengers and 9 PIA staff members from Lahore to Karachi.

=== Philippines ===
* Philippine Airlines Flight 158 – the BAC One-Eleven crashed into hills while on approach to Manila International Airport. 45 people were killed.
* Philippine Airlines Flight 215 – Flight 215 was en route to Manila when terrorists detonated a bomb that had been placed in the plane&#x27;s lavatory. The plane tore apart, exploding into pieces, killing all 36 people on board.
* Philippine Airlines Flight 206 – A Hawker Siddeley HS 748 impacted a mountain while in bad weather, killing all 50 people on board.
* Philippine Airlines Flight 443 – The Short 360-300 crashed into Mount Gurain, killing all 15 people on board.
* Cebu Pacific Flight 387 – Crashed on the slopes of Mount Sumagaya. All 104 people on board perished.
* Philippine Airlines Flight 137 – Flight 137 was landing at Bacolod City Domestic Airport when it overran the runway and plowed into houses, killing 3 people on the ground.
* Asian Spirit Flight 100 – the Let L-410 Turbolet crashed into a mountain while carrying 17 people. Due to the massive impact force, the aircraft was pulverized. None on board made it out alive.
* Air Philippines Flight 541 – Flight 541 was due to land to Francisco Bangoy International Airport in Davao City when it suddenly crashed into a coconut plantation 500 feet above mean sea level. All 131 occupants on board the aircraft were killed in the worst air crash in Philippines history.
* Philippine Airlines Flight 812 – Flight 812 was hijacked while at cruising altitude. Later, the hijacker wanted to escape by jumping from the plane with a parachute. Before he was about to jump, he panicked and clung to the rear door, and a flight attendant pushed him out of the plane.
* Laoag International Airlines Flight 585 – The aircraft, a Fokker F-27 Friendship, was taking off from Manila when one of its engines suddenly failed. The pilots then decided to ditch the plane in Manila Bay but failed. The plane broke up and 19 people drowned. The cause was due to pilot error.
*Philippine Airlines Flight 475 was a scheduled passenger flight from Manila&#x27;s Ninoy Aquino International Airport to Butuan Bancasi Airport which overran the runway at Butuan Airport. Everyone survived with 19 people injured.

=== Qatar ===
* Alia Royal Jordanian Flight 600 – On 14 March 1979, the Boeing 727 crashed on landing at Doha International Airport due to wind shear killing 45 passengers.
* Saudia Flight 162 – On 23 December 1980, the L-1011 TriStar suffered an explosive decompression. Its cabin floor and fuselage ripped apart, ejected two passengers out of their seats and fell to their death.

=== Saudi Arabia ===
* PIA Flight 740 – Shortly after taking off from Jeddah International Airport, the Boeing 707-340C suffered an in-flight fire. The fire spread into the cabin, causing mass panic among the passengers. The plane then crashed, killing all 156 people on board.
* Vnukovo Airlines Flight 2806 is hijacked by terrorists and taken to Medina airport. After some negotiations, Saudi special forces storm the plane. One flight attendant, a passenger and one of the hijackers were killed.
* Middle East Airlines Flight 438 – Disintegrated in flight from an explosive detonation.
* Iraqi Airways Flight 163 – Hijacked on the way from Baghdad to Amman, a hand grenade exploded in the cabin. The crews initiated an emergency descent, later on another grenade went off in the cockpit, causing it to crash, killing 63 people.
* Saudia Flight 163 – Just after taking off from Riyadh, the cargo hold caught fire. The pilots successfully landed the plane but failed to conduct an immediate evacuation. After 26 minutes rescuers were able to open the plane door and found everyone on board had been killed by smoke inhalation. 
* Nigeria Airways Flight 2120 (Jeddah, 1991) – The plane was carrying hajj pilgrims when one of its tires caught fire just after takeoff. The pilots tried to make it back to Jeddah, but the fire intensified and made its way to the cabin area causing passengers to panic. The flames engulfed the plane while it was still in mid-air and crashed, killing everyone on board.

=== Singapore ===
* 1954 BOAC Lockheed Constellation crash – The Lockheed Constellation was landing in Singapore-Kallang Airport when it struck a seawall and burst into flames in the deadliest aviation accident in Singapore.
* Singapore Airlines Flight 117 – Hijacked en route from Kuala Lumpur to Singapore.
* Qantas Flight 32 – an Airbus A380 from London to Sydney with a fuel stopover in Singapore suffered a catastrophic engine failure over Indonesia. The engine exploded and parts of it were strewn over the Indonesian Island of Batam. Qantas Flight 32 was forced to make an emergency landing at Singapore Changi Airport. Everyone on board survived.
*Singapore Airlines Flight 368 - International flight from Singapore Changi Airport to Milan Malpensa Airport turns back after engine oil warning. The right wing catches fire after landing. No injuries reported.

=== South Korea ===
* Asiana Airlines Flight 733 was on approach to Mokpo Airport in VOR when suddenly it hit a ridge, killing 68 people on board. Pilot error was blamed for the accident, as the pilots started a descent while passing over the mountain peak.
* Air China Flight 129 was on approach to Gimhae International Airport, lining up, but then crashed into a mountain nearby killing 129 people on board out of 166 people. The pilot was not aware of their proximity to the ground due to bad weather condition until it was too late to recover.
* Korean Air Lines Flight 015 was on approach to Gimpo International Airport when the pilots reported some problem with the controls. It hit an embankment slope, slid down, and caught fire, killing 15 people.
* Jeju Air Flight 2216 overran the runway during a belly landing at Muan International Airport, killing 179 people and leaving 2 survivors. The aircraft was destroyed.

=== Sri Lanka ===
* Air Lanka Flight 512, the Lockheed L-1011-100 TriStar 100 was taxiing for take-off to Malé when a time bomb exploded and ripped the cabin, split it into two. 21 people were killed. The bomb was intended to explode in mid-flight, but was delayed.
* Icelandic Airlines Flight 001, a Douglas DC-8 on a charter flight, crashed into a coconut plantation while on approach to Katunayake, Sri Lanka for a refueling stop. 78 survived, but 184 were killed.
* Martinair Flight 138 was a McDonnell Douglas DC-8 operating on behalf of Indonesia&#x27;s flag carrier Garuda Indonesia carrying out a hajj pilgrimage to Mecca in which on 4 December 1974, the plane flew into a mountain, killing all 191 people on board. To date, it remains the deadliest air disaster in Sri Lankan aviation history.

=== Syria ===
* ČSA Flight 540 – On 20 August 1975, an Ilyushin Il-62 operated by Czechoslovak national airline Czechoslovak Airlines flying to Tehran was stopping in approach to Damascus International Airport in clear weather condition when it crashed and burst into flames, 17 km from the airport. Only two people survived. An investigation concluded that CFIT was the cause of the deadliest plane crash in Syria&#x27;s aviation history.

===Taiwan===

* China Airlines Flight 206 – The NAMC YS-11 crashed into a bamboo grove near the top of Yuan Mountain after entered inclement weather condition, killing 14 people.
* Formosa Airlines Flight 7623 - Crashed into the sea shortly after take-off after an electrical failure. All 13 on board die.
*China Airlines Flight 676 – Crashed into a road upon approach to the airport, killing all passengers and crew of the aircraft and six persons on the ground.
*Far Eastern Air Transport Flight 103 – Shortly after takeoff, the Boeing 737 disintegrated and broke apart in mid-air, killing all 110 people on board. Severe corrosion led to the aircraft&#x27;s destruction.
* Singapore Airlines Flight 006 – Singapore Airlines Boeing 747 was starting to take off when it hit a ground maintenance vehicle at Chiang Kai-shek International Airport near Taipei, Taiwan. 83 people died as the result. The plane was taking off from the wrong runway which was closed for maintenance.
* TransAsia Airways Flight 222 attempted to land in Huxi, Taiwan, in bad weather. The ATR 72-500 crashed into several houses injuring 5 people on the ground. Ten survived of the 58 people aboard. The cause was pilot error.

* TransAsia Airways Flight 235 was flying over Taipei when one of its engines failed. The ATR 72 then rolled sharply to the left, clipped a taxi, and Huandong Viaduct. It impacted Keelung River in an upside-down condition. 43 people out of 58 people were killed. The investigation is still ongoing. Moments the plane crashed was captured by a motorist and CCTV.

===Tajikistan===
* 1993 Tajik Air Yakovlev Yak-40 incident – On 28 August 1993, A Yakovlev Yak-40 operated by Tajik Air crashed shortly after takeoff from Khorog Airport, hit a boulder and plunged into the Panj River, killing 82 people in the deadliest plane crash in Tajikistan. Overloading was blamed.

=== Thailand ===
* Bangkok Airways Flight 266 – On 4 August 2009, the ATR 72 overran the runway on landing and crashed into a disused control tower at Koh Samui Airport. The pilot of the plane was the only person killed in the incident.
* EgyptAir Flight 864 – 25 December 1976 – Flight 864 was on final approach to Bangkok&#x27;s Don Mueang International Airport when it rolled and crashed into an industrial complex in Bangkok, killing all 52 people on board. 19 people on the ground were also killed. The investigators concluded that the cause was pilot error.
* Lauda Air Flight 004 – On 26 May 1991, Flight 004 was flying over Phu Toei National Park when it broke up in mid-flight over the jungle near Suphan Buri and Ban Nong Rong, killing everyone on board in Thailand&#x27;s worst aviation disaster. The cause was an uncommanded thrust reverser on engine no. 1. Flight 004 was known for Niki Lauda&#x27;s contribution to the investigation.
* One-Two-GO Airlines Flight 269 – 16 September 2007 – A McDonnell Douglas MD-82 attempted to land in wind shear and strong winds at Phuket International Airport. The plane failed to land, rose sharply over the runway, stalled, crashed, and burst into flames killing 90 people. Pilot error was blamed.
* Thai Airways Flight 231 - 27 April 1980 – Flight 231 was on approach to Bangkok when it entered a thunderstorm. A downdraft struck the plane, causing it to stall. It crashed into the ground, killing 44 people out of 53 people on board.
* Thai Airways Flight 365 – 31 August 1987 – crashed off Ko Phuket due to pilot error, killing all 83 on board.
* Thai Airways International Flight 114 – 3 March 2001 – exploded while parked at Don Mueang Airport, killing one (a flight attendant) of eight on board; an assassination attempt was theorized as traces of explosives were found in the wreckage.
* Thai Airways International Flight 261 – 11 December 1998 – Flight crews made a third attempt to land the plane after the second failed attempt when the plane stalled with a high angle of attack and crashed into a paddy field on approach to Surat Thani Airport amid heavy rains and poor visibility. 101 people were killed while 45 others survived.
* Vietnam Airlines Flight 831 – 9 September 1988 – crashed into a rice field near Semafahkarm Village, Tambon Khu Khot. 76 people were killed.

=== Turkmenistan ===
* Aeroflot Flight 191 - 5 March 1963 - An Ilyushin Il-18 crashes on approach to Ashgabat due to a dust storm. 12 people are killed.
* Aeroflot Flight A-53 - 15 August 1975 - A Yakovlev Yak-40 crashes on approach to Krasnovodsk. 23 out of 38 on board are killed.
* Aeroflot Flight 699 - 18 January 1988 - A Tupolev Tu-154 lands heavily at Krasnovodsk and crashes. 11 people are killed.

=== United Arab Emirates ===

* Gulf Air Flight 771 – Bombed, then crashed into a desert in the United Arab Emirates.
* Kish Air Flight 7170 – The aircraft was due to land from Kish Island in Iran to Sharjah Airport when it spiraled and crashed, killing 43 people on board. The pilot accidentally selected the propellers into reverse thrust in mid-air causing it to spiral down out of control.
* Sterling Airways Flight 296 – A Sud Aviation Caravelle operated by Sterling Airways carrying 112 people crashed into a mountain ridge near Kalba, killing all aboard. An outdated flight plan and/or a misreading of weather radar was the cause. 
* Tajikistan Airlines Flight 3183 the Tupolev Tu-154 was carrying 86 people to Sharjah airport. The Tupolev Tu-154 crashed, disintegrated into the desert, leaving the flight navigator the only survivor in the third deadliest plane crash in the United Arab Emirates.
* On 27 December 1997, a Pakistan Airlines Boeing 747 plane from Karachi to London, crashed when landing at Dubai international airport. It overshot the runway and went through the perimeter wall before coming to rest. No one was killed. 
* In 2010, UPS Airlines Flight 6 took off from Dubai airport but caught fire and then crashed next to a major road.
* Emirates Flight 521 – Boeing 777-31H – Reg A6-EMW – Flight from Thiruvananthapuram, South India, crash-landed during a routine approach to runway 12L at Dubai International Airport on 3 August 2016 at around 08:37z. The accident currently under investigation, but an incident during the final / go around, caused the plane to crash land onto 12L, skid the length of the runway, and finally came to rest pointing WSW between runway entry points Mike-13 and Mike-13A, close to the end of RWY 12L / THR 30R. The plane suffered a fire which led to an explosion of the right-wing, which caused irreparable damage to the hull. All passengers and crew were evacuated, but one airport firefighter was killed during the incident.

=== Uzbekistan ===
* Aeroflot Flight 7425 (10 July 1985) – While cruising at an altitude of 38,100 ft, the Tupolev Tu-154 entered a flat spin. The crews were not able to recover it and the plane crashed near Uchuduk. All 200 people on board the aircraft perished in the deadliest plane crash in Uzbekistan as well as the deadliest plane crash involving a Tupolev Tu-154.
* Aeroflot Flight 505 – Shortly after take-off from Tashkent, the Yakovlev Yak-40 banked sharply to the right and crashed, killing all 9 people on board. The plane encountered a wake vortex formed by an Ilyushin Il-76 that had taken off minutes before Flight 505.
* Uzbekistan Airways Flight 1154 – During a foggy night at Tashkent International Airport, the Yakovlev Yak-40 overran the runway, clipped a ground structure, and somersaulted. The aircraft then exploded and burst into flames, killing everyone aboard.

=== Vietnam ===
* Cathay Pacific Flight 700Z bombing – While flying at 29.000 ft, a suitcase bomb exploded. The aircraft disintegrated. All 80 people on board were killed. 
* Air Vietnam Flight 706 was hijacked, then crashed after a missed approach at Phan Rang.
* Vietnam Airlines Flight 474 – The Yakovlev Yak-40 was carrying 31 people when it crashed into terrain near Son Trung during Cyclone Forrest. The only survivor, Dutch passenger Annette Herfkens, spent eight days alone in the forest, with only rainwater. An investigation blamed Controlled Flight Into Terrain.

===Yemen===
* EgyptAir Flight 763 – On 19 March 1972, while approaching Aden International Airport, the aircraft smashed into the Shamsans Mountain, killing all 30 people on board.

=== South China Sea ===
* Qantas Flight 30 – 25 July 2008, Mid-air decompression after departure from Hong Kong, landed safely in Manila; no injuries.

===Various countries===
* Indian Airlines Flight 814 – Hijacked on the way to India, and flown to India, Pakistan, the UAE, and Afghanistan before the passengers were released; 1 passenger was killed by the hijackers.

==Central America and the Caribbean==


===Antigua and Barbuda===
* FlyMontserrat Flight 107 – Shortly after takeoff from V. C. Bird International Airport, the Britten-Norman Islander encountered an engine failure. The pilot apparently lost control of the plane, crashing just off the runway and bursting into flames. 3 out of 4 occupants were killed, including the pilot.

===Bermuda===
* 1952 Bermuda air crash – On 6 December 1952, a Cubana de Aviación Douglas DC-4 stalled and impacted tail first with the sea. 37 people were killed. 4 people survived the fall.

===Barbados===
* Cubana de Aviación Flight 455 – On 6 October 1976, eleven minutes after takeoff, two bombs exploded and ripped the DC-8 to pieces. The aircraft pieces fell to the water, all 73 people on board were killed. Cuba blamed the US and CIA for the bombing.

===Costa Rica===
*On 15 January 1990, SANSA Flight 32 crashed into a mountain in Costa Rica after takeoff from Juan Santamaría International Airport in San José, killing all 23 on board.

===Cuba===
* Aeroflot Flight 331 – On 27 May 1977, an Aeroflot Ilyushin Il-62 was on approach to José Martí International Airport when it clipped power lines and crashed into the ground. Of the 67 people aboard 2 survived. Pilot error was blamed.
* Cubana de Aviación Flight 9046 – On 3 September 1989, a Cubana de Aviación Ilyushin Il-62M crashed shortly after takeoff from José Martí International Airport in bad weather. The aircraft crashed into a residential area. 126 people on board and 45 people on the ground, were killed.
* Aero Caribbean Flight 883 – On 4 November 2010, an ATR-72 operated by Cuba national airlines Cubana stalled and crashed in the Cuban provinces of Sancti Spiritus. All 68 people on board were killed. Until now, the investigation is still open.
* Cubana de Aviación Flight 972 – On 18 May 2018, a Boeing 737-201 Advanced was carrying 113 passengers and crews. While taking off from Havana&#x27;s José Martí International Airport, the plane suddenly banked to the left, stalled, and nose-dived. It then crashed onto a railway and exploded, killing 110 people. 2 survivors later succumbed to their injuries.

===Dominican Republic===
*Dominicana DC-9 air disaster The Dominicana de Aviación Santo Domingo DC-9 air disaster occurred on 15 February 1970, when a Dominicana de Aviación (Dominican Airlines) McDonnell Douglas DC-9-32 twin-engine jet airliner crashed on takeoff from Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic en route to San Juan, Puerto Rico.

*Birgenair Flight 301 was en route to Frankfurt, Germany via Gander, Canada, and Berlin, Germany. The pitot tube was blocked by a nest, causing a faulty reading on the airspeed. Pilot error caused the plane to stall and crash into the sea. Everyone on board was killed.

===Guatemala===
* The 1977 Aviateca Convair 240 crash occurred on 27 April 1977, when a Convair 240 suffered engine failure shortly after takeoff from La Aurora International Airport in Guatemala City, and crashed after attempting an emergency landing, killing all 28 on board.
* The 1986 Aerovías Guatemala air crash occurred on 18 January 1986 and involved a Sud Aviation SE-210 Caravelle III which crashed into a hill on approach to Santa Elena Airport, Flores after a short flight from Guatemala City&#x27;s La Aurora International Airport. All 93 passengers and crew on board were killed, making it the worst air disaster in Guatemalan history.
* Cubana de Aviación Flight 1216 overran the runway of La Aurora International Airport on 21 December 1999, ran down a slope and crashed into a residential area of Guatemala City, killing 16 on board and 2 on the ground.

===Haiti===
* 1995 Air St. Martin Beech 1900 crash – An Air Saint Martin Beechcraft 1900D crashed into a mountain after being cleared by air traffic control to descend, killing all 20 on board.
* Tropical Airways Flight 1301 – The Let L-410 Turbolet was taking off from Hugo Chávez International Airport when its cargo door flipped open. The crew attempted an emergency landing, but the plane stalled and crashed into a sugar cane field, killing everyone on board.

===Honduras===

* Tan-Sahsa Flight 414 with 146 people on board crashed into a hill on approach to Toncontín International Airport in Tegucigalpa on 21 October 1989. 131 people died, making it the worst air crash in Central American history.
* Central American Airways Flight 731 crashed on 14 February 2011, on approach to Toncontín International Airport, killing all 14 on board.
* TACA Flight 390 overran the runway of Toncontín International Airport on 30 May 2008, and crashed into an embankment, smashing several cars and killing 5.

===Jamaica===
* American Airlines Flight 331 the Boeing 737-823 was landing on Kingston&#x27;s Norman Manley International Airport when it overran the runway, flew into the rocky beach, crashed, and broke apart. 85 people were injured, no one was killed.
* Avianca Flight 671 a Lockheed L-1049E Super Constellation was landing on Montego Bay&#x27;s Sangster International Airport. The plane touched the runway hard enough to bounce it back to the air. It touched the runway again and skidded. The plane then burst into flames. 37 people were killed.

===Panama===
* Alas Chiricanas Flight 901 – In-flight explosion caused by a bomb.
* Copa Airlines Flight 201 – On the night of 6 June 1992, while traveling above the Darién Gap, the Boeing 737 rolled to the right, turned over, and suddenly disintegrate in mid-air. It then exploded and crashed into the dense Panamanian forest, killing all 47 people on board.

===Puerto Rico===
* Prinair Flight 277 - Crashed into a mountain in Fajardo, killing 19. 
* Prinair Flight 191 – Crashed while landing at Mercedita Airport. Ponce, killing 5.
* Air Caribbean Flight 309 - Crashed into a bar while landing at Isla Verde International Airport in San Juan, killing 6.
* Vieques Air Link Flight 901A – Crashed after take-off from Vieques Airport, killing 8.

==Europe==

===Albania===
*Turkish Airlines Flight 1476 from Tirana to Istanbul was hijacked en route to Italy.

===Austria===
* British Eagle International Airlines Flight 802/6 crashed into the Glungezer mountain near Innsbruck on 29 February 1964, killing all 83 people on board. 
* Hapag-Lloyd Flight 3378 crash-landed 650 m short of the runway in Vienna on 12 July 2000 due to fuel exhaustion 22 km out, arising from erroneous fuel management combined with a failure to divert. There were no serious injuries.

===Belarus===
* Aeroflot Flight 8641, the Yakovlev Yak-42 suffered a jackscrew failure, causing the aircraft to lose control, disintegrate in mid-air, and crashed near Mozyr. All 132 people on board were killed.
* Aeroflot Flight 7841 – On 1 February 1985, shortly after taking off, Flight 7481 suffered double engine failure due to ice ingestion. To maintain speed, the captain descended onto a forest. The plane clipped some trees, crashed, and burned all the way down, killing 58 people.

===Belgium===
* 28 March 1933 - An Imperial Airways Argosy crashes near Diksmuide following an onboard fire suspected to be the first case of aerial sabotage. All 12 passengers and 3 crew were killed.
* 30 December 1933 - An Avro Ten operated by Imperial Airways crashes on a radio mast of Belradio at Ruysselede killing all 8 passengers and 2 crew. 
* 16 November 1937 - Sabena OO-AUB crashes while attempting to land in bad weather near Ostend. All 11 aboard are killed.
* 15 February 1961 - Sabena Flight 548 crashed due to mechanical failure while attempting to land in Brussels. All 72 passengers and crew were killed, along with a single ground casualty.
* 2 October 1971 - British European Airways Flight 706, a Vickers Vanguard operated by British European Airways, suffers a rear pressure bulkhead failure due to corrosion causing the tailplane to detach. It nose-dived into a farmland killing all 55 passengers and 8 crew and minorly injuring 1 person on the ground.
* 25 May 2008 - Kalitta Air Flight 207 suffers a bird strike on take-off from Brussels Airport and overruns the runway. Everyone survives.

===Bulgaria===
* On 27 July 1955, El Al Flight 402 was shot down by Bulgarian jets after it went astray onto Bulgarian airspace. Everyone on board Flight 402 was killed.
* A Balkan Bulgarian Airlines Tupolev Tu-134 crashed near the village of Gabare. All 73 on people on board died.
* A Balkan Bulgarian Airlines Tupolev Tu-134 crashed on approach to Sofia Airport. All 50 people on board died.
* Hemus Air Flight 7081, a Tupolev Tu-154 operated by Hemus Air was hijacked on 3 September 1996. The plane lands safely without injuries.

===Croatia===
* British Airways Flight 476 collided with Inex-Adria Aviopromet Flight 550 in mid-air near Zagreb, killing all 176 people on board both aircraft and another on the ground.
* Aviogenex Flight 130, as the aircraft was approaching Rijeka Airport, the aircraft then entered into a gradually steeping angle of descent. Due to an optical illusion, the crew thought they were closer to the runway and at a greater altitude than the actual one. The plane then crashed and turned over. The ensuing fire kills 78 people on board.

===Cyprus===
* 1967 Nicosia Britannia disaster – On 20 April 1967, a Globe Air charter flight, operated with a Bristol Britannia 313 flew into high ground near Nicosia, Cyprus. Only 4 people survived.
* EgyptAir Flight 741, an Ilyushin Il-18D operated by Egyptair crashes into the Kyrenia Mountains on approach on 29 January 1971. All 30 passengers and 7 crew died. 
* Talia Airways Flight 2H79, a Boeing 727-200 crashed into a mountain, killing all 15 occupants.
* EgyptAir Flight 181, an Airbus A320-233 operated by EgyptAir is hijacked on 29 March 2016. The plane lands safely without injuries.

===Czech Republic===

* Aeroflot Flight 141 (1973): the Tupolev Tu-154 impacted ground and burst into flames while on approach to Prague Ruzyně Airport. 66 people were burned to death.

* JAT Flight 367, was bombed and crashed in Srbská Kamenice, Czechoslovakia (now Czech Republic). The sole survivor, crew member Vesna Vulović, holds the Guinness world record for surviving the highest fall without a parachute at 10,160 m (33,330 ft).
* Inex-Adria Aviopromet Flight 450, ground impact during final approach in foggy weather Prague, 1975.

===Denmark===
* 26 January 1947 - Douglas Dakota, PH-TCR of KLM crashed after takeoff from Kastrup airport in Copenhagen, killing all 22 on board, including Prince Gustaf Adolf of Sweden.
* 16 July 1960 - A de Havilland Dragon Rapide operated by Zonens Redningskorps loses control and crashes 50 meters from the shore killing all 8 passengers. Only the pilot survived. 
* 28 August 1971 - Malév Flight 731 crashes into the Baltic Sea on approach to Copenhagen Airport killing 31.
* 8 September 1989 - Partnair Flight 394 suffers a rudder hardover due to counterfeit parts and breaks up over the sea, killing all 55 on board. 
* 9 September 2007 - Scandinavian Airlines Flight 1209, a Bombardier Dash 8 Q400 operated Scandinavian Airlines suffers a right gear collapse on landing at Aalborg Airport. 5 people are injured. 
* 27 October 2007 - Scandinavian Airlines Flight 2867, a Bombardier Dash 8 Q400 operated by Scandinavian Airlines suffers a right gear collapse on landing at Copenhagen Airport. There are no injuries.

===Finland===
* Aero Flight 1631 (14 June 1940) – A Junkers Ju 52 operated by Aero O/Y is shot down by two Soviet Ilyushin DB-3 bombers. All 7 passengers and 2 crew are killed. 
* Aero Flight 311 (3 January 1961) – The plane, a Douglas DC-3, entered a spin during approach and crashed into the woods, killing all 25 people on board.
* Aero Flight 217 (8 November 1963) – A Douglas DC-3 crashed into the ground while trying to land at Mariehamn Airport. The plane came to rest upside down and caught fire, killing 22 people.

===France===
* 7 April 1922 - A Farman F.60 Goliath operated by Compagnie des Grands Express Aériens collides with a de Havilland DH.18A operated by Daimler Hire Limited. All 3 passengers and 2 crew on the Goliath and 2 crew on the DH.18A die. 
* 14 May 1923 - A Farman F.60 Goliath operated by Air Union broke up killing all 4 passengers and 2 crew. 
* 1 June 1943 - BOAC Flight 777-A, a Douglas DC-3-194 operated by British Overseas Airways Corporation is shot down by 8 Junkers Ju 88 fighters. All 13 passengers and 4 crew died. 
* 18 December 1949 - A Douglas DC-3 operated by Sabena crashes after suffering a structural failure of a wing, killing all 8 on board.
* 3 November 1950 - Air India Flight 245 crashes into Mont Blanc killing all 48 on board.
* 13 November 1950 - A Douglas C-54 operated by Curtiss-Reid Flying Service crashes into a mountain killing all 58 on board.
* 3 November 1950 - Air India Flight 245, a Lockheed L-749A Constellation operated by Air India crashes in Mont Blanc. All 40 passengers and 8 crew die. 
* 3 March 1952 - A SNCASE SE.161 Languedoc operated by Air France loses control and crashes due to jammed ailerons. All 34 passengers and 4 crew died. 
* 1 September 1953 - Air France Flight 178, a Lockheed L-749 Constellation crashes in the French Alps killing all 42 on board.
* 24 September 1959 - TAI Flight 307, a Douglas DC-7C operated by Transports Aériens Intercontinentaux crashes in a pine forest. Of the 56 passengers and 9 crew, only 11 survive with serious injuries. 
* 7 October 1961 - A Derby Aviation C-47 crashes into Canigou mountainside en route to Perpignan, killing all 34 aboard.
* 3 June 1962 - Air France Flight 007, a chartered Boeing 707 crashes on takeoff from Orly due to a mechanical failure. 130 people die.
* 22 June 1962 - Air France Flight 117 crashes into a hill and explodes killing all 113 on board.
* 24 January 1966 - Air India Flight 101, a Boeing 707-437 operated by Air India hits Mont Blanc. All 106 passengers and 11 crew die. 
* 3 June 1967 - A Douglas DC-4 operated by Air Ferry crashes into Mount Canigou after the crew becomes poisoned with carbon monoxide. All 88 on board die.
* 27 October 1972 - Air Inter Flight 696Y crashes in the La Faye Forest killing 60.
* 5 March 1973 - Iberia Flight 504, a McDonnell Douglas DC-9-32 operated by Iberia and Spantax Flight 400, a Convair 990 Coronado operated by Spantax collide due to ATC error. All 61 passengers and 7 crew on the DC-9 die while the Convair 990 lands safely without fatalities. 
* 3 June 1973 - A Tupolev Tu-144 breaks up during the Paris Air Show, killing all 6 crew and 8 people on the ground.
* 11 July 1973 - Varig Flight 820 lands in a field near Orly, France, because of a lavatory fire killing 123.
* 3 March 1974 - Turkish Airlines Flight 981 was a DC-10 flying from Paris Charles de Gaulle International Airport. Just after take-off, the cargo door suddenly was torn apart from the aircraft. The explosive decompression cut most of the aircraft&#x27;s vital cables, thus, a crash was inevitable. It then crashed in Ermenonville Forest. All 346 people on board perished. It remains the deadliest accident in France and the second-worst single-plane crash with no survivors.
* 1 December 1981 - Inex-Adria Aviopromet Flight 1308 crashes into Corsica&#x27;s Mont San-Pietro, killing all 180 people on board.
* 4 March 1988 - TAT Flight 230, a Fairchild FH-227 operated by TAT European Airlines suffers an electrical malfunction and crashes. All 20 passengers and 3 crew died. 
* 26 June 1988 - Air France Flight 296 crashes into a forest during a low-pass killing 3. It is the first Airbus A320 crash.
* 20 January 1992 - Air Inter Flight 148, an Airbus A320, crashed near Mont Sainte-Odile while it was circling to land at Strasbourg, killing 87.
* 31 March 1992 - Trans-Air Service Flight 671 suffers a double engine separation. A fire subsequently erupts on the wing. It lands at Istres-Le Tubé Air Base.
* 6 January 1993 - Lufthansa CityLine Flight 5634 was initiating a go-around when the plane suddenly entered a high sink rate. The aircraft crashed and split into two parts, killing 4 people.
* 30 June 1994 - Airbus Industrie Flight 129, an Airbus A330-321 operated by Airbus Industrie crashed during a test flight due to pilot error. All 4 passengers and 3 crew are killed. 
* 24–26 December 1994 - Air France Flight 8969 is hijacked after takeoff from Algiers and taken back to France. 7 people are killed.
* 30 July 1998 - Proteus Airlines Flight 706, a Beechcraft 1900D operated by Proteus Airlines collides with a private Cessna 177RG Cardinal. All 12 passengers and 2 crew on the Beechcraft and the only pilot on the Cessna died. 
* 25 July 2000 - Air France Flight 4590, a Concorde, was on its take-off roll when it ran over a metal strip left by a Continental Airlines DC-10. One of its tires burst and its pieces hit the fuel tank and ignited a fire. The Concorde stalled and crashed on a hotel in Gonesse, France. All 109 on board and 4 people in the hotel are killed.
* 22 June 2003 - Air France Flight 5672, a Bombardier CRJ100ER operated by Brit Air for Air France crashes on approach. Of the 21 passengers and 3 crew, the pilot dies and 9 people are injured (5 seriously).
* 15 September 2006: Easyjet Flight 6074 to the UK suffers serious problems in the air and is unable to contact ATC. It is very close to an America bound American Airlines plane and ATC is able to request the latter to descend, narrowly missing the other plane. Some things improve on the Easyjet plane and it is able to land safely.
* 27 November 2008 - XL Airways Germany Flight 888T, an Airbus A320-232 operated by XL Airways Germany stalls and crashes due to sensor malfunction. All 5 passengers and 2 crew died. 

* 24 March 2015 - Germanwings Flight 9525 crashes near Digne-les-Bains in the French Alps en route to Düsseldorf Airport after the co-pilot locked the captain from the cockpit and deliberately crashed the plane into the Alps, killing all 150 people on board.

===Germany===

* 1934 Swissair Tuttlingen accident, the wing of Curtiss AT-32C Condor II separated from the airplane while in adverse weather conditions. All 12 people on board were killed. 
* On 8 November 1940, a Junkers Ju 90A-1 operated by Deutsche Luft Hansa lost control and crashed due to tail icing. All 23 passengers and 6 crew die. 
* British European Flight 609, crashed in Munich, West Germany (Munich air disaster)
* ČSA Flight 511 was cruising above Germany when it disintegrated into pieces. The plane&#x27;s wreckage fell from the sky and struck the ground below, killing all 52 people on board.
* British Eagle Flight 802 lost control and crashed after all electrical generators disconnected, killing all 48 on board.
* Paninternational Flight 112, due to the mistakes of ground crews, the aircraft suffered a dual engine failure. The aircraft then attempted an emergency landing on Bundesautobahn 7, but then collided with a bridge and burst into flames, killing 22 people on board. 

* Lufthansa Flight 005 stalled and crashed during a go-around, killing all 46 people on board, including seven Italian team swimmers of the Olympic team.
* Pan Am Flight 708, a Boeing 727-21 operated by Pan American World Airways crashes on approach on 15 November 1966. All 3 crew members die. 
* 1972 Königs Wusterhausen air disaster occurred when an Interflug&#x27;s Ilyushin Il-62 suffered an in-flight fire. The pilots then made their way back to Berlin. The pilots then tried to see the airport. When the pilot had the airport already insight and was just a few kilometers south of it, the tail section broke off. The plane entered an uncontrollable descent. The front part of the plane detached, and the plane disintegrated gradually in the sky while its airframe engulfed in flames. Later crashed into a forest, killing all on board in Germany&#x27;s worst plane crash. 
* Interflug Flight 1107 was on approach to Leipzig/Halle Airport when it struck a radio mast and crashed, killing 27 people.
* 12 December 1986 - Aeroflot Flight 892 was on approach to Schonefeld Airport. Due to a language misunderstanding, the Tu-134A landed on a closed runway. It took off again, but then stalled and burst into flames. 72 people died.
* Nürnberger Flugdienst Flight 108 struck by lightning and lost control. The aircraft crashed and exploded, killing everyone on board.
* Überlingen mid-air collision occurred when a Tupolev Tu-154 carrying 69 people, 45 of whom were children, collided with a DHL Boeing 757 over the city of Überlingen on 1 July 2002. All 71 people on board both aircraft killed.
* Swiss International Air Lines Flight 850, a Saab 2000 operated by Swiss International Air Lines hits an earth embankment on landing. Of the 16 passengers and 4 crew, 1 passenger suffers minor injuries. 
* 19 June 2010 - A Douglas C-47 Skytrain operated by Air Service Berlin crashed in a field due to a left engine failure. Of the 25 passengers and 3 crew, 7 people were injured

===Greece===
* Cyprus Airways Flight 284 (12 October 1967) - A de Havilland DH.106 Comet 4B operated by Cyprus Airways (on behalf of British European Airways) broke up in mid-air due to an explosive device. All 66 on board died. 
* Olympic Airways Flight 954 (8 December 1969) – A Douglas DC-6 (SX-DAE) crashed during its approach to Athens Hellenicon Airport from Chania on Paneio mountain near Keratea amidst bad weather killing 90 passengers and crew. This was the worst aircraft accident in Greece until 2005.
* TWA Flight 841 (8 September 1974) – A Boeing 707-331B (N8734) crashed in the Ionian sea 30 minutes after its departure from Athens. An explosive device in the luggage area destroyed flight controls and resulted in 88 fatalities.
* Olympic Airways Flight 830 (23 November 1976) - A NAMC YS-11A operated by Olympic Airways hit a mountain near the village of Servia. All 50 on board died. 
* Swissair Flight 316 (8 October 1979) – A Douglas DC-8 (HB-IDE) landed near the middle of runway 15L of Athens Hellenicon Airport at more than 270 km/h overrun the runway and stopped on a public road outside the airport area. Its left-wing was severed from the fuselage and in the resulting fire 14 out of 154 passengers died.
* TWA Flight 847 (14 June 1985) - A Boeing 727-231 operated by Trans World Airlines was hijacked. 1 passenger dies. 
* TWA Flight 840 (2 April 1986) – Bombed on the way to Athens, Greece, sucking out 4 on board – the plane landed safely.
* Olympic Aviation Flight 545 (3 August 1989) – A Shorts 330-200 (SX-BGE) crashed on Kerkis mountain coming from Thessaloniki towards airport Pythagoras in Samos. All 31 passengers and crew of 3 died.
* Aerosvit Flight 241 (17 December 1997) - A Yakovlev Yak-42 operated by Aerosvit Airlines crashes in Pieria Mountains due to pilot error. All 70 people die. 
* Malév Flight 262 (4 July 2000) – On the first attempt of the landing, the aircraft performed a belly landing and skidded with the runway, causing significant damage. The aircraft initiated a go-around and landed safely.
* Helios Airways Flight 522 (&quot;Ghost Plane Incident&quot;)— The Cypriot Boeing 737 was on its way to Athens when the crews reported an air conditioner problem, which was actually a pressure problem. The plane increases the altitude, lowering the pressure, and decreasing the oxygen level. All of the passengers and crews but one suffered hypoxia. The plane was flying without any communication with the tower. It then ran out of fuel and crashed near Grammatiko. All 121 people on board were killed.
* Turkish Airlines Flight 1476 (3 October 2006) - A Boeing 737-4Y0 operated by Turkish Airlines is hijacked. Everyone survives without injuries.

===Ireland===
* TWA Flight 6963 (28 December 1946) - A Lockheed L-049 Constellation operated by Trans World Airlines crashed short of the runway. 9 people died while 14 people survived. 
* Pan Am Flight 1-10 (15 April 1948) - A Lockheed L-049-51-26 Constellation operated by Pan American World Airways crashed short of the runway. 30 people died and 1 person survived. 
* KLM Flight 633 – Ditched after takeoff from Shannon Airport on 5 September 1954. 28 fatalities.
* Pan Am Clipper Panama (22 June 1959) - A Douglas DC-6B operated by Pan American World Airways suffers engine no.4 fire. All 8 people on board survived but 6 dogs died. 
* 1961 President Airlines Douglas DC-6 crash – banked to the left and crashed into Shannon River shortly after takeoff, killing all 83 people on board. 
* Aer Lingus Flight 712 – Crashed into the sea off County Wexford in 1968, killing 61. Cause unknown.
* American Airlines Flight 293 (20 June 1979) - A Boeing 727 operated by American Airlines is hijacked. The hijacker later received a Boeing 707. No one is injured.
* Manx2 Flight 7100 (10 February 2011) - A Fairchild Swearingen Metroliner III was attempting to land at Cork Airport. After the flight commander ordered a go around, the aircraft banked hard left and then right until the wingtip touched the ground and the plane flipped over. The cause was determined to be lack of coordination between the pilots in a case of engine torque asymmetry, pilot fatigue and poor oversight by the operator. Six of the 12 aboard died.

===Italy===
* 1919 Verona Caproni Ca.48 crash – Caproni Ca.48 crashed at Verona, Italy (2 August 1919), killing all on board (14, 15, or 17 people).
* BOAC Flight 781 – On 10 January 1954, British Overseas Airways Corporation Flight 781, a de Havilland DH.106 Comet 1, suffered an explosive decompression at altitude and crashed near Elba into the Mediterranean Sea, killing all 35 on board.
* South African Airways Flight 201 – On 8 April 1954, a de Havilland Comet 1, en route to Cairo, Egypt, suffered an explosive decompression at altitude and crashed south of Naples killing all 21 aboard.
* Sabena Flight 503 – The Douglas DC-6 crashed into Monte Terminillo near Rieti while flying in heavy snow and rain condition. All aboard were killed in the accident.
* British European Airways Flight 142 – The Vickers Viscount 701 collided with an Italian Air Force North American F-86E Sabre over Anzio. The passenger plane disintegrated, killing all 31 people on board. The person on the F-86 Sabre survived.
* Alitalia Flight 4128 – The DC-9 was approaching Palermo Airport when the aircraft crashed into the sea and sank, killing 108 people on board. The crew deliberately made a premature descent as they thought that they were nearer to the airport than they were.
* Itavia Flight 870 – Crashed into the Tyrrhenian Sea near Ustica island en route to Palermo. The cause remains unclear; hypotheses include a bomb on board or an accidental shootdown by an anti-aircraft missile.
* Aero Trasporti Italiani Flight 460 – The ATR-42 rolled to the right and left several times and then dived into a mountain, eventually crashed, killing all 37 people on board.
* Uganda Airlines Flight 775 – Clipped some trees, crashed, and burst onto flames while on approach to Roma-Fiumicino Airport on 17 October 1988. 33 fatalities.

* Banat Air Flight 166 – An Antonov An-24 was taking off from Verona while carrying 49 passengers and crews on board. Due to ice accumulation on its wing, the aircraft lost its altitude and crashed, killing all aboard.
* Scandinavian Airlines Flight 686 – On 8 October 2001, in Milan, a Scandinavian Airlines McDonnell Douglas MD-87 was taking off from Milan when a small business jet suddenly entered the runway. The MD-87 crashed into the jet and started to skid. It then swayed several times, went out of control, and crashed into the airport&#x27;s hangar, killing all aboard. (Linate Airport disaster).

===Kosovo===
* Si Fly Flight 3275 – On 12 November 1999, Si Fly Flight 3275, an UN-chartered ATR 42 crashed into the mountaintop in Slakovce, Mitrovica, Kosovo.24 fatalities

===Latvia===
* 30 December 1967 - Aeroflot Flight L-51 losses control and crashes on approach killing 43.
* 22 March 1979 - An Aeroflot/Latvia Tupolev Tu-134A crashes on approach killing 4.

===Luxembourg===
* Aeroflot Flight 343 (29 September 1982) - An Ilyushin Il-62M operated by Aeroflot veers off the runway on landing due to a mechanical failure killing 7 and injuring 70.
* Luxair Flight 9642 crashes on final approach to Luxembourg, killing 22.

===Malta===
* 1956 Scottish Airlines Malta air disaster – On 18 February 1956, a Scottish Airlines Avro York was taking off from RAF Luqa when the boost enrichment capsule in the carburetor of number one engine failed and the engine caught fire. The aircraft stalled and crashed, killing all 50 people aboard.
* KLM Flight 861 (25 November 1973) - A Boeing 747-206B operated by KLM is hijacked. No one is injured. 
* EgyptAir Flight 648 – On 23 November 1985, Flight 648 was hijacked by terrorist organization Abu Nidal. A standoff occurred in Malta Luqa Airport until 24 November 1985. A failed raid later occurred in the standoff, resulting in multiple casualties.
* 2016 Malta Fairchild Merlin crash (24 October 2016) - A Fairchild SA227-AT Merlin IVC operated by CAE Aviation stalled and crashed after takeoff due to mechanical failure. All 5 on board died. 
*Afriqiyah Airways Flight 209 – On 23 December 2016, an Airbus A320 was hijacked to Malta. No fatalities

===Montenegro===
* JAT Airways Flight 769, the Sud Aviation SE-210 Caravelle 6-N crashed into terrain while on final approach to Podgorica, killing 41. A suspected radar malfunction, accompanied by ATC error, was blamed for the accident

===Netherlands===

* 1946 KLM Douglas DC-3 Amsterdam accident (24 November 1946) - A Douglas C-47A Skytrain operated by KLM crashed on approach. All 26 on board died. 
* KLM Flight 608 (23 August 1954) - A Douglas DC-6B operated by KLM crashed in the North Sea. All 21 on board died. 
* NLM CityHopper Flight 431 The Fokker F-28-4000 entered a tornado, and, due to the massive pressure drop inside the tornado, the aircraft began to shake violently. The starboard wing of the plane detached from the plane. The plane spun and crashed, killing all on board.
*KLM Cityhopper Flight 433 The pilots mistakenly believed that the engine 2 of the plane was suffering a low oil pressure due to a faulty warning light. They shut down the no 2 engine and flew back to Amsterdam Schipol Airport. While on final approach, the captain decided to go around and gave a full-throttle, only in one engine. The other remained at idle. It then stalled and crashed, killing 3 out of 21.

* El Al Flight 1862 a Boeing 747 crashed into an apartment complex in Amsterdam after suffering engine detachment due to metal fatigue. The resultant crash killed 43 people, including all four crew members and 39 people on the ground. 
* Turkish Airlines Flight 1951 a Boeing 737-800 flying from Atatürk Airport in Istanbul to Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam crashed into a field during final approach. Of the 127 passengers and 7 crew on board 9 were killed, 85 were injured along with 26 severely.

===North Macedonia===
* Avioimpex Flight 110 – Flight 110 flew into a snowstorm and turned into a mountain. The Yakovlev Yak-42 impacted terrain and exploded, killing all 116 on board.
* Palair Macedonian Airlines Flight 301 – Shortly after takeoff, the aircraft shook violently. It banked to the right and to the left and crashed, killing 83 people. An ice accumulation had occurred in flight.

===Norway===
* British European Airways Flight 530 (7 August 1946) - A Douglas C-47A Skytrain operated by British European Airways crashes into Mistberget. 3 people die. 
* Kvitbjørn disaster (28 August 1947) - A Shorts S.25 Sandringham 6 operated by Det Norske Luftfartsselskap hits a mountain. All 35 on board die. 
* Bukken Bruse disaster, a flying boat crashed upon landing in Trondheim, Norway. Nineteen were killed; Bertrand Russell was among the 24 survivors.
* Hurum air disaster (20 November 1949) - A Douglas C-47A-25DK operated by Aero Holland hits a mountain on approach. 34 people die. 
* Braathens SAFE Flight 253 (7 November 1956) - A de Havilland DH-114 Heron 2B operated by Braathens SAFE hits Hummelfjell due to icing. 2 people die. 
* Braathens SAFE Flight 239, crashed in Asker upon landing at Fornebu airport, Oslo, Norway, killing 40 of 45 people on board. The aircraft was four nmi off course in bad weather conditions.
* 1961 Holtaheia Vickers Viking crash, crashed into a mountain near Stavanger, killing all 39 people on board. All except two of the passengers were students aged 13–16 years old.
* Widerøe Flight 933, crashed into the Barents Sea near Mehamn, killing all 15 on board. This incident remains highly controversial in Norway.
* Widerøe Flight 710, crashed in heavy fog, killing all 36 passengers in the worst-ever Dash 7 accident.
* Atlantic Airways Flight 670, a BAe 146, slides off the runway at Stord Airport, Norway, killing four of the 16 people on board.
* Widerøe Flight 744 (27 October 1993) - A de Havilland Canada DHC-6-300 Twin Otter operated by Widerøe crashes on approach due to pilot error. 6 people die and 13 others are injured. 
*Widerøe Flight 839, a Twin Otter crashed in the sea outside Værøya, killing all 5 persons on board.
*Vnukovo Airlines Flight 2801, a Tupolev Tu-154 crashed into a mountain on Svalbard killing all 141 people on board. Deadliest aviation accident ever in Norway.

===Poland===

* 1951 LOT Li-2 Tuszyn air disaster the Lisunov Li-2 suffered an engine failure in mid-air. The pilots lost control of the plane, hit a power line, crashed and burst into flames in Tuszyn. All 18 people aboard were killed.
* 1962 LOT Vickers Viscount Warsaw crash, the plane was returning from Brussels, had a mid-way landing in Berlin from where it took off at 5:55 pm. While on approach on runway 33 in Warsaw at 7:30 pm the crew received landing clearance. 46 seconds later the plane crashed and burned 1335 meters from the threshold. All 33 people on board perished.

* LOT Polish Airlines Flight 165, crashed into a mountain near Zawoja.
* LOT Polish Airlines Flight 007, crashed near Okęcie Airport in Warsaw.
* LOT Polish Airlines Flight 5055, crashed in Kabacki Forest (Warsaw).
* LOT Flight 703, crash-landed at high speed, bounced back, crashed, and burst into flames near Białobrzegi.

* Lufthansa Flight 2904, during landing on Okęcie Airport in Warsaw, the aircraft overran the runway and, broke apart and burst into flames.
* LOT Polish Airlines Flight 16, a Boeing 767, crash lands after the landing gear failed to deploy at Warsaw Frederic Chopin Airport.

===Portugal===

* Air Transat Flight 236 ran out of fuel over the Atlantic Ocean and glided successfully to the Azores.
* Independent Air Flight 1851 crashed 8 February 1989 on approach to Santa Maria Airport in the Azores, due to pilot and air traffic control errors. All 144 on board died.
* Martinair Flight 495 crashed on landing at Faro Airport 21 December 1992 after flying through two microbursts. 56 people on board were killed.
* TAP Portugal Flight 425 overran the runway at Madeira Airport on 19 November 1977, killing 131 people on board.
* Viasa Flight 897 spiraled to the left and impacted the ocean on 30 May 1961, killing all 61 people on board.

===Romania===
* TAROM Flight 371 – Crashed near Baloteşti (on 31 March 1995) due to auto-throttle failure followed by the incapacitation of the captain, all 60 on board died.
* TAROM Flight 3107 – Veered off the runway in Otopeni (on 30 December 2007) after hitting a maintenance vehicle during takeoff run due to poor weather conditions.

===Russia===
* Austrian Airlines Flight 901 smashed to the ground near Trukovo short of the runway on 26 September 1960, killing 31 people.
* In 1971 January 22 Surgut Aeroflot Antonov An-12 crash, an Aeroflot Antonov An-12 crashed into the ground short of the runway of Surgut International Airport. All 14 on board perished. Icing was blamed. 
* In 1971 January 31 Surgut Aeroflot Antonov An-12 crash, an Aeroslot Antonov An-12 carrying one passenger and 6 crew crashed short of the runway of Surgut International Airport. All 7 died. Icing was blamed.
* Aeroflot Flight 217 crashed outside of Moscow on 13 October 1972 killing all 174 aboard, cause not known.
* Korean Air Lines Flight 902 was shot down by Soviet Union Air Defence after the flight violating the Soviet Union airspace. It then crashed and skidded along the frozen Korpijärvi lake, killing 2 passengers out of 109 passengers and crews on board.
* Aeroflot Flight 1080, the flight was taking off from Yekaterinburg when all three engines of the Yakovlev Yak-40 malfunctioned. While the crew was attempting to turn the aircraft back to the airport, the aircraft crashed into terrain, killing all 38 people on board. Investigators blamed the crew, the ATC worker, the overloaded state of the aircraft, and the weather conditions.
* Aeroflot Flight 3932, the pilots were preoccupied with spatial disorientation as the main artificial horizon and the compass system gave the wrong indication due to electrical failure. The Tupolev Tu-104 then crashed approximately five miles from Koltsovo Airport. All 108 people on board were killed.
* Aeroflot Flight 964, the pilots were preoccupied with spatial disorientation as the main artificial horizon and the compass system gave the wrong indication due to electrical failure. The Tupolev Tu-104 spun and crashed into a field 16 km north-west of Domodedovo Airport. All 122 people on board were killed.
* Aeroflot Flight 2003, shortly after takeoff, the Tupolev Tu-124V dived and crashed into a house, killing 62 people.
* 1976 Anapa mid-air collision, an Aeroflot Antonov An-24 carrying 52 people collided in mid-air over Anapa, Krasnodar Krai with an Aeroflot Yakovlev Yak-40, which was carrying 18 people. The impact severed the tail on both planes. Both planes then broke up in mid-air and crashed into the Black Sea, killing 80 people.
* Aeroflot Flight 1691, the Tupolev Tu-104B was taking off when one of its fire alarm suddenly sounded. It was a false alarm. The crews did not know that it was a false alarm and attempted to return to the airport but failed. It crashed and flipped over, killing 58 people.
* Aeroflot Tu-104A crash, the Tu-104A was taking off from Pushkin Airport on 7 February 1981 when the cargo hold suddenly shifted. The plane banked to the right and crashed in upside-down condition, killing all 51 people on board. The uneven distribution of the passengers in their seats was also found and concluded as one of its primary factors of the cause of the accident.
* Aeroflot Flight 498, the Ilyushin Il-14 crashed into mountainous terrain near Ust-Barguzin on 14 June 1981, killing 48 people in the worst accident involving an Ilyushin Il-14.
* Aeroflot Flight 811, the Antonov An-24RV was taking off from Komsomolsk-on-Amur Airport on 24 August 1981 when a Tupolev Tu-16K collided with the aircraft. All but one on board were killed. The survivor, Larisa Savitskaya, was conscious during the fall and glided with the 4х3 m aircraft fragment she was in. She fell into a soft, swampy glade.
* Aeroflot Flight 3603, the Tu-154B-2 was on approach to Norilsk Airport on 16 November 1981 when it descended below the glide slope aggravated with an excessive vertical speed. It then crashed ahead of the runway, killing 99 people.
* Aeroflot Flight 411, crashed on takeoff from Sheremetyevo Airport on 6 July 1982.
* Aeroflot Flight 593, crashed into a hillside in Siberia on 23 March 1994.
* Aeroflot Flight 601, the Antonov An-24RV banked left excessively and crashed while on approach Leshukonskoye Airport on 24 December 1983, killing 44 people. 
* Aeroflot Flight 2808, a Tupolev Tu-134, crashed short of the runway en route to Ivanovo airport, killing all 84 people on board.
* Aeroflot Flight 3352 crashed into maintenance vehicles upon landing at Omsk Airport, killing 174 on the aircraft and four more in the vehicles (11 October 1984).
* Aeroflot Flight 3519, the Tupolev Tu-154B-2&#x27;s engine no 3 caught fire on 23 December 1984. The crews attempted an emergency landing in Krasnoyarsk, banked to the right and crashed with only one survivor.
* Baikal Airlines Flight 130, crashed near the town of Mamony, Irkutsk after an apparent engine fire on 3 January 1994.
* a Cheremshanka Airlines flight, crashes near Vanavara after running out of fuel in bad weather, killing 28 passengers and crew on 26 September 1994.
* Siberia Airlines Flight 1047 and Volga-AviaExpress Flight 1303 exploded in the sky after suicide bombers detonated their bombs in mid-air, killing 90 people.
* Regional Airlines Flight 9288, an Antonov An-24RV crashed 5 kilometers (3.1 miles) from the runway while on approach to Varandey Airport in Nenetskiy Avtonomnyy Okrug on 16 March 2005, killing 28 of the 52 people aboard.
* S7 Airlines Flight 778 failed to brake on landing at Irkutsk and hit a concrete wall on 9 July 2006, the plane exploded on impact, burst into flames and leaving its tail as the only part that left intact, 125 people were killed.
* UTAir Flight 471 The Tupolev Tu-134 suffered a catastrophic structural failure after a hard landing in Samara. The aircraft broke apart and flipped over, killing 6 people. (27 March 2007)
* Aeroflot Flight 821 crashed on approach to Perm Airport en route from Moscow (on 14 September 2008). All 88 people on board were killed.

* 2010 Polish Air Force Tu-154 crash, a Tupolev Tu-154 was trying to land in Smolensk Airport when the left wing hit a tree, and the aircraft inverted to the left, crashed and skidded in upside down condition in Smolensk, killing President of Poland Lech Kaczyński and all people aboard.
* Katekavia Flight 9357, on the night of 3 August 2010, the Antonov An-24 veered to the right from its landing course, crossed a river, impacted trees, crashed and burst into flames, killing 12 people. Russian investigators concluded that pilot error was the cause of the accident.

* Kolavia Flight 348, While taxiing for take-off from Surgut, the Tupolev Tu-154B-2 caught fire. Evacuation was immediately ordered by the captain. 43 people were injured, and 3 people were killed.

* RusAir Flight 9605, on 20 June 2011, the Tupolev Tu-134A-3 was on approach to Petrozavodsk when it went upside down and crashed into houses, killing 47 people including FIFA football referee Vladimir Pettay. Pilot error was the cause of the accident.
* Angara Airlines Flight 9007, on 11 July 2011, the Antonov An-24 en route from Surgut to Tomsk suffered an engine fire, forcing the pilots to ditch into the Ob River. Seven of the 37 people on board were killed. The aircraft was written off.
* In the 2011 Lokomotiv Yaroslavl plane crash, a Yak-Service Yakovlev Yak-42 was carrying a Russian professional ice hockey team when it failed its takeoff, hit a mast and crashed into the Volga riverbank. Two of the 45 aboard initially survived, Alexander Galimov died of his injuries 5 days later.
* UTAir Flight 120 on 2 April 2012, the ATR 72 suffered an atmospheric icing and stalled. The plane impacted terrain and burst into flames, leaving with only 10 survivors. 
* Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky Air Flight 251 crashed while attempting to land at Palana Airport in Russia after descended below minima on approach, killing 10 people. Pilot error was the cause of the accident.
* Red Wings Airlines Flight 9268 failed to stop after landing at Vnukovo Airport and left the runway at high-speed, the aircraft hit the runway and broke up on impact killing five of the eight on board. Dashcam video shown the moment the aircraft hit and debris littered the runway.
* Tatarstan Airlines Flight 363 the Boeing 737 suddenly nose dived and hit the tarmac at nearly the speed of sound during a failed approach to Kazan Airport on 17 November 2013, upon impact the plane exploded and was pulverised. All 50 people were killed. The accident was caught on CCTV.

* Flydubai Flight 981, the Boeing 737 crashed in southwestern Russia while attempting its second landing at Rostov-on-Don. All 55 passengers and seven crew on board were killed. The plane was pulverized.
* 2016 Russian Defence Ministry Tupolev Tu-154 crash crashed into the Black Sea 1.5 kilometers from Sochi on 25 December 2016. All 92 on board were killed, including 64 members of the Alexandrov Ensemble choir.
* Aeroflot Flight 1492, a Sukhoi Superjet 100, caught fire during a 5 May 2019 emergency landing at Moscow&#x27;s Sheremetyevo Airport, killing 41 and injuring 11
* Gazpromavia Sukhoi Superjet 100-95 flight 4G-9608 was departing on 12 June 2024 from Lukhovitsy Airfield to Moscow Vnukovo (Russia). 7 minutes later as it climbed through 3000 feet the aircraft lost height and impacted ground in a forest near Kolomna (Russia). All three crew died.

===Slovakia===
* Ilyushin IL-18B of the Bulgarian carrier TABSO During a snowy night, the plane was on approach when it crashed in the foothills of Little Carpathians, near Bratislava on 24 November 1966. All aboard were killed.
* ČSA Flight 001 A multiple engine failure occurred on board the Ilyushin Il-18L. As the crew attempted a go-around, the plane&#x27;s right bank increased due to asymmetric thrust. It eventually crashed into Zlaté piesky, killing 76 people.

===Slovenia===
* Britannia Airways Flight 105, Crashed into a forest near Ljubljana, 1 September 1966, killing 98 out of 110 passengers.

===Spain===

* KLM Flight 4805 and Pan Am Flight 1736 crashed during takeoff from Tenerife in the Canary Islands on 27 March 1977 in what has become known as the Tenerife airport disaster, the deadliest aviation accident in history. The ground collision was caused by a number of factors, including weather conditions, pilot error, and technical limitations. 583 people aboard both aircraft died. Survivors numbered 61 (54 passengers, 7 crew).
* Dan-Air Flight 1008 crashed into a mountain on Tenerife near Los Rodeos due to pilot error on 25 April 1980. All 146 people aboard were killed.
* Aviaco Flight 118, a Sud Aviation SE 210 Caravelle carrying 85 people crashed into a village near Montrove killing everyone on board. A male also died on the ground.
* Spantax Flight 995 a DC-10-30CF was destroyed by fire after an aborted takeoff at Málaga, 13 September 1982.
* Avianca Flight 011, registered HK-2910, a Boeing 747 flew too low and slammed onto terrain. It then bounced back and hit the terrain again before crashing in an inverted position, bursting into flames. 181 fatalities
* Madrid runway disaster, an Iberia Boeing 727-256 Adv.collided with an Aviaco McDonnell Douglas DC-9-32 at Madrid-Barajas Airport on 7 December 1983. 93 people were killed, including Mexican actress Fanny Cano and South African pianist Marc Raubenheimer.
* Iberia Airlines Flight 610, on 19 February 1985 a Boeing 727-256 operated by Spain&#x27;s national airline Iberia struck a television antenna, separating the wing from the plane. It banked heavily and crashed on the top of Mount Oiz in Biscay, near Bilbao. All 148 people on board were killed. Pilot error was the cause.
* PauknAir Flight 4101, as the pilots could not see anything, they were not aware that Flight 4101 flew too low. It hit the ground killing all 38 people on board.
* Britannia Airways Flight 226A, crashed on landing at Girona-Costa Brava Airport, 14 September 1999.
* Spanair Flight 5022 &quot;Sunbreeze&quot;, stalled, veered off the runway, and crashed into a pond at Madrid Barajas International Airport, 20 August 2008, killing 154 passengers and crew, leaving 18 survivors. The pilots didn&#x27;t reset the flaps/slats after the first, aborted, takeoff.
* Dan-Air Flight 1903, the de Havilland DH 106 Comet series 4 was approaching Barcelona Airport when it flew into the woods of Serralada del Montseny near Girona, killing everyone on board in the deadliest aircraft accident involving a De Havilland Comet series.
* Flightline Flight 101 crashes into the Mediterranean Sea near the Columbretes Islands after a lightning strike killing all 10 on board.

===Sweden===

*1970 Spantax Convair crash, the aircraft crashed shortly after take-off from Stockholm Arlanda Airport, killing 5 people out of 10.
* Linjeflyg Flight 267, the aircraft was on approach but got off course from its track. It flew too low and crashed into the ground, killing 31 people. The airport had a military configuration rather than the normal civilian configuration. This caused a pilot error.
* Linjeflyg Flight 618, during approach on Stockholm Bromma Airport, the aircraft dived into the ground and crashed in upside down condition, killing all 22 people on board. An ice build up had occurred on its tailfin, causing a disruption on its airflow and subsequently crashed the plane.
* SAS Flight 751, &quot;The Gottröra accident&quot;, 27 December 1991.
* West Air Sweden Flight 294 crashed near Akkajaure.

===Switzerland===
* Swissair Flight 330 was a Convair Coronado that crashed near Würenlingen following detonation of a bomb on board, all 47 on board were killed.
* Ethiopian Airlines Flight 702 was carrying 202 passengers and crews when it was hijacked by the co-pilot over Sudan and landed in Geneva International Airport. The co-pilot was arrested.
* Alitalia Flight 404, a McDonnell Douglas DC-9 flew into a mountain near Weiach after its faulty navigational system caused the plane to not warn the pilots about the flight&#x27;s dangerously low altitude. Everyone on board were killed.
* Swissair Flight 306, the Sud Aviation SE-210 Caravelle III was taking off from Zurich when a fire occurred on board. The prolonged fire damaged the aircraft&#x27;s hydraulic system, thus, the aircraft lose control, and crashed into a village, destroying many ground structures. There were no survivors.
* Invicta International Airlines Flight 435 flew into the mountain, somersaulted and exploded in Switzerland&#x27;s deadliest air disaster. 108 fatalities
* Crossair Flight 3597 was on final approach to Zurich Airport when it crashed into a hill. The aircraft slid and broke up, killing 24 people including several high-profile singers. Pilot error was blamed.
* Crossair Flight 498, shortly after takeoff, the aircraft dived, spiraled and crashed in nearly vertical condition, killing everyone on board.

===Turkey===

*Air France Flight 152. a Lockheed L-749A Constellation, ditched into the Mediterranean Sea off Kızılada, Fethiye on 3 August 1953. Four people of 8 crew and 34 passengers drowned.
* Scandinavian Airlines System Flight 871, a Sud Aviation Caravelle crashed to high ground during its approach to land at Esenboğa International Airport, killing all 42 people on board. 
*Turkish Airlines Flight 452, a Boeing 727-2F2, flew into the slope of a hill at Karatepe in Isparta on 19 September 1976, killing 154 people.
* Turkish Airlines Flight 158, a Boeing 737-4Q8, crashed during its final approach to land at Ankara Esenboğa Airport in driving snow 16 January 1983. 47 fatalities.
* Condor Flugdienst Flight 3782, a Boeing 737-230, crashed into Dümentepe Hill during its final approach to land at Adnan Menderes Airport on 2 January 1988. All 16 people on board were killed.
* Turkish Airlines Flight 278, a Boeing 737-4Y0, crashed during its final approach to land at Van Ferit Melen Airport in driving snow, 29 December 1994. 57 fatalities.
* Turkish Airlines Flight 5904, a Boeing 737-4Q8, crashed in Ceyhan 8 minutes after takeoff from Adana Şakirpaşa Airport, 7 April 1999. 6 fatalities.
* Turkish Airlines Flight 634, an Avro RJ100, crashed on its final approach during landing at Diyarbakır Airport, 8 January 2003. 75 fatalities
* Atlasjet Flight 4203, a McDonnell Douglas MD-83, crashed on a hill during descent to Isparta Süleyman Demirel Airport, 30 November 2007. 57 fatalities.

===Ukraine===
* Aeroflot Flight 1491: While descending to Kharkov, the Antonov An-10&#x27;s wings suddenly snapped and detached from the aircraft. The fuselage fell into the woods. All 122 people on board were killed.
* 1979 Dniprodzerzhynsk mid-air collision: two Aeroflot Tupolev Tu-134s collided near Dniprodzerzhynsk on 11 August 1979, killing all 178 on both aircraft.
* Aeroflot Flight 528: The Yakovlev Yak-40 touched the runway too fast. The pilots then attempted to take-off again, but too late. It overran the runway, hit several obstacles and caught fire, killing 8 people.
* Aeroflot Flight 8381: An Aeroflot Tupolev Tu-134 was descending to Lviv Airport when it collided with a Soviet Air Force Antonov An-26. Both aircraft lost their right wings and tails, and crashed near the village of Zolochiv, killing 94 people.

* Malaysia Airlines Flight 17, a Boeing 777-200ER, was flying over Ukraine while en route to Kuala Lumpur International Airport when it was hit by a surface-to-air missile. As the missile exploded beside the aircraft, the shrapnel, thrown by the missile, penetrated the aircraft and destroyed the cockpit and the first class. The Boeing 777 spiraled and disintegrated in mid-air, sucking out passengers from their seats. It then crashed near Hrabove. All 298 people on board killed in the deadliest civilian airliner shootdown in history.

*Pulkovo Aviation Enterprise Flight 612: On 22 August 2006, a Tupolev Tu-154M was flying over Donetsk Oblast in stormy conditions when it stalled and crashed near Sukha Balka, killing all 170 people on board. Ukraine officials blamed pilot error, flying the aircraft higher than its design altitude.

===United Kingdom===
== International waters ==
The following accidents and incidents occurred in international waters; that is, more than off the coast of any territory.

===Persian Gulf===
3 July 1988 – Iran Air Flight 655, an Iranian passenger jet carrying 290 passengers, is shot down over the Persian Gulf by the United States Navy guided-missile cruiser USS Vincennes killing all aboard including 66 children.

===Atlantic Ocean===


* Air France Flight 447 – The Airbus A330 was carrying 228 people from Rio de Janeiro to Paris when its pitot tubes froze causing faulty airspeed reading. The plane then stalled. As the co-pilot took over, a miscommunication occurred and he deepened the stall. The plane crashed into the Atlantic Ocean killing all on board.

* Air France Flight 1611 – crashed into the Mediterranean sea off Nice. All 89 passengers and 6 crew members on board were killed.

* Air India Flight 182 – was flying over the Atlantic Ocean off the west of Ireland when a bomb placed by a Sikh extremist exploded in the cargo hold. The Boeing 747 disintegrated and plunged into the Atlantic killing everyone aboard in Ireland&#x27;s deadliest aviation disaster.
* American Airlines Flight 63 – Attempted bombing over Atlantic Ocean, terrorist was restrained and sedated.
* Birgenair Flight 301 – crashed in the Caribbean Sea, near the Dominican Republic; all 189 passengers and crew killed. Investigators found that a nest was found blocking its airspeed indicator, causing the pilot to misread it.
* BOAC Flight 777 was shot down by Luftwaffe fighter planes in the Bay of Biscay on 1 June 1943. All 17 aboard died, including actor Leslie Howard.
* Cubana Flight 455 – bombed, then crashed off west coast of Barbados.
* Dominicana DC-9 air disaster – crashed into the Caribbean Sea shortly after takeoff.

* EgyptAir Flight 990 – Crashed off the Atlantic coast of Nantucket. All 217 aboard were killed.
* KLM Flight 607-E crashed west of Shannon, Ireland, on 14 August 1958. The most likely cause was catastrophic mechanical failure, though the cause is officially undetermined. All 99 aboard died.
* LAV Flight 253 – Crashed into the Atlantic off Asbury Park, New Jersey, on 20 June 1956. All 74 aboard died.
* Swissair Flight 111 – Crashed off the Atlantic coast of Nova Scotia.

* TWA Flight 800 – The Boeing 747 was climbing just after taking off when suddenly its fuel tank exploded. The front cabin of the plane detached from the plane and fell straight to the Atlantic. The middle and the back cabin remained intact, but burning. The &#x27;decapitated&#x27; plane then climbed and later crashed off the Atlantic coast of East Moriches, New York. All on board were killed. Investigators found that a faulty cable ignited a fire in the fuel tank, causing it to explode violently.
* Vieques Air Link Flight 901A, crashed into the Atlantic Ocean, off Vieques, Puerto Rico, with 9 deaths.

===Black Sea===

* Siberia Airlines Flight 1812 – was flying near Ukraine on 4 October 2001. By coincidence, the Ukrainian army was conducting a military practice to shoot a target with a missile. Rather than locking onto its actual target, the missile locked onto the Siberia Airlines plane. All 78 people aboard were killed. Ukraine paid ~$15 million compensation to victims&#x27; relatives.
*Transair Georgian Airline Crash (21 September) – Shot down into the Black Sea by a missile upon landing.

===Caribbean Sea===
* LIAT Flight 319 – Not long after taking off from Hewanorra International Airport in Saint Lucia, the 19-seater DHC-6 crashed into the sea, killing all 13 people on board.
* ALM Flight 980 – After several unsuccessful landing attempts, the plane ran out of fuel. The crews were forced to ditch the plane, and 23 people drowned.

=== Indian Ocean ===
* Lionair Flight 602 crashed into the ocean off the coast of Mannar District, Sri Lanka while carrying 55 on board. Everyone aboard were killed. The wreckage was discovered in 2012.
* Korean Air Flight 858 was destroyed by a bomb planted by North Korean agents on 29 November 1987. All 115 on board died.
* South African Airways Flight 295 crashed into the Indian Ocean in international waters off the coast of Mauritius on 28 November 1987 after a catastrophic in-flight fire. The cause of the fire was never determined. All 159 aboard were killed.
* Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 went missing over the Indian ocean while heading from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing. All 239 people on board were presumed dead.

=== Pacific Ocean ===

* Aeroperú Flight 603 – Off the coast of Peru
* Alaska Airlines Flight 261 – Off the coast of Oxnard, California.
* China Airlines Flight 006 – Plunged 30,000 feet while 350 miles northwest of San Francisco.
* Flying Tigers Line Flight 739 – mid-ocean.
* Korean Air Flight 007 – Shot down over the Sea of Okhotsk in Soviet airspace.
* Asiana Airlines Flight 991 – Near Jeju Island, South Korea
* Philippine Airlines Flight 434 – bomb exploded on board over Minami Daito Island in the Philippine Sea, near Okinawa, Japan.
*China Airlines Flight 611- near Taiwan.

==Oceania==

===Australia===
* ANA Avro Ten crashed in the Snowy Mountains, New South Wales, 21 March 1931.
* ANA Stinson crashed near the border of Queensland and New South Wales, 19 February 1937.
* ANA DC-2 crashed into Mount Dandenong, Victoria, 25 October 1938.
* ANA Stinson &quot;Tokana&quot; crashed near Redesdale, Victoria, 31 January 1945.
* ANA DC-3 crashed at Seven-Mile Beach, Tasmania, 10 March 1946.
* ANA DC-3 crashed in New South Wales, 2 September 1948.
* Queensland Airlines Lockheed Lodestar crashed at Coolangatta, Queensland, 10 March 1949.
* MacRobertson Miller Aviation&#x27;s DC-3 &quot;Fitzroy&quot; crashed immediately after takeoff from Perth on 2 July 1949.
* ANA DC-4 crashed after departure Perth, Western Australia, 26 June 1950.
* TAA Fokker Friendship crashed into the sea while preparing to land at Mackay, Queensland, 10 June 1960.
* Ansett-ANA Flight 325, a Vickers Viscount crashed into Botany Bay, New South Wales, 30 November 1961.
* Ansett-ANA Flight 149, a Vickers Viscount crashed while preparing to make an emergency landing at Winton, Queensland, 22 September 1966.
* MacRobertson Miller Airlines Flight 1750, a Vickers Viscount crashed near Port Hedland, Western Australia, on 31 December 1968.
* Beech Super King Air crashed after take-off from Sydney Airport on 21 February 1980.
* Beechcraft Baron Registered VH-TLO crashed on approach to airstrip, Mt Diane, Palmer River Far North Qld, on 2 February 1987, with 5 killed and 3 survivors. 
* Beech Super King Air departed Perth and crashed in Queensland in September 2000, killing all eight on board.
* Lockhart River air disaster occurred on 7 May 2005, involving the death of all 15 occupants of a Fairchild Metroliner.
*B200 Super King Air Crash occurred on 21 February 2017, when shortly after takeoff the plane stalled into the DFO Shopping complex near Essendon Airport, Victoria, killing the pilot and all 4 Passengers.

===Fiji===
* 24 July 1999 - *Air Fiji Flight 121, crashed into the mountainside due to pilot error, killing everyone on board.

===Federated states of Micronesia===
* 18 September 2018 - Air Niugini Flight 73 crash lands at Chuck International Airport in the Federated states of Micronesia.

===French Polynesia===
* 22 July 1973 - Pan Am Flight 816 crashes into the sea for undetermined reasons, killing 78 people on board.
* 9 August 2007 - Air Moorea Flight 1121 crashes into the sea due to an elevator cable failure killing all 20 on board.

=== Guam (United States) ===
* 6 August 1997 - Korean Air Flight 801 crashed on approach to Antonio B. Won Pat International Airport, Guam. 228 of the 254 people aboard the Boeing 747 were killed.

===New Zealand===

* New Zealand National Airways Corporation Flight 441 crashed in the Kaimai Ranges on 3 July 1963, killing all 23 people were on board.
* Air New Zealand Flight 4374 crashed on approach to Auckland Airport from Gisborne Airport on 17 February 1979, killing 2 out of the 4 people on board.
* Ansett New Zealand Flight 703 crashed during approach to Palmerston North, on 5 June 1995, killing 4 of 21 people on board.
* Eagle Airways Flight 2279 was hijacked on 8 February 2008 on a flight from Blenheim to Christchurch.

===Papua New Guinea===
* Airlines PNG Flight 4684 – On 11 August 2009, in bad weather, a de Havilland Twin Otter was on approach to Kokoda Airport carrying 13 passengers and crew. The plane crashed into the eastern slope of the Kokoda Gap. All on board killed.
* Airlines PNG Flight 1600 – On 13 October 2011, a de Havilland Canada Dash 8 was en route to Madang Airport while carrying 32 people when one of its propellers oversped. This causing a catastrophic engine failure. The pilots decided to land the plane near Guabe River. While the plane was landing, the plane gradually, disintegrated. Eventually, the plane exploded. The cockpit was flung from the main body. Only 4 people survived.
* 2016 Sunbird Aviation crash – On 13 April 2016, a Britten-Norman BN-2T aircraft crashed into a forest, just 1 km short of the runway in Kiunga. All 12 people on board perished.

==North America==

===Canada===
* 9 December 1956 - Trans-Canada Air Lines Flight 810 crashed into Mount Slesse near Chilliwack, British Columbia on 9 December 1956 after encountering severe icing and turbulence, resulting in the death of all 62 people on board.
* 29 November 1963 - Trans-Canada Air Lines Flight 831, a Douglas DC-8-54CF Jet Trader operated by Trans-Canada Air Lines crashed into a soggy field, killing all 118 on board. 
* 8 July 1965 - Canadian Pacific Airlines Flight 21 crashed near 100 Mile House, British Columbia, after an in-flight explosion. All 52 aboard were killed.
* 5 July 1970 - Air Canada Flight 621 crashed due to pilot error while attempting to land at Toronto. All 109 people on board were killed.
* 11 February 1978 - Pacific Western Airlines Flight 314 crashed after thrust reversers did not fully stow following a rejected landing that was executed in order to avoid a snowplow. The crash killed four crew members and 38 of the 44 passengers.
* 26 June 1978 - Air Canada Flight 189 crashed on takeoff in Toronto due to pilot error and mechanical failure. Two passengers were killed.
* 29 March 1979 - Quebecair Flight 255, a Fairchild F-27 operated by Quebecair crashes into a hill due to engine separation, killing 17.
* 23 July 1983 - Air Canada Flight 143, commonly known as the Gimli Glider. The Boeing 767 ran out of fuel over the Canadian Shield due to a maintenance error, and had to glide to a landing at a former airbase at Gimli, Manitoba.
* 22 March 1984 - Pacific Western Airlines Flight 501 burst into flames upon takeoff from Calgary International Airport due to mechanical failure. No one was killed.
* 12 December 1985 - Arrow Air Flight 1285 crashed shortly after takeoff due to icing. All 256 aboard died.
* 10 March 1989 - Air Ontario Flight 1363 crashed soon after takeoff due to icing. Of 65 people on board, 24 were killed.

* 16 December 1997 - Air Canada Flight 646 skidded off the runway and crashed into a tree while attempting to land at Fredericton International Airport in Fredericton, New Brunswick. 35 of the 42 passengers and crew were injured.

* 18 June 1998 - Propair Flight 420, a Fairchild Metroliner SA226 operated by Propair from Montreal-Dorval Airport to Peterborough, Ontario suffered an in-flight fire causing the wing to fall off during an emergency landing at Mirabel Airport, killing all 11 on board.
* 2 September 1998 - Swissair Flight 111 crashed into the Atlantic Ocean southwest of the Halifax International Airport at the entrance to St. Margarets Bay, Nova Scotia on Wednesday, following an in-flight fire which lead to electrical failure, spatial disorientation and crew distraction. All 229 people on board died.
* 14 October 2004 - MK Airlines Flight 1602 ran off the runway on take-off from Halifax Stanfield International Airport and crashed killing all 7 crew. The is attributed to incorrect take-off speed calculations.
* 2 August 2005 - Air France Flight 358 burst into flames after overshooting the runway at Toronto Pearson International Airport. There were no casualties.
* 20 August 2011 - First Air Flight 6560 suffered a controlled flight into terrain in poor weather while attempting to land at Resolute, Nunavut. Of the 15 people on board, 12 were killed, and three were injured but survived.
* 29 March 2015 - Air Canada Flight 624 hit an electric power line then made a hard landing as it skidded off a runway at Halifax Stanfield International Airport, Nova Scotia during a snowstorm. All 133 passengers and crew survived, but 23 suffered injuries.

===United States===
===Mexico===
* Aeroméxico Flight 229 crashed into the side of a mountain while on approach to Licenciado Gustavo Díaz Ordaz International Airport on 20 June 1973, killing all 27 people on board.
* Aeromexico Flight 230 touched down too hard during landing, bounced back and broke up. It then caught fire, killing 32 people on board. 34 people survived. 
* Aerocaribe Flight 7831 crashed into mountain and burst into flames, killing all 19 people on board.
* Mexicana Flight 704 made a continuous descent in the last five minutes before impact, then turned left instead of right and collided with Cerro del Fraile, killing all 79 people on board.
*Mexicana Flight 940 suffered in-flight fire due to maintenance error, leading to loss of hydraulics and electrical systems that caused the aircraft to crash in El Carbón, killing all 167 people on board.
*30 July 1987 - A Belize Air International Boeing C-97G Stratofreighter crashes onto a road due to a cargo shift killing 49.
* TAESA Flight 725 stalled and crashed in Uruapan after a slat malfunction, killing all 18 people on board.
* Western Airlines Flight 2605 landed on the wrong runway, hit a maintenance vehicle, bounced back, struck a hangar, crashed and broke apart, killing 73 people, including one person on the ground.
* 4 November, 2008 Mexico City Learjet crash crashed in central Mexico City at around 18:45 local time on. The nine people on board, including the Mexican Secretary of the Interior Juan Camilo Mouriño, were killed, along with seven people on the ground.
* 9 September 2009 - Aeroméxico Flight 576, a Boeing 737-852 operated by Aeroméxico was hijacked. Everyone survived.
* 13 April 2010 - AeroUnion Flight 302, an Airbus A300B4-203F operated by AeroUnion stalls and crashes on approach killing 7.
* 26 November 2015 - Magnicharters Flight 779, a Boeing 737-322 operated by Magnicharters suffers a landing gear collapse. Everyone survives.
* 24 October 2016 - A FlyMex Dornier 328JET-310 veers off the runway. Everyone survives.
* 31 July 2018 - Aeroméxico Connect Flight 2431, an Embraer 190AR operated by Aeroméxico Connect crashes on takeoff due to low altitude windshear. Everyone survives.
* 24 December 2019 - Calafia Airlines Flight 7872, a Cessna 208B Grand Caravan operated by Calafia Airlines crashes into a hill killing 2.

==South America==


===Argentina===
* Aerolíneas Argentinas Flight 644 – Half an hour after take-off, the plane entered severe turbulence. The plane then crashed near Pardo, Buenos Aires, killing everyone on board.
* Aerolíneas Argentinas Flight 707 – The aircraft, named &quot;Ciudad de Bahía Blanca&quot;, entered severe turbulence while en route on its third leg between Camba Puntá Airport and Islas Malvinas International Airport. The pilots lost control of the aircraft and crashed into terrain, killing everyone on board.
* Austral Líneas Aéreas Flight 46 – The McDonnell Douglas MD-81 clipped a eucalyptus tree and crashed 3 km short of the runway while on approach to Libertador General Jose de San Martin Airport on 12 June 1988, killing all 22 people on board.
* Austral Líneas Aéreas Flight 901 – Flight 901 was cleared to land at Aeroparque Jorge Newbery in Buenos Aires when it suddenly lose control and crashed into the river, all aboard were killed. The investigation blamed the pilots for underestimating the intensity of the storm.
* LAPA Flight 3142 – Crashed at Aeroparque Jorge Newbery, Buenos Aires.
* Sol Líneas Aéreas Flight 5428 – Crashed at Prahuaniyeu, Río Negro.

===Bolivia===
* 1976 Lloyd Aéreo Boliviano Boeing 707 crash – a Boeing 707 crashed during takeoff due to an engine failure killing all three crew members on board and 88 people on the ground.
* Eastern Air Lines Flight 980 – A Boeing 727 crashed into Mount Illimani on 1 January 1985, killing all 29 people on board.

===Brazil===
* 1960 Rio de Janeiro mid-air collision – A United States Navy Douglas DC-6 collided in the air over Guanabara Bay with a Real Transportes Aéreos Douglas DC-3 on 25 February 1960. Only 3 people survived, all of whom were from the United States Navy&#x27;s aircraft.
* Aerolíneas Argentinas Flight 322 – The plane clipped several tree tops and crashed into terrain during climbout, killing all 52 people on board.
* Lufthansa Flight 502 – The Lockheed L-1049G Super Constellation was on approach to Rio de Janeiro when its nose wheel struck the water. The plane crashed near Flecheiras Beach. 3 crew members survived of the 29 passengers and 10 crew.
* VASP Flight 168 – Crashed into the Aratanha mountains in Ceará, northeast Brazil.
* Varig Flight 254 – Crashed into a jungle near Sao Jose do Xingu into the Cachimbo mountains, central-west Brazil.
* Transbrasil Flight 303 – Crashed into a hill during instrumental approach to Florianópolis, Brazil.

* TAM Transportes Aéreos Regionais Flight 402 – Crashed near the airport of Congonhas in São Paulo, southeast Brazil, during the takeoff.

* Gol Transportes Aereos Flight 1907 – Flight 1907 was flying over Amazon when one of its wings suddenly cut off from the Boeing 737. This caused the plane to roll uncontrollably, corkscrew, and break up due to the stress this put on the airframe. It then crashed into a jungle near Sao Jose do Xingu in the Cachimbo mountains. All 154 people on board were killed. A U.S. Embraer Legacy aircraft accidentally turned its transponder off, causing the Gol Flight and ATC to not notice the Embraer plane. The Embraer winglets then sliced the Gol&#x27;s wing. Everyone on board the Embraer survived.
* TAM Airlines Flight 3054 – Crashed near the airport of Congonhas in São Paulo, southeast Brazil, during the landing, killing all 187 on board and 12 on the ground, making it the worst plane crash in Brazil and South America.
* 1982 TABA Fairchild FH-227 accident – crashed on approach to land at Tabatinga International Airport
* 1984 TAM – Transportes Aéreos Regionais Bandeirante accident – an Embraer EMB-110 Bandeirante crashed into terrain. Everyone on board was killed.
* VASP Flight 210 - Slammed into a dyke after an accidental take-off attempt from a taxiway and a subsequent overrun of the taxiway. 1 passenger is killed.
* Voepass Linhas Aéreas Flight 2283, an ATR 72-500 turboprop airliner, crashed in Vinhedo, São Paulo in an apparent flat spin while en route to Guarulhos International Airport. None of the 62 occupants survived.

===Chile===
* Aeronor Flight 304 suffered an engine malfunction and crashed into a stone wall near La Florida Airport, La Serena, killing all 46 people on board.
* LAN Chile Flight 160 crashed into a farm near Colina. All 60 people on board survived.
* LAN Chile Flight 210, the aircraft smashed into the side of the Andes mountain while carrying 24 people including 8 professional footballers and 2 coaching staff from CD Green Cross. All aboard were killed.
* LAN Chile Flight 107 the Douglas DC-6 crashed into the side of La Corona Mountain in the Andes, killing everyone on board. 
* British South American Airways Avro Lancastrian &quot;Star Dust&quot; G-AGWH crashed in the Andes (the &quot;STENDEC&quot; incident).

===Colombia===
* Aeropesca Colombia Flight 221, the Vickers Viscount 745D, named &quot;Ciudad de Popayana&quot;, crashed and exploded after impacting Mount Santa Elana on 26 August 1981, killing all 50 people on board.
* Aeropesca Colombia Flight 217, the Vickers Viscount carrying 21 people crashed into a mountain on 26 March 1982. All aboard were killed.
* Air France Flight 422 – a Boeing 727 leased from TAME Airlines, it crashes into the mountains east of Bogotá, Colombia shortly after takeoff, killing all 53 people on board.
* American Airlines Flight 965 – Crashed into a mountain in Colombia, killing 159 and leaving 4 survivors. Pilot error was the main cause.
* Avianca Flight 4 – A Douglas C-54 was taking off from Bogota when it suddenly stalled, causing a rapid descent. The aircraft crashed into the sea, leaving 8 survivors.
* Avianca Flight 203 – Exploded by bomb as part of an assassination attempt while flying over Soacha.
* Avianca Flight 410 – Crashed in Santander, Colombia.
* AIRES Flight 8250 – Upon landing on San Andrés Gustavo Rojas Pinilla International Airport, the Boeing 737 crashed and broke up into several parts. 2 people were killed, while 119 others were injured. Pilots action saved the aircraft from post-impact fire and collision with the airport.
* Intercontinental de Aviación Flight 256 – The Douglas DC-9 impacted with the ground in a marshy lagoon near María La Baja, 56 km from Cartagena Airport due to a false altimeter setting. 51 people were killed. The only survivor was a 9-year-old girl who apparently fell out before the aircraft caught fire.

* LaMia Flight 2933 – A charter flight by an Avro RJ85, operated by LaMia, crashed near the José María Córdova International Airport in Colombia. It was transporting the Brazilian Chapecoense football squad from Viru Viru International Airport in Santa Cruz de la Sierra, Bolivia, to José María Córdova International Airport in Colombia. 71 people, including 19 players of the Chapecoense football team, were killed.
* SAM Colombia Flight 501 – A Boeing 727 operated by SAM Colombia hit Mt. Paramo de Frontino at 12,300 ft. while on approach to José María Córdova International Airport, killing all 132 people on board. The VHF omnidirectional range/distance measuring equipment had been sabotaged by terrorists and was not in service.
* TAME Flight 120 – The Boeing 727-134 was on approach to Teniente Coronel Luis a Mantilla International Airport in foggy conditions on 28 January 2002, when it crashed into the side of Cumbal Volcano, killing all 94 people on board instantly. Colombian authorities concluded that pilot error was the cause of the accident.
* West Caribbean Airways flight 9955, a Let L-410 Turbolet that crashed soon after take off from El Embrujo Airport on 26 March 2005, following a stall due to EFTO and pilot error. 9 of the 14 on board died.

===Ecuador===
* 1982 Aerocondor DHC-4 Caribou accident – flew into high ground
* TAME Boeing 737 crash – The Boeing 737, named &quot;Ciudad de Loja&quot;, was on approach to Cuenca when the pilots went distracted. They were not aware that the plane was flying dangerously low and flew into terrain. At the same time, it was suspected that both pilots were experimenting with their aircraft, indicating a possible lack of experience. It then crashed into a hill, killing all 119 people on board.

===Guyana===
* Caribbean Airlines Flight 523 – Upon landing on Cheddi Jagan International Airport, the Boeing 737 overran the runway, went through the perimeter fence, crashed and broke into two sections. Seven people were injured, no one was killed.

===Peru===
*Faucett Flight 251, a Boeing 737-200 passenger plane which crashed on approach to Rodríguez Ballón International Airport in Arequipa, killing all 123 people on board.
*LANSA Flight 508 Pilot error led to a lightning strike, fire and structural failure. The aircraft broke up over the Amazon rainforest in December 1971.
* LANSA Flight 501, the Lockheed L-749A Constellation crashed into the side of Mount Talalua, killing all on board.
* Aerolíneas Argentinas Flight 386 Passengers suffered from foodborne illness resulting in one fatality.
* TANS Perú Flight 222 Crashed on approach, January 2003.
* TANS Peru Flight 204, a Boeing 737-200 passenger plane which crashed during a storm in the Peruvian jungle, killing at least 40 people of the approximately 100 on board.
* LATAM Perú Flight 2213, an Airbus A320neo collided with a fire truck. All passengers were unharmed but two firefighters were killed and one injured.

===Suriname===
* Surinam Airways Flight 764 – The McDonnell Douglas DC-8-62 clipped a tree and flipped over while on approach to Zanderij airport, Suriname, killing 176 people, including a group of Surinamese football players called &quot;Colourful 11&quot;.

===Uruguay===
* Austral Líneas Aéreas Flight 2553 – The plane was cruising when its pitot tubes froze and caused a false stall warning. The pilots put the aircraft on nose down to increase speed. With the stall warning still sounding as the plane neared overspeed, one of its slats came off, and the plane crashed at Nuevo Berlín, Uruguay at a nearly perpendicular angle, killing all aboard.

===Venezuela===
* Viasa Flight 742, a McDonnell Douglas DC-9-32 that crashed near Maracaibo Airport on 16 March 1969, killing 84 people on the aircraft and 71 on the ground.
* Linea Aeropostal Venezolana Flight 253 (November 1956) was flying through a rainstorm as it approached Caracas Airport when it crashed into a mountain near Caracas Venezuela, killing all 25 people on board.
* West Caribbean Airways Flight 708 was flying over Venezuela while carrying French tourist when it stalled. The pilots misidentified it as an engine failure and pulled down the stick, thus, deepening the stall. The plane then crashed into a field in Machiques killing all 160 people on board.
* 11 March 1983 Avensa Douglas DC-9 crash, 23 killed.
* 5 March 1991 – Aeropostal Alas de Venezuela Flight 108, a McDonnell Douglas DC-9 crashes into a mountain (Paramo Los Torres) shortly after taking off from La Chinita International Airport, Venezuela. All 45 passengers and crew are killed.
* Cubana de Aviación Flight 310: Russian-built Yak-42 crashed near Valencia, Venezuela, and killed 22..
* 21 February 2008 – Santa Bárbara Airlines Flight 518, an ATR 42-300, crashes shortly after taking off from Mérida, Venezuela, killing all 46 on board.

==See also==
* List of aircraft accidents and incidents resulting in at least 50 fatalities
* List of accidents and incidents involving airliners by airline
* List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft

==References==
==External links==
* Aircraft Crashes Record Office
* AirSafe
* Aviation Safety Network
* BBC News
* CNN International
* Federal Aviation Administration</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16667463" start="5" end="61" title="List of accidents and incidents involving airliners by location" label="list of accidents and incidents on airliners by location"/>
<link wikidata="Q108284447" start="73" end="90" title="Aviation accidents and incidents" label="airline accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q354069" start="205" end="266" title="List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft" label="List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306941" start="270" end="280" title="List of accidents and incidents involving airliners by airline" label="by airline"/>
<link wikidata="" start="284" end="295" title=":Category:Accidents and incidents involving airliners" label="by category"/>
<link wikidata="Q16667463" start="566" end="570" title="List of accidents and incidents involving airliners by location" label="bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697994" start="640" end="661" title="Air France Flight 406" label="Air France Flight 406"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302456" start="782" end="796" title="TWA Flight 847" label="TWA Flight 847"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409" start="800" end="810" title="Boeing 727" label="Boeing 727"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574009" start="893" end="915" title="Air France Flight 8969" label="Air France Flight 8969"/>
<link wikidata="Q898712" start="920" end="926" title="Aircraft hijacking" label="hijack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="946" end="953" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046072" start="997" end="1020" title="Air Algérie Flight 6289" label="Air Algérie Flight 6289"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="1073" end="1087" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q51747221" start="1245" end="1289" title="2018 Algerian Air Force Ilyushin Il-76 crash" label="2018 Algerian Air Force Ilyushin Il-76 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q142549" start="1302" end="1316" title="Ilyushin Il-76" label="Ilyushin Il-76"/>
<link wikidata="Q51747221" start="1408" end="1452" title="2018 Algerian Air Force Ilyushin Il-76 crash" label="2018 Algerian Air Force Ilyushin Il-76 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952032" start="1572" end="1578" title="N844AA" label="N844AA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050518" start="1606" end="1626" title="TAAG Angola Airlines" label="TAAG Angola Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q598002" start="1648" end="1675" title="Quatro de Fevereiro Airport" label="Quatro de Fevereiro Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897" start="1679" end="1685" title="Luanda" label="Luanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q15224161" start="1815" end="1861" title="1995 Trans Service Airlift Electra crash" label="A Trans Service Airlift Lockheed L-188 crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581223" start="2070" end="2101" title="TAAG Angola Airlines Flight 462" label="TAAG Angola Airlines Flight 462"/>
<link wikidata="Q4189392" start="2271" end="2285" title="UTA Flight 141" label="UTA Flight 141"/>
<link wikidata="Q107512760" start="2643" end="2650" title="1974 Francistown Wenela Air Services Douglas DC-4 crash" label="crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594461" start="2752" end="2778" title="1999 Air Botswana incident" label="1999 Air Botswana incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q406896" start="2823" end="2835" title="Air Botswana" label="Air Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019415" start="2952" end="2981" title="Caledonian Airways Flight 153" label="Caledonian Airways Flight 153"/>
<link wikidata="Q898928" start="3030" end="3058" title="Douala International Airport" label="Douala International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026436" start="3134" end="3162" title="Cameroon Airlines Flight 786" label="Cameroon Airlines Flight 786"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026437" start="3465" end="3494" title="Cameroon Airlines Flight 3701" label="Cameroon Airlines Flight 3701"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739099" start="3737" end="3761" title="Kenya Airways Flight 507" label="Kenya Airways Flight 507"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698264" start="4208" end="4227" title="Air West Flight 612" label="Air West Flight 612"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="4268" end="4276" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="4278" end="4283" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659" start="4298" end="4312" title="N&amp;#x27;Djamena" label="N&amp;#x27;Djamena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326918" start="4436" end="4465" title="Ethiopian Airlines Flight 961" label="Ethiopian Airlines Flight 961"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624" start="4513" end="4524" title="Addis Ababa" label="Addis Ababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="4528" end="4535" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q904715" start="4720" end="4738" title="Yemenia Flight 626" label="Yemenia Flight 626"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="4935" end="4942" title="Comoros" label="Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842550" start="4985" end="5024" title="Bahia Bakari" label="a 12-year-old passenger was found alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q770821" start="5070" end="5098" title="Hewa Bora Airways Flight 122" label="Hewa Bora Airways Flight 122"/>
<link wikidata="Q204381" start="5145" end="5149" title="Goma" label="Goma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055754" start="5373" end="5417" title="2007 Africa One Antonov An-26 crash" label="Antonov An-26 operated by Africa One crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="5456" end="5464" title="Kinshasa" label="Kinshasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608517" start="5611" end="5659" title="2007 Free Airlines L-410 crash" label="L-410 aircraft operated by Free Airlines crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924877" start="5698" end="5712" title="Kamina Airport" label="Kamina Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q741398" start="5888" end="5909" title="1996 Air Africa crash" label="1996 Air Africa crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573472" start="6109" end="6140" title="1969 Aswan Ilyushin Il-18 crash" label="1969 Aswan Ilyushin Il-18 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q752537" start="6238" end="6265" title="Aswan International Airport" label="Aswan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q29888" start="6269" end="6274" title="Aswan" label="Aswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887394" start="6318" end="6349" title="United Arab Airlines Flight 749" label="United Arab Airlines Flight 749"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449925" start="6572" end="6602" title="Dawson&amp;#x27;s Field hijackings" label="Dawson&amp;#x27;s Field hijackings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="6636" end="6642" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="6655" end="6660" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427211" start="6751" end="6776" title="Flash Airlines Flight 604" label="Flash Airlines Flight 604"/>
<link wikidata="Q326268" start="6829" end="6866" title="Sharm el-Sheikh International Airport" label="Sharm el-Sheikh International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576861" start="7067" end="7098" title="Libyan Arab Airlines Flight 114" label="Libyan Arab Airlines Flight 114"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="7116" end="7122" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1833067" start="7335" end="7349" title="KLM Flight 823" label="KLM Flight 823"/>
<link wikidata="Q4217221" start="7452" end="7494" title="Pakistan International Airlines Flight 705" label="Pakistan International Airlines Flight 705"/>
<link wikidata="Q461793" start="7531" end="7558" title="Cairo International Airport" label="Cairo International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115786" start="7673" end="7687" title="TWA Flight 903" label="TWA Flight 903"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="7749" end="7754" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21282782" start="7876" end="7896" title="Metrojet Flight 9268" label="Metrojet Flight 9268"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="8032" end="8036" title="ISIS" label="ISIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688264" start="8136" end="8155" title="Aeroflot Flight 418" label="Aeroflot Flight 418"/>
<link wikidata="Q205022" start="8240" end="8245" title="Bioko" label="Bioko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604214" start="8275" end="8319" title="2005 Equatorial Express Airlines An-24 crash" label="2005 Equatorial Express Airlines An-24 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q337467" start="8353" end="8366" title="Antonov An-24" label="Antonov An-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q17074968" start="8497" end="8527" title="Ethiopian Air Lines Flight 372" label="Ethiopian Air Lines Flight 372"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055748" start="8607" end="8636" title="Ethiopian Airlines Flight 604" label="Ethiopian Airlines Flight 604"/>
<link wikidata="Q62018034" start="8774" end="8803" title="Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302" label="Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302"/>
<link wikidata="Q139289" start="8807" end="8821" title="Boeing 737 MAX" label="Boeing 737 MAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q44923" start="8860" end="8898" title="Addis Ababa Bole International Airport" label="Addis Ababa Bole International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616916" start="8967" end="8988" title="Allied Air Flight 111" label="Allied Air Flight 111"/>
<link wikidata="Q257502" start="9195" end="9208" title="Air Koryo" label="Chosonminhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q182575" start="9215" end="9229" title="Ilyushin Il-62" label="Ilyushin Il-62"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="9262" end="9271" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733" start="9275" end="9282" title="Conakry" label="Conakry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="9301" end="9306" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="9311" end="9316" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398603" start="9331" end="9365" title="1983 CAAK Ilyushin Il-62 crash" label="crashed into the Guinean mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153249" start="9641" end="9665" title="Kenya Airways Flight 431" label="Kenya Airways Flight 431"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471" start="9720" end="9731" title="Airbus A310" label="Airbus A310"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515" start="9955" end="9962" title="Abidjan" label="Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299165" start="10101" end="10117" title="Varig Flight 797" label="Varig Flight 797"/>
<link wikidata="Q534358" start="10262" end="10282" title="Lufthansa Flight 540" label="Lufthansa Flight 540"/>
<link wikidata="Q116880591" start="10454" end="10476" title="2006 Kenya plane crash" label="2006 Kenya plane crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129563" start="10496" end="10513" title="Pan Am Flight 151" label="Pan Am Flight 151"/>
<link wikidata="Q877578" start="10537" end="10548" title="Bong County" label="Bong County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915893" start="10616" end="10632" title="Varig Flight 837" label="Varig Flight 837"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569258" start="11116" end="11150" title="Central African Airways Flight 890" label="Central African Airways Flight 890"/>
<link wikidata="Q44553" start="11231" end="11259" title="Benina International Airport" label="Benina International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q387892" start="11400" end="11428" title="Afriqiyah Airways Flight 771" label="Afriqiyah Airways Flight 771"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="11433" end="11444" title="Airbus A330" label="Airbus A330"/>
<link wikidata="Q44588" start="11465" end="11494" title="Tripoli International Airport" label="Tripoli International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q626003" start="11691" end="11712" title="Korean Air Flight 803" label="Korean Air Flight 803"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117937" start="11885" end="11917" title="Libyan Arab Airlines Flight 1103" label="Libyan Arab Airlines Flight 1103"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="12168" end="12183" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410088" start="12241" end="12264" title="Air Algérie Flight 5017" label="Air Algérie Flight 5017"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777" start="12284" end="12295" title="Ouagadougou" label="Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="12297" end="12309" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="12314" end="12321" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="12323" end="12330" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637932" start="12418" end="12423" title="Gossi" label="Gossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="12425" end="12429" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q207400" start="12452" end="12475" title="McDonnell Douglas MD-80" label="McDonnell Douglas MD-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q122897577" start="12591" end="12598" title="2023 Gao Ilyushin Il-76 crash" label="crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="12628" end="12632" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002175" start="12754" end="12779" title="Air Mauritanie Flight 625" label="Air Mauritanie Flight 625"/>
<link wikidata="Q725319" start="12783" end="12804" title="Fokker F28 Fellowship" label="Fokker F28 Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="13051" end="13057" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q677122" start="13073" end="13095" title="Lockheed Constellation" label="Lockheed Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36460" start="13136" end="13153" title="Mauritius Airport" label="Mauritius Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q215081" start="13346" end="13358" title="Cocos Island" label="Cocos Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q715683" start="13398" end="13430" title="South African Airways Flight 295" label="South African Airways Flight 295"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="13441" end="13448" title="747-200" label="747-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q821750" start="13466" end="13486" title="Johannesburg Airport" label="Johannesburg Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q44856" start="13492" end="13521" title="Taoyuan International Airport" label="Taoyuan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q36460" start="13541" end="13558" title="Mauritius Airport" label="Mauritius Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="13716" end="13725" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q15908324" start="13775" end="13803" title="Malaysia Airlines Flight 370" label="Malaysia Airlines Flight 370"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425" start="13840" end="13850" title="Boeing 777" label="Boeing 777"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="13935" end="13947" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697989" start="14037" end="14059" title="Air France Flight 2005" label="Air France Flight 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="14127" end="14132" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690967" start="14205" end="14249" title="1975 Agadir Royal Air Maroc Boeing 707 crash" label="1975 Agadir Royal Air Maroc Boeing 707 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373628" start="14453" end="14479" title="Royal Air Maroc Flight 630" label="Royal Air Maroc Flight 630"/>
<link wikidata="Q218637" start="14484" end="14490" title="ATR 42" label="ATR 42"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565425" start="14645" end="14677" title="South African Airways Flight 228" label="South African Airways Flight 228"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935" start="14752" end="14760" title="Windhoek" label="Windhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q15260756" start="14784" end="14818" title="LAM Mozambique Airlines Flight 470" label="LAM Mozambique Airlines Flight 470"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364406" start="14856" end="14878" title="Bwabwata National Park" label="Bwabwata National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q598002" start="14902" end="14929" title="Quatro de Fevereiro Airport" label="Quatro de Fevereiro Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488972" start="15097" end="15111" title="UTA Flight 772" label="UTA Flight 772"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372406" start="15140" end="15168" title="Union des Transports Aériens" label="Union des Transports Aériens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="15190" end="15203" title="Sahara Desert" label="Sahara Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q208075" start="15209" end="15232" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-10" label="McDonnell Douglas DC-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="15247" end="15252" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="15369" end="15373" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002194" start="15404" end="15410" title="Libyan" label="Libyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q623179" start="15422" end="15453" title="state terrorism" label="backed by the Libyan government"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999014" start="15508" end="15534" title="Nigeria Airways Flight 825" label="Nigeria Airways Flight 825"/>
<link wikidata="Q947947" start="15538" end="15550" title="Vickers VC10" label="Vickers VC10"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364195" start="15690" end="15732" title="1973 Kano Nigeria Airways Boeing 707 crash" label="1973 Kano Nigeria Airways Boeing 707 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431654" start="15762" end="15774" title="Kano Airport" label="Kano Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651082" start="15969" end="15991" title="ADC Airlines Flight 86" label="ADC Airlines Flight 86"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032791" start="16231" end="16257" title="Nigeria Airways Flight 357" label="Nigeria Airways Flight 357"/>
<link wikidata="Q5672567" start="16292" end="16306" title="Kaduna Airport" label="Kaduna Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q615020" start="16446" end="16470" title="EAS Airlines Flight 4226" label="EAS Airlines Flight 4226"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497839" start="16755" end="16783" title="Bellview Airlines Flight 210" label="Bellview Airlines Flight 210"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025205" start="16942" end="16971" title="Sosoliso Airlines Flight 1145" label="Sosoliso Airlines Flight 1145"/>
<link wikidata="Q217432" start="17002" end="17015" title="Port Harcourt" label="Port Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048031" start="17133" end="17155" title="ADC Airlines Flight 53" label="ADC Airlines Flight 53"/>
<link wikidata="Q584131" start="17298" end="17317" title="Dana Air Flight 992" label="Dana Air Flight 992"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016243" start="17579" end="17598" title="RwandAir Flight 205" label="RwandAir Flight 205"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859" start="17680" end="17686" title="Kigali" label="Kigali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559133" start="17750" end="17775" title="Somali Airlines Flight 40" label="Somali Airlines Flight 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q22450721" start="18015" end="18041" title="Daallo Airlines Flight 159" label="Daallo Airlines Flight 159"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604" start="18075" end="18083" title="Djibouti (city)" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119032" start="18165" end="18196" title="Aden Adde International Airport" label="Aden Adde International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15196226" start="18299" end="18304" title="Balad, Somalia" label="Balad"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370225" start="18308" end="18351" title="2020 East African Express Airways Brasilia crash" label="2020 East African Express Airways Shootdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370225" start="18434" end="18441" title="2020 East African Express Airways Brasilia crash" label="crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526574" start="18537" end="18569" title="South African Airways Flight 406" label="South African Airways Flight 406"/>
<link wikidata="Q130840" start="18587" end="18599" title="Eastern Cape" label="Eastern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q209537" start="18667" end="18692" title="East London, South Africa" label="East London, South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q950273" start="18742" end="18778" title="1986 Mozambican Tupolev Tu-134 crash" label="1986 Mozambican Tupolev Tu-134 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q159067" start="18782" end="18796" title="Tupolev Tu-134" label="Tupolev Tu-134"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="18819" end="18829" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q219918" start="18830" end="18843" title="Samora Machel" label="Samora Machel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="18883" end="18889" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753460" start="18947" end="18964" title="Comair Flight 206" label="Comair Flight 206"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698807" start="19065" end="19087" title="SA Airlink Flight 8911" label="SA Airlink Flight 8911"/>
<link wikidata="Q17058804" start="19186" end="19226" title="1986 Sudan Airways Fokker F-27 shootdown" label="1986 Sudan Airways Fokker F-27 shootdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q506736" start="19249" end="19276" title="Fokker F-27 Friendship 400M" label="Fokker F-27 Friendship 400M"/>
<link wikidata="Q912908" start="19294" end="19329" title="Sudan People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="Sudan People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q220049" start="19372" end="19379" title="Malakal" label="Malakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673524" start="19428" end="19452" title="Sudan Airways Flight 109" label="Sudan Airways Flight 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="19507" end="19515" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q935682" start="19825" end="19849" title="Sudan Airways Flight 139" label="Sudan Airways Flight 139"/>
<link wikidata="Q208718" start="19861" end="19871" title="Port Sudan" label="Port Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941687" start="20131" end="20152" title="1974 Togo plane crash" label="1974 Togo plane crash"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20213" end="20221" title="Sarakawa" label="Sarakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q155385" start="20233" end="20251" title="Gnassingbé Eyadéma" label="Gnassingbé Eyadéma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348314" start="20294" end="20313" title="EgyptAir Flight 843" label="EgyptAir Flight 843"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="20404" end="20409" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698169" start="20508" end="20531" title="Air Rhodesia Flight 825" label="Air Rhodesia Flight 825"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426171" start="20549" end="20590" title="Zimbabwe People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Army" label="Zimbabwe People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698170" start="20689" end="20712" title="Air Rhodesia Flight 827" label="Air Rhodesia Flight 827"/>
<link wikidata="Q406599" start="20813" end="20839" title="Air New Zealand Flight 901" label="Air New Zealand Flight 901"/>
<link wikidata="Q188982" start="20865" end="20877" title="Mount Erebus" label="Mount Erebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057090" start="21056" end="21109" title="1985 Bakhtar Afghan Airlines Antonov An-26 shootdown" label="A Bakhtar Afghan Airlines Antonov An-26 was shot down"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593350" start="21206" end="21246" title="1998 Ariana Afghan Airlines crash" label="An Ariana Afghan Airlines Boeing 727-228"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208597" start="21298" end="21316" title="Kam Air Flight 904" label="Kam Air Flight 904"/>
<link wikidata="Q161750" start="21332" end="21347" title="Pamir Mountains" label="Pamir Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681634" start="21470" end="21494" title="Pamir Airways Flight 112" label="Pamir Airways Flight 112"/>
<link wikidata="Q921029" start="21584" end="21618" title="2011 Silk Way Airlines Ilyushin Il-76 crash" label="A Silk Way Airlines Ilyushin Il-76"/>
<link wikidata="Q12257020" start="21661" end="21689" title="National Airlines Flight 102" label="National Airlines Flight 102"/>
<link wikidata="Q24147327" start="21962" end="21995" title="2016 Silk Way Airlines Antonov An-12 crash" label="A Silk Way Airlines Antonov An-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202305" start="22071" end="22161" title="1981 Armenia mid-air collision" label="A Transporte Aéreo Rioplatense Canadair CL-44 and a Soviet Air Defense Forces Sukhoi Su-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055393" start="22247" end="22266" title="Belavia Flight 1834" label="Belavia Flight 1834"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953" start="22295" end="22302" title="Yerevan" label="Yerevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124922" start="22310" end="22341" title="Zvartnots International Airport" label="Zvartnots International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662368" start="22474" end="22492" title="Aeroflot Flight 13" label="Aeroflot Flight 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662578" start="22607" end="22636" title="Azerbaijan Airlines Flight 56" label="Azerbaijan Airlines Flight 56"/>
<link wikidata="Q619376" start="22669" end="22687" title="Nakhchivan Airport" label="Nakhchivan Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832380" start="23048" end="23078" title="Azerbaijan Airlines Flight 217" label="Azerbaijan Airlines Flight 217"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566775" start="23265" end="23298" title="1950 Air France multiple Douglas DC-4 accidents" label="Air France Douglas DC-4 accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="23362" end="23374" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q637639" start="23396" end="23425" title="Bahrain International Airport" label="Bahrain International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271379" start="23640" end="23659" title="Gulf Air Flight 072" label="Gulf Air Flight 072"/>
<link wikidata="Q907218" start="23878" end="23903" title="Japan Airlines Flight 472 (1977)" label="Japan Airlines Flight 472"/>
<link wikidata="Q18088261" start="23988" end="24024" title="1984 Biman Bangladesh Airlines Fokker F27 crash" label="Biman Bangladesh Airlines Fokker F27"/>
<link wikidata="Q30603" start="24051" end="24076" title="Zia International Airport" label="Zia International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="24118" end="24123" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="24125" end="24135" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23257919" start="24333" end="24363" title="2016 True Aviation An-26 crash" label="A True Aviation Antonov An-26B"/>
<link wikidata="Q842026" start="24426" end="24443" title="PMTair Flight 241" label="PMTair Flight 241"/>
<link wikidata="Q846291" start="24649" end="24676" title="Vietnam Airlines Flight 815" label="Vietnam Airlines Flight 815"/>
<link wikidata="Q174386" start="24760" end="24776" title="Vietnam Airlines" label="Vietnam Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425455" start="25072" end="25088" title="Handley Page O/7" label="Handley Page O/7"/>
<link wikidata="Q111914710" start="25089" end="25096" title="1922 Beijing-Han Airlines crash" label="crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q866852" start="25179" end="25214" title="China National Aviation Corporation" label="China National Aviation Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q142591" start="25215" end="25227" title="Douglas DC-2" label="Douglas DC-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q17627345" start="25232" end="25241" title="Kweilin incident" label="shot down"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568040" start="25293" end="25347" title="1954 Cathay Pacific Douglas DC-4 shootdown" label="A Cathay Pacific Airways Douglas C-54A-10-DC Skymaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008500" start="25393" end="25409" title="CAAC Flight 3303" label="CAAC Flight 3303"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026903" start="25432" end="25457" title="Guilin Qifengling Airport" label="Guilin Qifengling Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15401460" start="25567" end="25583" title="CAAC Flight 2311" label="CAAC Flight 2311"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060596" start="25690" end="25703" title="CAAC Airlines" label="CAAC Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423689" start="25704" end="25727" title="Hawker Siddeley Trident" label="Hawker Siddeley Trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q607832" start="25734" end="25739" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force" label="PLAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q652911" start="25740" end="25750" title="Harbin H-5" label="Harbin H-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843965" start="25751" end="25759" title="1983 Guilin Airport collision" label="collided"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026903" start="25763" end="25788" title="Guilin Qifengling Airport" label="Guilin Qifengling Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254436" start="25831" end="25867" title="China Southwest Airlines Flight 4146" label="China Southwest Airlines Flight 4146"/>
<link wikidata="Q800043" start="26001" end="26041" title="1990 Guangzhou Baiyun airport collisions" label="1990 Guangzhou Baiyun airport collisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099695" start="26247" end="26281" title="China General Aviation Flight 7552" label="China General Aviation Flight 7552"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099905" start="26382" end="26417" title="China Southern Airlines Flight 3943" label="China Southern Airlines Flight 3943"/>
<link wikidata="Q189633" start="26587" end="26593" title="Guilin" label="Guilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099824" start="26635" end="26671" title="China Northwest Airlines Flight 2119" label="China Northwest Airlines Flight 2119"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099661" start="26917" end="26951" title="China Eastern Airlines Flight 5398" label="China Eastern Airlines Flight 5398"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099822" start="27058" end="27093" title="China Northern Airlines Flight 6901" label="China Northern Airlines Flight 6901"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099830" start="27364" end="27400" title="China Northwest Airlines Flight 2303" label="China Northwest Airlines Flight 2303"/>
<link wikidata="Q5826" start="27640" end="27650" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099909" start="27692" end="27727" title="China Southern Airlines Flight 3456" label="China Southern Airlines Flight 3456"/>
<link wikidata="Q671604" start="27980" end="28016" title="China Southwest Airlines Flight 4509" label="China Southwest Airlines Flight 4509"/>
<link wikidata="Q12592687" start="28162" end="28190" title="Korean Air Cargo Flight 6316" label="Korean Air Cargo Flight 6316"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044699" start="28217" end="28226" title="Xinzhuang, Shanghai" label="Xinzhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253960" start="28313" end="28338" title="Wuhan Airlines Flight 343" label="Wuhan Airlines Flight 343"/>
<link wikidata="Q120743" start="28345" end="28353" title="Xian Y-7" label="Xian Y-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120872" start="28478" end="28494" title="Lightning strike" label="Lightning strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q909869" start="28541" end="28576" title="China Northern Airlines Flight 6136" label="China Northern Airlines Flight 6136"/>
<link wikidata="Q495341" start="28712" end="28721" title="Bohai Bay" label="Bohai Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267305" start="28803" end="28828" title="China Eastern Flight 5210" label="China Eastern Flight 5210"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828809" start="29016" end="29042" title="Avient Aviation Flight 324" label="Avient Aviation Flight 324"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922654" start="29179" end="29205" title="Henan Airlines Flight 8387" label="Henan Airlines Flight 8387"/>
<link wikidata="Q111313251" start="29471" end="29505" title="China Eastern Airlines Flight 5735" label="China Eastern Airlines Flight 5735"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084919" start="29512" end="29526" title="Boeing 737 Next Generation" label="Boeing 737 89P"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314049" start="29584" end="29595" title="Teng County" label="Teng County"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973540" start="29691" end="29717" title="Tibet Airlines Flight 9833" label="Tibet Airlines Flight 9833"/>
<link wikidata="Q17494984" start="29850" end="29869" title="Aeroflot Flight 207" label="Aeroflot Flight 207"/>
<link wikidata="Q275031" start="29874" end="29889" title="Ilyushin Il-14" label="Ilyushin Il-14M"/>
<link wikidata="Q58707" start="29902" end="29910" title="Aeroflot" label="Aeroflot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045629" start="29999" end="30018" title="Aeroflot Flight 244" label="Aeroflot Flight 244"/>
<link wikidata="Q337467" start="30023" end="30037" title="Antonov An-24" label="Antonov An-24B"/>
<link wikidata="Q58707" start="30050" end="30058" title="Aeroflot" label="Aeroflot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756366" start="30146" end="30166" title="Aeroflot Flight 6833" label="Aeroflot Flight 6833"/>
<link wikidata="Q159067" start="30170" end="30186" title="Tupolev Tu-134" label="Tupolev Tu-134-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q58707" start="30199" end="30207" title="Aeroflot" label="Aeroflot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662596" start="30260" end="30298" title="1992 Tbilisi Tupolev Tu-154 crash" label="Tupolev Tu-154B crashed during takeoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q778213" start="30302" end="30331" title="Tbilisi International Airport" label="Tbilisi International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833750" start="30412" end="30434" title="1993 Sukhumi airliner attacks" label="Georgian Tu-134A crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833750" start="30526" end="30548" title="1993 Sukhumi airliner attacks" label="Transair Georgia Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347363" start="30591" end="30616" title="Sukhumi Babushara Airport" label="Sukhumi Babushara Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833750" start="30656" end="30683" title="1993 Sukhumi airliner attacks" label="Orbi Georgian Airways Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q40811" start="30739" end="30746" title="Sukhumi" label="Sukhumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833750" start="30768" end="30790" title="1993 Sukhumi airliner attacks" label="Transair Georgia Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008496" start="30902" end="30917" title="CAAC Flight 301" label="CAAC Flight 301"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099569" start="31040" end="31065" title="China Airlines Flight 605" label="China Airlines Flight 605"/>
<link wikidata="Q673202" start="31088" end="31117" title="Kai Tak International Airport" label="Kai Tak International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073177" start="31308" end="31333" title="China Airlines Flight 642" label="China Airlines Flight 642"/>
<link wikidata="Q17704" start="31370" end="31401" title="Hong Kong International Airport" label="Hong Kong International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709097" start="31537" end="31574" title="Thai Airways International Flight 601" label="Thai Airways International Flight 601"/>
<link wikidata="Q25042932" start="31822" end="31861" title="1965 Hong Kong US Marines KC-130F Crash" label="1965 Hong Kong US Marines KC-130F Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867545" start="31905" end="31912" title="Lockheed Martin KC-130" label="KC-130F"/>
<link wikidata="Q118373" start="32043" end="32079" title="1996 Charkhi Dadri mid-air collision" label="1996 Charkhi Dadri mid-air collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="32083" end="32098" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747-168B"/>
<link wikidata="Q541179" start="32102" end="32124" title="Saudi Arabian Airlines" label="Saudi Arabian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380790" start="32139" end="32158" title="Kazakhstan Airlines" label="Kazakhstan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q142549" start="32159" end="32173" title="Ilyushin Il-76" label="Ilyushin Il-76"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098353" start="32232" end="32252" title="Air India Flight 855" label="Air India Flight 855"/>
<link wikidata="Q69906" start="32275" end="32284" title="Air India" label="Air India"/>
<link wikidata="Q504368" start="32327" end="32340" title="Sahar Airport" label="Sahar Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q98129149" start="32378" end="32407" title="Air India Express Flight 1344" label="Air India Express Flight 1344"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084919" start="32411" end="32429" title="Boeing 737 Next Generation" label="Boeing 737-8HG(SF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q407343" start="32433" end="32450" title="Air India Express" label="Air India Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q17363717" start="32462" end="32478" title="runway excursion" label="runway excursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q406582" start="32529" end="32557" title="Air India Express Flight 812" label="Air India Express Flight 812"/>
<link wikidata="Q25975805" start="32683" end="32716" title="2016 Indian Air Force An-32 crash" label="2016 Indian Air Force An-32 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q579939" start="32721" end="32734" title="Antonov An-32" label="Antonov An-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="32752" end="32768" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="32786" end="32798" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q64623494" start="32855" end="32888" title="2019 Indian Air Force An-32 crash" label="2019 Indian Air Force An-32 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019809" start="33002" end="33028" title="Indian Airlines Flight 605" label="Indian Airlines Flight 605"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475" start="33033" end="33048" title="Airbus A320 family" label="Airbus A320-231"/>
<link wikidata="Q876323" start="33052" end="33067" title="Indian Airlines" label="Indian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355" start="33098" end="33107" title="Bangalore" label="Bangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019803" start="33151" end="33177" title="Indian Airlines Flight 257" label="Indian Airlines Flight 257"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="33181" end="33195" title="Boeing 737-200" label="Boeing 737-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q26780100" start="33226" end="33240" title="Thangjing Hill" label="Thangjing Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019807" start="33277" end="33303" title="Indian Airlines Flight 491" label="Indian Airlines Flight 491"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057459" start="33376" end="33387" title="pilot error" label="pilot error"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901933" start="33435" end="33461" title="Indian Airlines Flight 410" label="Indian Airlines Flight 410"/>
<link wikidata="Q898712" start="33503" end="33511" title="Aircraft hijacking" label="hijacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019789" start="33604" end="33630" title="Indian Airlines Flight 113" label="Indian Airlines Flight 113"/>
<link wikidata="Q119683909" start="33724" end="33750" title="Indian Airlines Flight 503" label="Indian Airlines Flight 503"/>
<link wikidata="Q312541" start="33754" end="33765" title="Dornier 228" label="Dornier 228"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019800" start="33858" end="33884" title="Indian Airlines Flight 427" label="Indian Airlines Flight 427"/>
<link wikidata="Q385356" start="34031" end="34049" title="Raja Sansi Airport" label="Raja Sansi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="34070" end="34076" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="34078" end="34086" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q835929" start="34221" end="34237" title="Kashmir Princess" label="Kashmir Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344809" start="34357" end="34371" title="KLM Flight 844" label="KLM Flight 844"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524468" start="34494" end="34521" title="Garuda Indonesia Flight 708" label="Garuda Indonesia Flight 708"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574525" start="34639" end="34688" title="1971 Indian Ocean Vickers Viscount crash" label="A Merpati Nusantara Airlines Vickers Viscount 828"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524466" start="34758" end="34785" title="Garuda Indonesia Flight 150" label="Garuda Indonesia Flight 150"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578702" start="34909" end="34946" title="1979 Garuda Fokker F28 crash" label="A Garuda Indonesia Fokker F28 Mk-1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524467" start="35017" end="35044" title="Garuda Indonesia Flight 206" label="Garuda Indonesia Flight 206"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580452" start="35141" end="35178" title="1982 Garuda Fokker F28 crash" label="A Garuda Indonesia Fokker F28 Mk-1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q435605" start="35253" end="35277" title="British Airways Flight 9" label="British Airways Flight 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524465" start="35486" end="35513" title="Garuda Indonesia Flight 035" label="Garuda Indonesia Flight 035"/>
<link wikidata="Q29018000" start="35614" end="35648" title="Dirgantara Air Service Flight 5940" label="Dirgantara Air Service Flight 5940"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503541" start="35768" end="35795" title="Garuda Indonesia Flight 152" label="Garuda Indonesia Flight 152"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163710" start="35935" end="35969" title="Dirgantara Air Service Flight 3130" label="Dirgantara Air Service Flight 3130"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056794" start="36119" end="36138" title="Lion Air" label="Lion Air Flight 386"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608354" start="36275" end="36302" title="Garuda Indonesia Flight 421" label="Garuda Indonesia Flight 421"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555394" start="36442" end="36461" title="Lion Air Flight 583" label="Lion Air Flight 583"/>
<link wikidata="Q746785" start="36592" end="36619" title="Mandala Airlines Flight 091" label="Mandala Airlines Flight 091"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056794" start="36744" end="36764" title="Lion Air" label="Lion Air Flight 8987"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056794" start="36914" end="36933" title="Lion Air" label="Lion Air Flight 792"/>
<link wikidata="Q250439" start="37061" end="37080" title="Adam Air Flight 574" label="Adam Air Flight 574"/>
<link wikidata="Q348349" start="37234" end="37253" title="Adam Air Flight 172" label="Adam Air Flight 172"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494794" start="37371" end="37398" title="Garuda Indonesia Flight 200" label="Garuda Indonesia Flight 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884513" start="37506" end="37543" title="2009 Aviastar British Aerospace 146 crash" label="An Aviastar British Aerospace 146-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056794" start="37604" end="37623" title="Lion Air" label="Lion Air Flight 712"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419491" start="37730" end="37754" title="2012 Mount Salak Sukhoi Superjet crash" label="A Sukhoi Superjet 100-95"/>
<link wikidata="Q10903028" start="37823" end="37842" title="Lion Air Flight 904" label="Lion Air Flight 904"/>
<link wikidata="Q18683047" start="37957" end="37986" title="Indonesia AirAsia Flight 8501" label="Indonesia AirAsia Flight 8501"/>
<link wikidata="Q21042789" start="38120" end="38140" title="Aviastar Flight 7503" label="Aviastar Flight 7503"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039784" start="38277" end="38298" title="Batik Air Flight 7703" label="Batik Air Flight 7703"/>
<link wikidata="Q57912689" start="38466" end="38485" title="Lion Air Flight 610" label="Lion Air Flight 610"/>
<link wikidata="Q104759345" start="38638" end="38662" title="Sriwijaya Air Flight 182" label="Sriwijaya Air Flight 182"/>
<link wikidata="Q591797" start="38877" end="38893" title="Imperial Airways" label="Imperial Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q286903" start="38894" end="38921" title="de Havilland DH.66 Hercules" label="de Havilland DH.66 Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q47485285" start="38929" end="38935" title="1929 Jask Imperial Airways de Havilland Hercules crash" label="stalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q20455239" start="38997" end="39009" title="Jask Airport" label="Jask Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q719781" start="39013" end="39017" title="Jask" label="Jask"/>
<link wikidata="Q58707" start="39224" end="39232" title="Aeroflot" label="Aeroflot"/>
<link wikidata="Q662591" start="39233" end="39245" title="Lisunov Li-2" label="Lisunov Li-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q461631" start="39308" end="39316" title="Iran Air" label="Iran Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="39317" end="39338" title="Douglas C-47 Skytrain" label="Douglas C-47 Skytrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q374740" start="39605" end="39614" title="EgyptAir" label="Egypt Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q609029" start="39615" end="39631" title="SNCASE Languedoc" label="SNCASE Languedoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205891" start="39672" end="39679" title="1951 Misrair SNCASE Languedoc crash" label="crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="39749" end="39761" title="Douglas DC-3" label="Douglas DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="39763" end="39769" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="39771" end="39775" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538864" start="39833" end="39846" title="Martin PBM Mariner" label="Mariner P-303"/>
<link wikidata="Q609818" start="40351" end="40360" title="TMA Cargo" label="TMA Cargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q538968" start="40361" end="40370" title="Avro York" label="Avro York"/>
<link wikidata="Q36529" start="40404" end="40409" title="Karaj" label="Karaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503" start="40454" end="40476" title="Sud Aviation Caravelle" label="Sud Aviation Caravelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q978831" start="40480" end="40497" title="Sterling Airlines" label="Sterling Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q19390475" start="40498" end="40519" title="1974 Sterling Airways Tehran Caravelle accident" label="damaged beyond repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254354" start="40611" end="40633" title="1980 Iran Air Boeing 727 airplane crash" label="Iran Air Boeing 727-86"/>
<link wikidata="Q180078" start="40815" end="40825" title="Kermanshah" label="Kermanshah"/>
<link wikidata="Q142549" start="40921" end="40935" title="Ilyushin Il-76" label="Ilyushin Il-76"/>
<link wikidata="Q15080583" start="40979" end="41004" title="1993 Tehran mid-air collision" label="Iran Air Tours Flight 962"/>
<link wikidata="Q172957" start="41007" end="41021" title="Tupolev Tu-154" label="Tupolev Tu-154"/>
<link wikidata="Q513684" start="41067" end="41097" title="Mehrabad International Airport" label="Mehrabad International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152024" start="41110" end="41139" title="Mashhad International Airport" label="Mashhad International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q378442" start="41195" end="41212" title="Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force" label="Iranian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q210413" start="41213" end="41225" title="Sukhoi Su-24" label="Sukhoi Su-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q6066728" start="41419" end="41450" title="Iran Aseman Airlines Flight 746" label="Iran Aseman Airlines Flight 746"/>
<link wikidata="Q725319" start="41454" end="41475" title="Fokker F28 Fellowship" label="Fokker F28 Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q42053" start="41510" end="41517" title="Isfahan" label="Isfahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151889" start="41628" end="41657" title="Isfahan International Airport" label="Isfahan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q124669" start="41723" end="41729" title="Natanz" label="Natanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412468" start="41803" end="41823" title="Qeshm Airlines" label="Faraz Qeshm Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q505663" start="41824" end="41839" title="Yakovlev Yak-40" label="Yakovlev Yak-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434613" start="41876" end="41890" title="Gorgan Airport" label="Gorgan Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283483" start="41952" end="41965" title="Rahman Dadman" label="Rahman Dadman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815763" start="42105" end="42112" title="2001 Faraz Qeshm Airlines Yak-40 crash" label="crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q484725" start="42120" end="42136" title="Alborz Mountains" label="Alborz Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q168843" start="42143" end="42147" title="Sari, Iran" label="Sari"/>
<link wikidata="Q11737216" start="42198" end="42223" title="Iran Air Tours Flight 956" label="Iran Air Tours Flight 956"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446065" start="42260" end="42270" title="Sefid Kooh" label="Sefid Kooh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434411" start="42341" end="42360" title="Khorramabad Airport" label="Khorramabad Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600175" start="42438" end="42466" title="Aeromist-Kharkiv Flight 2137" label="Aeromist-Kharkiv Flight 2137"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369300" start="42582" end="42595" title="Saha Airlines" label="Saha Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394" start="42610" end="42625" title="Boeing 707-320C" label="Boeing 707-320C"/>
<link wikidata="Q221883" start="42660" end="42671" title="Kish Island" label="Kish Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562641" start="42969" end="42994" title="Iran Air Tours Flight 945" label="Iran Air Tours Flight 945"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358345" start="43018" end="43038" title="Bandar Abbas Airport" label="Bandar Abbas Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q842831" start="43196" end="43224" title="Caspian Airlines Flight 7908" label="Caspian Airlines Flight 7908"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953" start="43274" end="43281" title="Yerevan" label="Yerevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020397" start="43655" end="43675" title="Aria Air Flight 1525" label="Aria Air Flight 1525"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623769" start="43826" end="43847" title="Taban Air Flight 6437" label="Taban Air Flight 6437"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152024" start="43913" end="43942" title="Mashhad International Airport" label="Mashhad International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q951088" start="44065" end="44084" title="Iran Air Flight 277" label="Iran Air Flight 277"/>
<link wikidata="Q256534" start="44224" end="44237" title="Urmia Airport" label="Urmia Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860425" start="44305" end="44324" title="Iran Air Flight 742" label="Iran Air Flight 742"/>
<link wikidata="Q17496200" start="44589" end="44617" title="Sepahan Airlines Flight 5915" label="Sepahan Airlines Flight 5915"/>
<link wikidata="Q367719" start="44621" end="44633" title="IrAn-140" label="IrAn-140-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q49098663" start="44880" end="44912" title="Iran Aseman Airlines Flight 3704" label="Iran Aseman Airlines Flight 3704"/>
<link wikidata="Q219764" start="44916" end="44926" title="ATR 72-212" label="ATR 72-212"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434631" start="44974" end="44987" title="Yasuj Airport" label="Yasuj Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143042" start="45002" end="45012" title="Mount Dena" label="Mount Dena"/>
<link wikidata="Q50404279" start="45110" end="45147" title="2018 Iran Bombardier Challenger crash" label="2018 Iran Bombardier Challenger crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q50404279" start="45211" end="45218" title="2018 Iran Bombardier Challenger crash" label="crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q167021" start="45219" end="45238" title="Zagros Mountains" label="in Zagros Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="45242" end="45254" title="Iran" label="Iranian soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60616816" start="45380" end="45387" title="2019 Saha Airlines Boeing 707 crash" label="crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q60647922" start="45391" end="45404" title="Fath Air Base" label="Fath Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q81360866" start="45531" end="45572" title="Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752" label="Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752"/>
<link wikidata="Q83812863" start="45734" end="45762" title="Caspian Airlines Flight 6936" label="Caspian Airlines Flight 6936"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436184" start="45800" end="45816" title="Mahshahr Airport" label="Mahshahr Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q370143" start="45870" end="45912" title="2003 Baghdad DHL attempted shootdown incident" label="A DHL Airbus A300 suffers a missile strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q304438" start="45976" end="46005" title="Baghdad International Airport" label="Baghdad International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365353" start="46028" end="46039" title="AerianTur-M" label="AerianTur-M"/>
<link wikidata="Q62156" start="46040" end="46053" title="Antonov An-26" label="Antonov An-26"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608028" start="46054" end="46061" title="2007 Balad aircraft crash" label="crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529746" start="46077" end="46091" title="Balad Air Base" label="Balad Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729189" start="46132" end="46160" title="All Nippon Airways Flight 60" label="All Nippon Airways Flight 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q141017" start="46174" end="46183" title="Tokyo Bay" label="Tokyo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q204853" start="46205" end="46232" title="Haneda Airport" label="Tokyo International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729199" start="46355" end="46383" title="All Nippon Airways Flight 61" label="All Nippon Airways Flight 61"/>
<link wikidata="Q796847" start="46431" end="46446" title="BOAC Flight 911" label="BOAC Flight 911"/>
<link wikidata="Q39231" start="46464" end="46474" title="Mount Fuji" label="Mount Fuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099481" start="46497" end="46517" title="clear-air turbulence" label="clear-air turbulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276023" start="46717" end="46748" title="Toa Domestic Airlines Flight 63" label="Toa Domestic Airlines Flight 63"/>
<link wikidata="Q689448" start="46865" end="46901" title="Canadian Pacific Airlines Flight 402" label="Canadian Pacific Airlines Flight 402"/>
<link wikidata="Q204853" start="46928" end="46955" title="Haneda Airport" label="Tokyo International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q13628966" start="47017" end="47043" title="Asiana Airlines Flight 214" label="Asiana Airlines Flight 214"/>
<link wikidata="Q994581" start="47150" end="47175" title="Japan Airlines Flight 350" label="Japan Airlines Flight 350"/>
<link wikidata="Q204853" start="47208" end="47222" title="Haneda Airport" label="Haneda Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q141017" start="47391" end="47400" title="Tokyo Bay" label="Tokyo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q18173" start="47508" end="47533" title="Japan Airlines Flight 123" label="Japan Airlines Flight 123"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080767" start="47586" end="47605" title="vertical stabilizer" label="vertical stabilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892307" start="47791" end="47809" title="Mount Takamagahara" label="Mount Takamagahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q699055" start="48088" end="48113" title="China Airlines Flight 140" label="China Airlines Flight 140"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48260" end="48277" title="Takeoff/Go-around" label="Takeoff/Go-around"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274581" start="48493" end="48520" title="Garuda Indonesia Flight 865" label="Garuda Indonesia Flight 865"/>
<link wikidata="Q172129" start="48744" end="48799" title="2001 Japan Airlines mid-air incident" label="Japan Airlines Flight 907 and Japan Airlines Flight 958"/>
<link wikidata="Q696783" start="48823" end="48828" title="Yaizu" label="Yaizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q707497" start="48840" end="48865" title="China Airlines Flight 120" label="China Airlines Flight 120"/>
<link wikidata="Q124078312" start="49008" end="49033" title="Japan Airlines Flight 516" label="Japan Airlines Flight 516"/>
<link wikidata="Q908296" start="49059" end="49078" title="New Chitose Airport" label="New Chitose Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q37951" start="49082" end="49089" title="Sapporo" label="Sapporo"/>
<link wikidata="Q204853" start="49093" end="49107" title="Haneda Airport" label="Haneda Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="49111" end="49116" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q565418" start="49134" end="49151" title="Japan Coast Guard" label="Japan Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q736765" start="49152" end="49178" title="De Havilland Canada Dash 8" label="De Havilland Canada Dash 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q124060919" start="49484" end="49504" title="2024 Sea of Japan earthquake" label="2024 Noto earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253625" start="49827" end="49847" title="Aeroflot Flight 4225" label="Aeroflot Flight 4225"/>
<link wikidata="Q4847219" start="49907" end="49940" title="microburst" label="a massive blow of wind from above"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055763" start="50127" end="50147" title="Aeroflot Flight 5463" label="Aeroflot Flight 5463"/>
<link wikidata="Q35493" start="50233" end="50239" title="Almaty" label="Almaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866667" start="50294" end="50318" title="SCAT Airlines Flight 760" label="SCAT Airlines Flight 760"/>
<link wikidata="Q650170" start="50366" end="50379" title="SCAT Airlines" label="SCAT Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q858844" start="50448" end="50476" title="Almaty International Airport" label="Almaty International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552728" start="50637" end="50668" title="Azerbaijan Airlines Flight 8243" label="Azerbaijan Airlines Flight 8243"/>
<link wikidata="Q22093747" start="51047" end="51078" title="Avia Traffic Company Flight 768" label="Avia Traffic Company Flight 768"/>
<link wikidata="Q741126" start="51284" end="51316" title="Iran Aseman Airlines Flight 6895" label="Iran Aseman Airlines Flight 6895"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="51323" end="51333" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675251" start="51346" end="51354" title="Itek Air" label="Itek Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q952728" start="51567" end="51595" title="Turkish Airlines Flight 6491" label="Turkish Airlines Flight 6491"/>
<link wikidata="Q15075468" start="51804" end="51827" title="Lao Airlines Flight 301" label="Lao Airlines Flight 301"/>
<link wikidata="Q219764" start="51831" end="51841" title="ATR 72" label="ATR 72-600"/>
<link wikidata="Q756172" start="51854" end="51866" title="Lao Airlines" label="Lao Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="51988" end="52000" title="Mekong River" label="Mekong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790210" start="52162" end="52195" title="Ariana Afghan Airlines Flight 202" label="Ariana Afghan Airlines Flight 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q622673" start="52220" end="52232" title="Douglas DC-4" label="Douglas DC-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859502" start="52287" end="52294" title="Aramoun, Keserwan" label="Aramoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="52300" end="52306" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q695290" start="52359" end="52388" title="Ethiopian Airlines Flight 409" label="Ethiopian Airlines Flight 409"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467946" start="52470" end="52505" title="Malaysian Airline System Flight 653" label="Malaysian Airline System Flight 653"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="52545" end="52551" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="52555" end="52567" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683421" start="52594" end="52608" title="Tanjung Kupang" label="Tanjung Kupang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251468" start="52637" end="52653" title="1976 Sabah Air GAF Nomad crash" label="Double Six Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q15698040" start="52720" end="52755" title="Malaysian Airline System Flight 684" label="Malaysian Airline System Flight 684"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156492" start="52882" end="52908" title="Japan Air Lines Flight 715" label="Japan Air Lines Flight 715"/>
<link wikidata="Q15911326" start="53118" end="53147" title="Malaysia Airlines Flight 2133" label="Malaysia Airlines Flight 2133"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373856" start="53220" end="53252" title="Royal Brunei Airlines Flight 238" label="Royal Brunei Airlines Flight 238"/>
<link wikidata="Q15908324" start="53364" end="53392" title="Malaysia Airlines Flight 370" label="Malaysia Airlines Flight 370"/>
<link wikidata="Q121546295" start="53600" end="53618" title="Elmina plane crash" label="Elmina plane crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q126095148" start="54008" end="54048" title="October 1987 Burma Airways Fokker F27 crash" label="Burma Airways Fokker F-27 Friendship 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q495953" start="54118" end="54139" title="Korean Air Flight 858" label="Korean Air Flight 858"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946731" start="54293" end="54318" title="Myanma Airways Flight 635" label="Myanma Airways Flight 635"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767634" start="54446" end="54465" title="Air Bagan Flight 11" label="Air Bagan Flight 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q257298" start="54472" end="54482" title="Fokker 100" label="Fokker 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q30149289" start="54653" end="54687" title="2017 Myanmar Air Force Shaanxi Y-8 crash" label="Myanmar Air Force Shaanxi Y-8F-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018167" start="54725" end="54730" title="Dawei" label="Dawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919790" start="54818" end="54855" title="Thai Airways International Flight 311" label="Thai Airways International Flight 311"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471" start="54878" end="54889" title="Airbus A310" label="Airbus A310"/>
<link wikidata="Q61066" start="54948" end="54979" title="Tribhuvan International Airport" label="Tribhuvan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="54983" end="54992" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064550" start="55071" end="55113" title="Pakistan International Airlines Flight 268" label="Pakistan International Airlines Flight 268"/>
<link wikidata="Q204887" start="55140" end="55171" title="Pakistan International Airlines" label="Pakistan International Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437" start="55172" end="55189" title="Airbus A300" label="Airbus A300B4-203"/>
<link wikidata="Q90500563" start="55358" end="55392" title="Hinduja Cargo Services Flight 8533" label="Hinduja Cargo Services Flight 8533"/>
<link wikidata="Q48790186" start="55473" end="55493" title="Necon Air Flight 128" label="Necon Air Flight 128"/>
<link wikidata="Q791468" start="55519" end="55539" title="Hawker Siddeley HS 748" label="BAe 748-501 Super 2B"/>
<link wikidata="Q155340" start="55552" end="55561" title="Necon Air" label="Necon Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640" start="55638" end="55645" title="Pokhara" label="Pokhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009640" start="55756" end="55782" title="Indian Airlines Flight 814" label="Indian Airlines Flight 814"/>
<link wikidata="Q876323" start="55809" end="55824" title="Indian Airlines" label="Indian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="55903" end="55911" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860910" start="56039" end="56063" title="Yeti Airlines Flight 103" label="Yeti Airlines Flight 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q683041" start="56087" end="56123" title="De Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter" label="De Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129232" start="56261" end="56265" title="Controlled Flight Into Terrain" label="CFIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055776" start="56269" end="56288" title="Agni Air Flight 101" label="Agni Air Flight 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385210" start="56313" end="56321" title="Agni Air" label="Agni Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618088" start="56557" end="56590" title="2010 Okhaldhunga Twin Otter crash" label="2010 Okhaldhunga Twin Otter crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q774108" start="56616" end="56624" title="Tara Air" label="Tara Air"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56644" end="56658" title="Bilandu forest" label="Bilandu forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641878" start="56733" end="56754" title="Buddha Air Flight 103" label="Buddha Air Flight 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q734942" start="56780" end="56790" title="Buddha Air" label="Buddha Air"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56791" end="56807" title="Beechcraft 1900#1900D" label="Beechcraft 1900D"/>
<link wikidata="Q394864" start="57003" end="57034" title="2012 Agni Air Dornier 228 crash" label="2012 Agni Air Dornier 228 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q312541" start="57074" end="57085" title="Dornier 228" label="Dornier 228"/>
<link wikidata="Q433126" start="57217" end="57231" title="Taruni Sachdev" label="Taruni Sachdev"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241797" start="57235" end="57254" title="Sita Air Flight 601" label="Sita Air Flight 601"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495905" start="57281" end="57289" title="Sita Air" label="Sita Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q312541" start="57290" end="57301" title="Dornier 228" label="Dornier 228"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365876" start="57483" end="57508" title="Nepal Airlines Flight 555" label="Nepal Airlines Flight 555"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431605" start="57572" end="57586" title="Jomsom Airport" label="Jomsom Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15732778" start="57711" end="57736" title="Nepal Airlines Flight 183" label="Nepal Airlines Flight 183"/>
<link wikidata="Q588909" start="57762" end="57776" title="Nepal Airlines" label="Nepal Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q22927624" start="57875" end="57894" title="Tara Air Flight 193" label="Tara Air Flight 193"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430565" start="57970" end="57974" title="Dana, Nepal" label="Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28624" start="57984" end="57999" title="Myagdi District" label="Myagdi district"/>
<link wikidata="Q24909534" start="58035" end="58062" title="2016 Air Kasthamandap crash" label="2016 Air Kasthamandap crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q30689001" start="58158" end="58179" title="Summit Air Flight 409" label="Summit Air Flight 409"/>
<link wikidata="Q50412176" start="58432" end="58461" title="US-Bangla Airlines Flight 211" label="US-Bangla Airlines Flight 211"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58503" end="58518" title="Bombardier Dash-8#Series 400" label="Bombardier Q400"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="58552" end="58557" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="58561" end="58570" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q61066" start="58645" end="58676" title="Tribhuvan International Airport" label="Tribhuvan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q116205343" start="58719" end="58743" title="Yeti Airlines Flight 691" label="Yeti Airlines Flight 691"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58782" end="58792" title="ATR 72#ATR 72-500" label="ATR 72-500"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="58831" end="58840" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640" start="58844" end="58851" title="Pokhara" label="Pokhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q124632350" start="58973" end="58987" title="PIA Flight 631" label="PIA Flight 631"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202320" start="59105" end="59147" title="Pakistan International Airlines Flight 404" label="Pakistan International Airlines Flight 404"/>
<link wikidata="Q506736" start="59152" end="59173" title="Fokker F27 Friendship" label="Fokker F27 Friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q204887" start="59212" end="59243" title="Pakistan International Airlines" label="Pakistan International Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907585" start="59288" end="59304" title="Pan Am Flight 73" label="Pan Am Flight 73"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="59319" end="59326" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119310" start="59340" end="59354" title="PIA Flight 688" label="PIA Flight 688"/>
<link wikidata="Q408058" start="59537" end="59555" title="AirBlue Flight 202" label="AirBlue Flight 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278675" start="59561" end="59572" title="Airbus A321" label="Airbus A321"/>
<link wikidata="Q855050" start="59938" end="59958" title="Bhoja Air Flight 213" label="Bhoja Air Flight 213"/>
<link wikidata="Q4847219" start="60005" end="60015" title="microburst" label="microburst"/>
<link wikidata="Q100021" start="60243" end="60285" title="Pakistan International Airlines Flight 661" label="Pakistan International Airlines Flight 661"/>
<link wikidata="Q95092655" start="60607" end="60650" title="Pakistan International Airlines Flight 8303" label="Pakistan International Airlines Flight 8303"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184945" start="60822" end="60852" title="Philippine Airlines Flight 158" label="Philippine Airlines Flight 158"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184947" start="60969" end="60999" title="Philippine Airlines Flight 215" label="Philippine Airlines Flight 215"/>
<link wikidata="Q15266139" start="61199" end="61229" title="Philippine Airlines Flight 206" label="Philippine Airlines Flight 206"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184948" start="61333" end="61363" title="Philippine Airlines Flight 443" label="Philippine Airlines Flight 443"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016236" start="61445" end="61468" title="Cebu Pacific Flight 387" label="Cebu Pacific Flight 387"/>
<link wikidata="Q827856" start="61496" end="61510" title="Mount Sumagaya" label="Mount Sumagaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261034" start="61548" end="61578" title="Philippine Airlines Flight 137" label="Philippine Airlines Flight 137"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806746" start="61722" end="61745" title="Asian Spirit Flight 100" label="Asian Spirit Flight 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156912" start="61918" end="61944" title="Air Philippines Flight 541" label="Air Philippines Flight 541"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192811" start="61977" end="62015" title="Francisco Bangoy International Airport" label="Francisco Bangoy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184950" start="62213" end="62243" title="Philippine Airlines Flight 812" label="Philippine Airlines Flight 812"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487841" start="62502" end="62541" title="Laoag International Airlines Flight 585" label="Laoag International Airlines Flight 585"/>
<link wikidata="Q676154" start="62698" end="62708" title="Manila Bay" label="Manila Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184949" start="62798" end="62828" title="Philippine Airlines Flight 475" label="Philippine Airlines Flight 475"/>
<link wikidata="Q15924516" start="63045" end="63076" title="Alia Royal Jordanian Flight 600" label="Alia Royal Jordanian Flight 600"/>
<link wikidata="Q58754" start="63134" end="63160" title="Doha International Airport" label="Doha International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027878" start="63168" end="63178" title="wind shear" label="wind shear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427170" start="63204" end="63221" title="Saudia Flight 162" label="Saudia Flight 162"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119313" start="63435" end="63449" title="PIA Flight 740" label="PIA Flight 740"/>
<link wikidata="Q4469128" start="63692" end="63720" title="Vnukovo Airlines Flight 2806" label="Vnukovo Airlines Flight 2806"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841321" start="63913" end="63944" title="Middle East Airlines Flight 438" label="Middle East Airlines Flight 438"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067958" start="64003" end="64027" title="Iraqi Airways Flight 163" label="Iraqi Airways Flight 163"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="64055" end="64062" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805" start="64066" end="64071" title="Amman" label="Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440618" start="64245" end="64262" title="Saudia Flight 163" label="Saudia Flight 163"/>
<link wikidata="Q3692" start="64292" end="64298" title="Riyadh" label="Riyadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133097" start="64522" end="64538" title="smoke inhalation" label="smoke inhalation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634895" start="64543" end="64570" title="Nigeria Airways Flight 2120" label="Nigeria Airways Flight 2120"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056984" start="64933" end="64971" title="1954 BOAC Lockheed Constellation crash" label="1954 BOAC Lockheed Constellation crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784125" start="65140" end="65169" title="Singapore Airlines Flight 117" label="Singapore Airlines Flight 117"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="65195" end="65207" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="65211" end="65220" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135895" start="65224" end="65240" title="Qantas Flight 32" label="Qantas Flight 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830" start="65246" end="65257" title="Airbus A380" label="Airbus A380"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="65263" end="65269" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="65273" end="65279" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="65304" end="65313" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="65358" end="65367" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10103" start="65447" end="65452" title="Batam" label="Batam"/>
<link wikidata="Q32159" start="65514" end="65538" title="Singapore Changi Airport" label="Singapore Changi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q32159" start="65627" end="65651" title="Singapore Changi Airport" label="Singapore Changi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q60910" start="65655" end="65677" title="Milan Malpensa Airport" label="Milan Malpensa Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q497354" start="65803" end="65829" title="Asiana Airlines Flight 733" label="Asiana Airlines Flight 733"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057459" start="65928" end="65939" title="Pilot error" label="Pilot error"/>
<link wikidata="Q489904" start="66041" end="66061" title="Air China Flight 129" label="Air China Flight 129"/>
<link wikidata="Q483223" start="66081" end="66109" title="Gimhae International Airport" label="Gimhae International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11233547" start="66331" end="66358" title="Korean Air Lines Flight 015" label="Korean Air Lines Flight 015"/>
<link wikidata="Q482493" start="66378" end="66405" title="Gimpo International Airport" label="Gimpo International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581945" start="66540" end="66560" title="Jeju Air Flight 2216" label="Jeju Air Flight 2216"/>
<link wikidata="Q783860" start="66589" end="66602" title="belly landing" label="belly landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q484060" start="66606" end="66632" title="Muan International Airport" label="Muan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698060" start="66727" end="66747" title="Air Lanka Flight 512" label="Air Lanka Flight 512"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985739" start="66975" end="67004" title="Icelandic Airlines Flight 001" label="Icelandic Airlines Flight 001"/>
<link wikidata="Q223315" start="67008" end="67020" title="Douglas DC-8" label="Douglas DC-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887547" start="67097" end="67107" title="Katunayake" label="Katunayake"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="67109" end="67118" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207890" start="67177" end="67197" title="Martinair Flight 138" label="Martinair Flight 138"/>
<link wikidata="Q512468" start="67280" end="67296" title="Garuda Indonesia" label="Garuda Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="67331" end="67336" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q12033079" start="67527" end="67541" title="ČSA Flight 540" label="ČSA Flight 540"/>
<link wikidata="Q182575" start="67566" end="67580" title="Ilyushin Il-62" label="Ilyushin Il-62"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="67593" end="67605" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q192653" start="67623" end="67644" title="Czechoslovak Airlines" label="Czechoslovak Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q570873" start="67690" end="67720" title="Damascus International Airport" label="Damascus International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129232" start="67869" end="67873" title="Controlled Flight Into Terrain" label="CFIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099566" start="67968" end="67993" title="China Airlines Flight 206" label="China Airlines Flight 206"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069038" start="68000" end="68010" title="NAMC YS-11" label="NAMC YS-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q89670813" start="68133" end="68161" title="Formosa Airlines Flight 7623" label="Formosa Airlines Flight 7623"/>
<link wikidata="Q709416" start="68259" end="68284" title="China Airlines Flight 676" label="China Airlines Flight 676"/>
<link wikidata="Q699195" start="68417" end="68453" title="Far Eastern Air Transport Flight 103" label="Far Eastern Air Transport Flight 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q478172" start="68628" end="68657" title="Singapore Airlines Flight 006" label="Singapore Airlines Flight 006"/>
<link wikidata="Q44856" start="68759" end="68796" title="Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport" label="Chiang Kai-shek International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="68802" end="68808" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="68810" end="68816" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17404012" start="68931" end="68959" title="TransAsia Airways Flight 222" label="TransAsia Airways Flight 222"/>
<link wikidata="Q709939" start="68981" end="68985" title="Huxi, Penghu" label="Huxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="68987" end="68993" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q219764" start="69015" end="69025" title="ATR 72-500" label="ATR 72-500"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057459" start="69139" end="69150" title="pilot error" label="pilot error"/>
<link wikidata="Q18951344" start="69155" end="69183" title="TransAsia Airways Flight 235" label="TransAsia Airways Flight 235"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69303" end="69319" title="Huandong Viaduct" label="Huandong Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q708976" start="69333" end="69346" title="Keelung River" label="Keelung River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662613" start="69535" end="69574" title="1993 Tajik Air Yakovlev Yak-40 incident" label="1993 Tajik Air Yakovlev Yak-40 incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q505663" start="69598" end="69613" title="Yakovlev Yak-40" label="Yakovlev Yak-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q528978" start="69626" end="69635" title="Tajik Air" label="Tajik Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q6402378" start="69671" end="69685" title="Khorog Airport" label="Khorog Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q806481" start="69840" end="69866" title="Bangkok Airways Flight 266" label="Bangkok Airways Flight 266"/>
<link wikidata="Q867656" start="69972" end="69989" title="Koh Samui Airport" label="Koh Samui Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348315" start="70060" end="70079" title="EgyptAir Flight 864" label="EgyptAir Flight 864"/>
<link wikidata="Q675546" start="70387" end="70407" title="Lauda Air Flight 004" label="Lauda Air Flight 004"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921846" start="70453" end="70475" title="Phu Toei National Park" label="Phu Toei National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q978805" start="70528" end="70539" title="Suphan Buri" label="Suphan Buri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70544" end="70557" title="Ban Nong Rong" label="Ban Nong Rong"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="70716" end="70726" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q460476" start="70771" end="70801" title="One-Two-GO Airlines Flight 269" label="One-Two-GO Airlines Flight 269"/>
<link wikidata="Q240694" start="70902" end="70930" title="Phuket International Airport" label="Phuket International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709095" start="71073" end="71096" title="Thai Airways Flight 231" label="Thai Airways Flight 231"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900391" start="71311" end="71334" title="Thai Airways Flight 365" label="Thai Airways Flight 365"/>
<link wikidata="Q60638" start="71423" end="71460" title="Thai Airways International Flight 114" label="Thai Airways International Flight 114"/>
<link wikidata="Q612396" start="71668" end="71705" title="Thai Airways International Flight 261" label="Thai Airways International Flight 261"/>
<link wikidata="Q770306" start="71908" end="71927" title="Surat Thani Airport" label="Surat Thani Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928485" start="72017" end="72044" title="Vietnam Airlines Flight 831" label="Vietnam Airlines Flight 831"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662450" start="72182" end="72201" title="Aeroflot Flight 191" label="Aeroflot Flight 191"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688267" start="72314" end="72334" title="Aeroflot Flight A-53" label="Aeroflot Flight A-53"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165837" start="72444" end="72463" title="Aeroflot Flight 699" label="Aeroflot Flight 699"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335758" start="72598" end="72617" title="Gulf Air Flight 771" label="Gulf Air Flight 771"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="72662" end="72682" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416483" start="72686" end="72706" title="Kish Air Flight 7170" label="Kish Air Flight 7170"/>
<link wikidata="Q221883" start="72743" end="72754" title="Kish Island" label="Kish Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="72758" end="72762" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q635826" start="72766" end="72781" title="Sharjah Airport" label="Sharjah Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992083" start="72962" end="72989" title="Sterling Airways Flight 296" label="Sterling Airways Flight 296"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503" start="72994" end="73016" title="Sud Aviation Caravelle" label="Sud Aviation Caravelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q978831" start="73029" end="73045" title="Sterling Airways" label="Sterling Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q11737221" start="73207" end="73238" title="Tajikistan Airlines Flight 3183" label="Tajikistan Airlines Flight 3183"/>
<link wikidata="Q172957" start="73243" end="73257" title="Tupolev Tu-154" label="Tupolev Tu-154"/>
<link wikidata="Q204887" start="73496" end="73513" title="Pakistan Airlines" label="Pakistan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615396" start="73721" end="73742" title="UPS Airlines Flight 6" label="UPS Airlines Flight 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q26212179" start="73828" end="73847" title="Emirates Flight 521" label="Emirates Flight 521"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425" start="73850" end="73860" title="Boeing 777" label="Boeing 777"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055770" start="74571" end="74591" title="Aeroflot Flight 7425" label="Aeroflot Flight 7425"/>
<link wikidata="Q910917" start="74682" end="74691" title="Flat spin (aviation)" label="flat spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688265" start="74923" end="74942" title="Aeroflot Flight 505" label="Aeroflot Flight 505"/>
<link wikidata="Q269" start="74973" end="74981" title="Tashkent" label="Tashkent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037959" start="75099" end="75110" title="wake vortex" label="wake vortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q11737223" start="75187" end="75217" title="Uzbekistan Airways Flight 1154" label="Uzbekistan Airways Flight 1154"/>
<link wikidata="Q860952" start="75244" end="75274" title="Tashkent International Airport" label="Tashkent International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q505663" start="75280" end="75295" title="Yakovlev Yak-40" label="Yakovlev Yak-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059245" start="75456" end="75490" title="Cathay Pacific Flight 700Z bombing" label="Cathay Pacific Flight 700Z bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698253" start="75613" end="75648" title="Air Vietnam Flight 706 hijacking" label="Air Vietnam Flight 706 was hijacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q18510562" start="75703" end="75730" title="Vietnam Airlines Flight 474" label="Vietnam Airlines Flight 474"/>
<link wikidata="Q505663" start="75737" end="75752" title="Yakovlev Yak-40" label="Yakovlev Yak-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002077" start="75827" end="75842" title="Cyclone Forrest" label="Cyclone Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q18510562" start="75879" end="75895" title="Annette Herfkens" label="Annette Herfkens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129232" start="75980" end="76010" title="Controlled Flight Into Terrain" label="Controlled Flight Into Terrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348312" start="76027" end="76046" title="EgyptAir Flight 763" label="EgyptAir Flight 763"/>
<link wikidata="Q7266512" start="76221" end="76237" title="Qantas Flight 30" label="Qantas Flight 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="76325" end="76331" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009640" start="76373" end="76399" title="Indian Airlines Flight 814" label="Indian Airlines Flight 814"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="76466" end="76469" title="United Arab Emirates" label="UAE"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="76475" end="76486" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202012" start="76634" end="76658" title="FlyMontserrat Flight 107" label="FlyMontserrat Flight 107"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433157" start="76688" end="76720" title="V. C. Bird International Airport" label="V. C. Bird International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q921019" start="76726" end="76749" title="Britten-Norman Islander" label="Britten-Norman Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567416" start="76956" end="76978" title="1952 Bermuda air crash" label="1952 Bermuda air crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608588" start="77150" end="77179" title="Cubana de Aviación Flight 455" label="Cubana de Aviación Flight 455"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="77356" end="77360" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="77372" end="77374" title="US" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="77379" end="77382" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388664" start="77439" end="77454" title="SANSA Flight 32" label="SANSA Flight 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="77482" end="77492" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q555940" start="77512" end="77549" title="Juan Santamaría International Airport" label="Juan Santamaría International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688261" start="77602" end="77621" title="Aeroflot Flight 331" label="Aeroflot Flight 331"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057459" start="77812" end="77823" title="Pilot error" label="Pilot error"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192135" start="77838" end="77868" title="Cubana de Aviación Flight 9046" label="Cubana de Aviación Flight 9046"/>
<link wikidata="Q282999" start="78123" end="78148" title="Aero Caribbean Flight 883" label="Aero Caribbean Flight 883"/>
<link wikidata="Q53729870" start="78368" end="78397" title="Cubana de Aviación Flight 972" label="Cubana de Aviación Flight 972"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="78418" end="78441" title="Boeing 737-200" label="Boeing 737-201 Advanced"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290887" start="78754" end="78782" title="Dominicana DC-9 air disaster" label="Dominicana DC-9 air disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290891" start="78787" end="78809" title="Dominicana de Aviación" label="Dominicana de Aviación"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="78810" end="78823" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290891" start="78879" end="78901" title="Dominicana de Aviación" label="Dominicana de Aviación"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="78923" end="78948" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-9-32" label="McDonnell Douglas DC-9-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="78998" end="79011" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="79013" end="79031" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41211" start="79044" end="79065" title="San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="San Juan, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q435223" start="79069" end="79089" title="Birgenair Flight 301" label="Birgenair Flight 301"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="79106" end="79115" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q98818712" start="79361" end="79392" title="1977 Aviateca Convair 240 crash" label="1977 Aviateca Convair 240 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q868965" start="79427" end="79438" title="Convair 240" label="Convair 240"/>
<link wikidata="Q765608" start="79490" end="79521" title="La Aurora International Airport" label="La Aurora International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555" start="79525" end="79539" title="Guatemala City" label="Guatemala City"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040730" start="79623" end="79656" title="1986 Aerovías Guatemala air crash" label="1986 Aerovías Guatemala air crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503" start="79700" end="79733" title="Sud Aviation Caravelle" label="Sud Aviation SE-210 Caravelle III"/>
<link wikidata="Q589550" start="79775" end="79794" title="Mundo Maya International Airport" label="Santa Elena Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q679383" start="79796" end="79802" title="Flores, El Petén" label="Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192132" start="79991" end="80021" title="Cubana de Aviación Flight 1216" label="Cubana de Aviación Flight 1216"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555" start="80153" end="80167" title="Guatemala City" label="Guatemala City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590155" start="80225" end="80261" title="1995 Air St. Martin Beech 1900 crash" label="1995 Air St. Martin Beech 1900 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q406992" start="80267" end="80283" title="Air Saint Martin" label="Air Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q661819" start="80284" end="80300" title="Beechcraft 1900D" label="Beechcraft 1900D"/>
<link wikidata="Q28441371" start="80407" end="80435" title="Tropical Airways Flight 1301" label="Tropical Airways Flight 1301"/>
<link wikidata="Q157925" start="80442" end="80460" title="Let L-410 Turbolet" label="Let L-410 Turbolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286957" start="80481" end="80514" title="Hugo Chávez International Airport" label="Hugo Chávez International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682001" start="80695" end="80715" title="Tan-Sahsa Flight 414" label="Tan-Sahsa Flight 414"/>
<link wikidata="Q930733" start="80776" end="80807" title="Toncontín International Airport" label="Toncontín International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238" start="80811" end="80822" title="Tegucigalpa" label="Tegucigalpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060325" start="80921" end="80956" title="Central American Airways Flight 731" label="Central American Airways Flight 731"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261830" start="81061" end="81076" title="TACA Flight 390" label="TACA Flight 390"/>
<link wikidata="Q463187" start="81233" end="81261" title="American Airlines Flight 331" label="American Airlines Flight 331"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432206" start="81312" end="81347" title="Norman Manley International Airport" label="Norman Manley International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828570" start="81474" end="81492" title="Avianca Flight 671" label="Avianca Flight 671"/>
<link wikidata="Q677122" start="81495" end="81531" title="Lockheed Constellation" label="Lockheed L-1049E Super Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174140" start="81566" end="81596" title="Sangster International Airport" label="Sangster International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708406" start="81783" end="81809" title="Alas Chiricanas Flight 901" label="Alas Chiricanas Flight 901"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168156" start="81852" end="81876" title="Copa Airlines Flight 201" label="Copa Airlines Flight 201"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715028" start="82149" end="82167" title="Prinair Flight 277" label="Prinair Flight 277"/>
<link wikidata="Q542833" start="82197" end="82204" title="Fajardo, Puerto Rico" label="Fajardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243720" start="82221" end="82239" title="Prinair Flight 191" label="Prinair Flight 191"/>
<link wikidata="Q652578" start="82267" end="82284" title="Mercedita Airport" label="Mercedita Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q864024" start="82286" end="82291" title="Ponce, Puerto Rico" label="Ponce"/>
<link wikidata="Q97861115" start="82306" end="82330" title="Air Caribbean Flight 309" label="Air Caribbean Flight 309"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360523" start="82369" end="82401" title="Luis Munoz Marin International Airport" label="Isla Verde International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q41211" start="82405" end="82413" title="San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928392" start="82428" end="82456" title="Vieques Air Link Flight 901A" label="Vieques Air Link Flight 901A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321656" start="82487" end="82502" title="Vieques Airport" label="Vieques Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355139" start="82543" end="82571" title="Turkish Airlines Flight 1476" label="Turkish Airlines Flight 1476"/>
<link wikidata="Q918595" start="82645" end="82694" title="British Eagle International Airlines Flight 802/6" label="British Eagle International Airlines Flight 802/6"/>
<link wikidata="Q655671" start="82802" end="82825" title="Hapag-Lloyd Flight 3378" label="Hapag-Lloyd Flight 3378"/>
<link wikidata="Q11737212" start="83048" end="83068" title="Aeroflot Flight 8641" label="Aeroflot Flight 8641"/>
<link wikidata="Q505649" start="83074" end="83089" title="Yakovlev Yak-42" label="Yakovlev Yak-42"/>
<link wikidata="Q386487" start="83200" end="83205" title="Mozyr" label="Mozyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500030" start="83246" end="83266" title="Aeroflot Flight 7841" label="Aeroflot Flight 7841"/>
<link wikidata="Q591797" start="83559" end="83575" title="Imperial Airways" label="Imperial Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563222" start="83576" end="83582" title="City of Liverpool (aircraft)" label="Argosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563222" start="83583" end="83590" title="1933 Imperial Airways Diksmuide crash" label="crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q215244" start="83596" end="83605" title="Diksmuide" label="Diksmuide"/>
<link wikidata="Q460362" start="83749" end="83757" title="Avro Ten" label="Avro Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q591797" start="83770" end="83786" title="Imperial Airways" label="Imperial Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563221" start="83787" end="83794" title="1933 Imperial Airways Ruysselede crash" label="crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q448597" start="83896" end="83909" title="Sabena OO-AUB Ostend crash" label="Sabena OO-AUB"/>
<link wikidata="Q12996" start="83963" end="83969" title="Ostend" label="Ostend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575474" start="84018" end="84035" title="Sabena Flight 548" label="Sabena Flight 548"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="84098" end="84106" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q918604" start="84204" end="84239" title="British European Airways Flight 706" label="British European Airways Flight 706"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471566" start="84243" end="84259" title="Vickers Vanguard" label="Vickers Vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q919252" start="84272" end="84296" title="British European Airways" label="British European Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626153" start="84517" end="84539" title="Kalitta Air Flight 207" label="Kalitta Air Flight 207"/>
<link wikidata="Q28934" start="84579" end="84595" title="Brussels Airport" label="Brussels Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550247" start="84675" end="84691" title="El Al Flight 402" label="El Al Flight 402"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578073" start="84815" end="84855" title="1978 Balkan Bulgarian Tupolev Tu-134 crash" label="Balkan Bulgarian Airlines Tupolev Tu-134"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581582" start="84928" end="84968" title="1984 Balkan Bulgarian Tupolev Tu-134 crash" label="Balkan Bulgarian Airlines Tupolev Tu-134"/>
<link wikidata="Q127951" start="84992" end="85005" title="Sofia Airport" label="Sofia Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842943" start="85038" end="85059" title="Hemus Air Flight 7081" label="Hemus Air Flight 7081"/>
<link wikidata="Q172957" start="85063" end="85077" title="Tupolev Tu-154" label="Tupolev Tu-154"/>
<link wikidata="Q729175" start="85090" end="85099" title="Hemus Air" label="Hemus Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q768914" start="85219" end="85227" title="1976 Zagreb mid-air collision" label="collided"/>
<link wikidata="Q223191" start="85233" end="85254" title="Adria Airways" label="Inex-Adria Aviopromet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="85282" end="85288" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983329" start="85365" end="85385" title="Aviogenex Flight 130" label="Aviogenex Flight 130"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434079" start="85727" end="85758" title="1967 Nicosia Britannia disaster" label="1967 Nicosia Britannia disaster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85781" end="85790" title="Globe Air" label="Globe Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q917907" start="85823" end="85844" title="Bristol Britannia 313" label="Bristol Britannia 313"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856" start="85872" end="85879" title="Nicosia" label="Nicosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575544" start="85915" end="85934" title="EgyptAir Flight 741" label="EgyptAir Flight 741"/>
<link wikidata="Q160266" start="85939" end="85954" title="Ilyushin Il-18" label="Ilyushin Il-18D"/>
<link wikidata="Q374740" start="85967" end="85975" title="Egyptair" label="Egyptair"/>
<link wikidata="Q909107" start="85993" end="86010" title="Kyrenia Mountains" label="Kyrenia Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057129" start="86081" end="86106" title="Talia Airways Flight 2H79" label="Talia Airways Flight 2H79"/>
<link wikidata="Q23651626" start="86178" end="86197" title="EgyptAir Flight 181" label="EgyptAir Flight 181"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475" start="86202" end="86217" title="Airbus A320" label="Airbus A320-233"/>
<link wikidata="Q374740" start="86230" end="86238" title="EgyptAir" label="EgyptAir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575422" start="86335" end="86361" title="Aeroflot Flight 141 (1973)" label="Aeroflot Flight 141 (1973)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262739" start="86499" end="86513" title="JAT Flight 367" label="JAT Flight 367"/>
<link wikidata="Q149456" start="86541" end="86556" title="Srbská Kamenice" label="Srbská Kamenice"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="86558" end="86572" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986203" start="86751" end="86783" title="Inex-Adria Aviopromet Flight 450" label="Inex-Adria Aviopromet Flight 450"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="86838" end="86844" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="86887" end="86901" title="Douglas Dakota" label="Douglas Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q181912" start="86913" end="86916" title="KLM" label="KLM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164685" start="86917" end="86924" title="1947 KLM Douglas DC-3 Copenhagen accident" label="crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420866" start="86944" end="86951" title="Kastrup" label="Kastrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="86963" end="86973" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q347374" start="87010" end="87039" title="Prince Gustaf Adolf, Duke of Västerbotten" label="Prince Gustaf Adolf of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050763" start="87060" end="87086" title="de Havilland Dragon Rapide" label="de Havilland Dragon Rapide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87099" end="87119" title="Zonens Redningskorps" label="Zonens Redningskorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q91013439" start="87242" end="87258" title="Malév Flight 731" label="Malév Flight 731"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="87276" end="87286" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q206277" start="87302" end="87320" title="Copenhagen Airport" label="Copenhagen Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q766006" start="87354" end="87373" title="Partnair Flight 394" label="Partnair Flight 394"/>
<link wikidata="Q131560682" start="87500" end="87533" title="2007 Bombardier Dash 8 landing gear incidents" label="Scandinavian Airlines Flight 1209"/>
<link wikidata="Q736765" start="87537" end="87559" title="De Havilland Canada Dash 8" label="Bombardier Dash 8 Q400"/>
<link wikidata="Q187854" start="87569" end="87590" title="Scandinavian Airlines" label="Scandinavian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q478620" start="87635" end="87650" title="Aalborg Airport" label="Aalborg Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q131560682" start="87695" end="87728" title="2007 Bombardier Dash 8 landing gear incidents" label="Scandinavian Airlines Flight 2867"/>
<link wikidata="Q736765" start="87732" end="87754" title="De Havilland Canada Dash 8" label="Bombardier Dash 8 Q400"/>
<link wikidata="Q187854" start="87767" end="87788" title="Scandinavian Airlines" label="Scandinavian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q206277" start="87833" end="87851" title="Copenhagen Airport" label="Copenhagen Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464299" start="87893" end="87909" title="Kaleva (airplane)" label="Aero Flight 1631"/>
<link wikidata="Q26066" start="87929" end="87942" title="Junkers Ju 52" label="Junkers Ju 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q201821" start="87955" end="87963" title="Finnair" label="Aero O/Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="87984" end="87990" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112841" start="87991" end="88004" title="Ilyushin DB-3" label="Ilyushin DB-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q381183" start="88057" end="88072" title="Aero Flight 311" label="Aero Flight 311"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="88105" end="88117" title="Douglas DC-3" label="Douglas DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q18147604" start="88212" end="88227" title="Aero Flight 217" label="Aero Flight 217"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031590" start="88311" end="88328" title="Mariehamn Airport" label="Mariehamn Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396820" start="88434" end="88453" title="Farman F.60 Goliath" label="Farman F.60 Goliath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115240" start="88466" end="88502" title="Grands Express Aériens" label="Compagnie des Grands Express Aériens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454216" start="88503" end="88511" title="1922 Picardie mid-air collision" label="collides"/>
<link wikidata="Q408448" start="88519" end="88538" title="de Havilland DH.18" label="de Havilland DH.18A"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209419" start="88551" end="88571" title="Daimler Airway" label="Daimler Hire Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396820" start="88665" end="88684" title="Farman F.60 Goliath" label="Farman F.60 Goliath"/>
<link wikidata="Q975752" start="88697" end="88706" title="Air Union" label="Air Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796267" start="88707" end="88715" title="May 1923 Air Union Farman Goliath crash" label="broke up"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343232" start="88770" end="88787" title="BOAC Flight 777" label="BOAC Flight 777-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="88791" end="88807" title="Douglas DC-3" label="Douglas DC-3-194"/>
<link wikidata="Q846885" start="88820" end="88856" title="British Overseas Airways Corporation" label="British Overseas Airways Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q155661" start="88875" end="88888" title="Junkers Ju 88" label="Junkers Ju 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="88958" end="88970" title="Douglas DC-3" label="Douglas DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q141146" start="88983" end="88989" title="Sabena" label="Sabena"/>
<link wikidata="Q97495282" start="88990" end="88997" title="1949 Sabena DC-3 Crash" label="crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q531334" start="89090" end="89110" title="Air India Flight 245" label="Air India Flight 245"/>
<link wikidata="Q583" start="89124" end="89134" title="Mont Blanc" label="Mont Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252107" start="89183" end="89195" title="Douglas C-54" label="Douglas C-54"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566930" start="89236" end="89243" title="1950 Tête de l&amp;#x27;Obiou C-54 crash" label="crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q531334" start="89305" end="89325" title="Air India Flight 245" label="Air India Flight 245"/>
<link wikidata="Q15943067" start="89329" end="89358" title="Lockheed L-749 Constellation" label="Lockheed L-749A Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q69906" start="89371" end="89380" title="Air India" label="Air India"/>
<link wikidata="Q583" start="89392" end="89402" title="Mont Blanc" label="Mont Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q609029" start="89458" end="89481" title="SNCASE SE.161 Languedoc" label="SNCASE SE.161 Languedoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="89494" end="89504" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q16825968" start="89523" end="89530" title="1952 Air France SNCASE Languedoc crash" label="crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135123" start="89612" end="89633" title="Air France Flight 178" label="Air France Flight 178"/>
<link wikidata="Q15943067" start="89637" end="89665" title="Lockheed L-749 Constellation" label="Lockheed L-749 Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630884" start="89681" end="89692" title="French Alps" label="French Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569721" start="89740" end="89754" title="TAI Flight 307" label="TAI Flight 307"/>
<link wikidata="Q847409" start="89758" end="89771" title="Douglas DC-7" label="Douglas DC-7C"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835322" start="89784" end="89820" title="Transports Aériens Intercontinentaux" label="Transports Aériens Intercontinentaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570317" start="89941" end="89960" title="1961 Derby Aviation crash" label="Derby Aviation C-47"/>
<link wikidata="Q6650" start="89974" end="89981" title="Canigou" label="Canigou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730" start="90007" end="90016" title="Perpignan" label="Perpignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697992" start="90057" end="90078" title="Air France Flight 007" label="Air France Flight 007"/>
<link wikidata="Q223416" start="90127" end="90131" title="Paris-Orly Airport" label="Orly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562568" start="90194" end="90215" title="Air France Flight 117" label="Air France Flight 117"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016228" start="90295" end="90315" title="Air India Flight 101" label="Air India Flight 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394" start="90319" end="90333" title="Boeing 707" label="Boeing 707-437"/>
<link wikidata="Q69906" start="90346" end="90355" title="Air India" label="Air India"/>
<link wikidata="Q583" start="90361" end="90371" title="Mont Blanc" label="Mont Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q622673" start="90428" end="90440" title="Douglas DC-4" label="Douglas DC-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697869" start="90453" end="90462" title="Air Ferry Limited" label="Air Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q30633939" start="90463" end="90470" title="1967 Air Ferry DC-4 accident" label="crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q97329973" start="90585" end="90606" title="Air Inter Flight 696Y" label="Air Inter Flight 696Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410087" start="90622" end="90636" title="La Faye" label="La Faye Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983513" start="90666" end="90683" title="1973 Nantes mid-air collision" label="Iberia Flight 504"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="90687" end="90712" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-9" label="McDonnell Douglas DC-9-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q187972" start="90725" end="90731" title="Iberia (airline)" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983513" start="90736" end="90754" title="1973 Nantes mid-air collision" label="Spantax Flight 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q384469" start="90758" end="90778" title="Convair 990 Coronado" label="Convair 990 Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968508" start="90791" end="90798" title="Spantax" label="Spantax"/>
<link wikidata="Q188513" start="90944" end="90958" title="Tupolev Tu-144" label="Tupolev Tu-144"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822723" start="90959" end="90968" title="1973 Paris Air Show Tu-144 crash" label="breaks up"/>
<link wikidata="Q174352" start="90980" end="90994" title="Paris Air Show" label="Paris Air Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267605" start="91060" end="91076" title="Varig Flight 820" label="Varig Flight 820"/>
<link wikidata="Q236058" start="91099" end="91103" title="Orly" label="Orly"/>
<link wikidata="Q462716" start="91170" end="91197" title="Turkish Airlines Flight 981" label="Turkish Airlines Flight 981"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="91222" end="91227" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q46280" start="91228" end="91267" title="Charles de Gaulle International Airport" label="Charles de Gaulle International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078774" start="91471" end="91490" title="Ermenonville Forest" label="Ermenonville Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562572" start="91649" end="91682" title="Inex-Adria Aviopromet Flight 1308" label="Inex-Adria Aviopromet Flight 1308"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669436" start="91778" end="91792" title="TAT Flight 230" label="TAT Flight 230"/>
<link wikidata="Q153318" start="91796" end="91812" title="Fairchild F-27" label="Fairchild FH-227"/>
<link wikidata="Q172135" start="91825" end="91846" title="TAT European Airlines" label="TAT European Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q406486" start="91947" end="91968" title="Air France Flight 296" label="Air France Flight 296"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475" start="92036" end="92047" title="Airbus A320 family" label="Airbus A320"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631349" start="92075" end="92095" title="Air Inter Flight 148" label="Air Inter Flight 148"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="92177" end="92187" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q97174681" start="92219" end="92247" title="Trans-Air Service Flight 671" label="Trans-Air Service Flight 671"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886471" start="92336" end="92359" title="Istres-Le Tubé Air Base" label="Istres-Le Tubé Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875659" start="92380" end="92410" title="Lufthansa CityLine Flight 5634" label="Lufthansa CityLine Flight 5634"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797657" start="92570" end="92597" title="Airbus Industrie Flight 129" label="Airbus Industrie Flight 129"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="92602" end="92617" title="Airbus A330" label="Airbus A330-321"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="92630" end="92646" title="Airbus" label="Airbus Industrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574009" start="92761" end="92783" title="Air France Flight 8969" label="Air France Flight 8969"/>
<link wikidata="Q898712" start="92787" end="92795" title="Aircraft hijacking" label="hijacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="92815" end="92822" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002158" start="92887" end="92914" title="Proteus Airlines Flight 706" label="Proteus Airlines Flight 706"/>
<link wikidata="Q661819" start="92918" end="92934" title="Beechcraft 1900" label="Beechcraft 1900D"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408004" start="92947" end="92963" title="Proteus Airlines" label="Proteus Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057100" start="92988" end="93009" title="Cessna 177 Cardinal" label="Cessna 177RG Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q406535" start="93115" end="93137" title="Air France Flight 4590" label="Air France Flight 4590"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505" start="93141" end="93149" title="Concorde" label="Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="93217" end="93237" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q271659" start="93368" end="93375" title="Gonesse" label="Gonesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562604" start="93457" end="93479" title="Air France Flight 5672" label="Air France Flight 5672"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000403" start="93483" end="93502" title="Bombardier CRJ100/200" label="Bombardier CRJ100ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q918006" start="93515" end="93523" title="Brit Air" label="Brit Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="93528" end="93538" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562629" start="94003" end="94033" title="XL Airways Germany Flight 888T" label="XL Airways Germany Flight 888T"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475" start="94038" end="94053" title="Airbus A320 family" label="Airbus A320-232"/>
<link wikidata="Q699514" start="94066" end="94084" title="XL Airways Germany" label="XL Airways Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q19671417" start="94185" end="94208" title="Germanwings Flight 9525" label="Germanwings Flight 9525"/>
<link wikidata="Q181306" start="94222" end="94237" title="Digne-les-Bains" label="Digne-les-Bains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630884" start="94245" end="94256" title="French Alps" label="French Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q58226" start="94269" end="94287" title="Düsseldorf Airport" label="Düsseldorf Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000671" start="94444" end="94477" title="1934 Swissair Tuttlingen accident" label="1934 Swissair Tuttlingen accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q700131" start="94642" end="94658" title="Junkers Ju 90" label="Junkers Ju 90A-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q290162" start="94671" end="94690" title="Deutsche Luft Hansa" label="Deutsche Luft Hansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000679" start="94708" end="94715" title="1940 Deutsche Lufthansa Ju 90 crash" label="crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q308923" start="94772" end="94799" title="Munich air disaster" label="British European Flight 609"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="94812" end="94818" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254414" start="94857" end="94871" title="ČSA Flight 511 (March 1961)" label="ČSA Flight 511"/>
<link wikidata="Q918588" start="95041" end="95065" title="British Eagle Flight 802" label="British Eagle Flight 802"/>
<link wikidata="Q883089" start="95164" end="95191" title="Paninternational Flight 112" label="Paninternational Flight 112"/>
<link wikidata="Q9018" start="95327" end="95343" title="Bundesautobahn 7" label="Bundesautobahn 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q320879" start="95432" end="95452" title="Lufthansa Flight 005" label="Lufthansa Flight 005"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129568" start="95586" end="95603" title="Pan Am Flight 708" label="Pan Am Flight 708"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409" start="95607" end="95620" title="Boeing 727" label="Boeing 727-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="95633" end="95659" title="Pan American World Airways" label="Pan American World Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434078" start="95728" end="95765" title="1972 Königs Wusterhausen air disaster" label="1972 Königs Wusterhausen air disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q573915" start="95783" end="95792" title="Interflug" label="Interflug"/>
<link wikidata="Q182575" start="95800" end="95814" title="Ilyushin Il-62" label="Ilyushin Il-62"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046495" start="96311" end="96332" title="Interflug Flight 1107" label="Interflug Flight 1107"/>
<link wikidata="Q668382" start="96352" end="96373" title="Leipzig/Halle Airport" label="Leipzig/Halle Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15316781" start="96455" end="96474" title="Aeroflot Flight 892" label="Aeroflot Flight 892"/>
<link wikidata="Q17353891" start="96666" end="96698" title="Nürnberger Flugdienst Flight 108" label="Nürnberger Flugdienst Flight 108"/>
<link wikidata="Q163107" start="96801" end="96829" title="Überlingen mid-air collision" label="Überlingen mid-air collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q43394" start="97029" end="97069" title="Swiss International Air Lines Flight 850" label="Swiss International Air Lines Flight 850"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136382" start="97073" end="97082" title="Saab 2000" label="Saab 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q156776" start="97095" end="97124" title="Swiss International Air Lines" label="Swiss International Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="97251" end="97272" title="Douglas C-47 Skytrain" label="Douglas C-47 Skytrain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="97285" end="97303" title="Air Service Berlin" label="Air Service Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616557" start="97304" end="97311" title="2010 Air Service Berlin Douglas C-47 crash" label="crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055787" start="97424" end="97449" title="Cyprus Airways Flight 284" label="Cyprus Airways Flight 284"/>
<link wikidata="Q26159" start="97472" end="97500" title="de Havilland Comet" label="de Havilland DH.106 Comet 4B"/>
<link wikidata="Q28719599" start="97513" end="97527" title="Cyprus Airways" label="Cyprus Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q919252" start="97542" end="97566" title="British European Airways" label="British European Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254868" start="97641" end="97667" title="Olympic Airways Flight 954" label="Olympic Airways Flight 954"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355070" start="97925" end="97939" title="TWA Flight 841 (1974)" label="TWA Flight 841"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101041" start="98156" end="98182" title="Olympic Airways Flight 830" label="Olympic Airways Flight 830"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069038" start="98206" end="98217" title="NAMC YS-11" label="NAMC YS-11A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021591" start="98230" end="98245" title="Olympic Airlines" label="Olympic Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659034" start="98314" end="98333" title="Swissair Flight 316" label="Swissair Flight 316"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302456" start="98642" end="98656" title="TWA Flight 847" label="TWA Flight 847"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409" start="98676" end="98690" title="Boeing 727" label="Boeing 727-231"/>
<link wikidata="Q527341" start="98703" end="98723" title="Trans World Airlines" label="Trans World Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672524" start="98759" end="98773" title="TWA Flight 840 bombing" label="TWA Flight 840"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="98812" end="98818" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562603" start="98880" end="98907" title="Olympic Aviation Flight 545" label="Olympic Aviation Flight 545"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656412" start="98928" end="98934" title="Short Brothers" label="Shorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="98991" end="99003" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q156882" start="99034" end="99039" title="Samos" label="Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688478" start="99081" end="99100" title="Aerosvit Flight 241" label="Aerosvit Flight 241"/>
<link wikidata="Q505649" start="99124" end="99139" title="Yakovlev Yak-42" label="Yakovlev Yak-42"/>
<link wikidata="Q381779" start="99152" end="99169" title="Aerosvit Airlines" label="Aerosvit Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745203" start="99240" end="99256" title="Malév Flight 262" label="Malév Flight 262"/>
<link wikidata="Q783860" start="99335" end="99348" title="belly landing" label="belly landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q865513" start="99462" end="99487" title="Helios Airways Flight 522" label="Helios Airways Flight 522"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="99802" end="99809" title="hypoxia (medical)" label="hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355139" start="99966" end="99994" title="Turkish Airlines Flight 1476" label="Turkish Airlines Flight 1476"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="100016" end="100030" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737-4Y0"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548" start="100043" end="100059" title="Turkish Airlines" label="Turkish Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387417" start="100126" end="100141" title="TWA Flight 6963" label="TWA Flight 6963"/>
<link wikidata="Q134215" start="100165" end="100193" title="Lockheed L-049 Constellation" label="Lockheed L-049 Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q527341" start="100206" end="100226" title="Trans World Airlines" label="Trans World Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129554" start="100299" end="100317" title="Pan Am Flight 1-10" label="Pan Am Flight 1-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q134215" start="100338" end="100372" title="Lockheed L-049 Constellation" label="Lockheed L-049-51-26 Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="100385" end="100411" title="Pan American World Airways" label="Pan American World Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452289" start="100482" end="100496" title="KLM Flight 633" label="KLM Flight 633"/>
<link wikidata="Q584102" start="100526" end="100541" title="Shannon Airport" label="Shannon Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q38251992" start="100580" end="100601" title="Pan Am Clipper Panama" label="Pan Am Clipper Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q503761" start="100621" end="100634" title="Douglas DC-6" label="Douglas DC-6B"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="100647" end="100673" title="Pan American World Airways" label="Pan American World Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407469" start="100751" end="100793" title="1961 President Airlines Douglas DC-6 crash" label="1961 President Airlines Douglas DC-6 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q381070" start="100904" end="100925" title="Aer Lingus Flight 712" label="Aer Lingus Flight 712"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742945" start="101006" end="101034" title="American Airlines Flight 293" label="American Airlines Flight 293"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409" start="101054" end="101064" title="Boeing 727" label="Boeing 727"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="101077" end="101094" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394" start="101138" end="101148" title="Boeing 707" label="Boeing 707"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438752" start="101171" end="101188" title="Manx2 Flight 7100" label="Manx2 Flight 7100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393122" start="101212" end="101247" title="Fairchild Swearingen Metroliner" label="Fairchild Swearingen Metroliner III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345361" start="101274" end="101286" title="Cork Airport" label="Cork Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q10356047" start="101647" end="101678" title="1919 Verona Caproni Ca.48 crash" label="1919 Verona Caproni Ca.48 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035022" start="101681" end="101694" title="Caproni Ca.48" label="Caproni Ca.48"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="101706" end="101712" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q962966" start="101784" end="101799" title="BOAC Flight 781" label="BOAC Flight 781"/>
<link wikidata="Q45328" start="101967" end="101971" title="Elba" label="Elba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078122" start="102027" end="102059" title="South African Airways Flight 201" label="South African Airways Flight 201"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="102198" end="102204" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797641" start="102230" end="102247" title="Sabena Flight 503" label="Sabena Flight 503"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969943" start="102397" end="102432" title="British European Airways Flight 142" label="British European Airways Flight 142"/>
<link wikidata="Q153826" start="102495" end="102521" title="North American F-86E Sabre" label="North American F-86E Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439744" start="102642" end="102662" title="Alitalia Flight 4128" label="Alitalia Flight 4128"/>
<link wikidata="Q784466" start="102902" end="102919" title="Itavia Flight 870" label="Itavia Flight 870"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="102939" end="102953" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q192129" start="102959" end="102965" title="Ustica" label="Ustica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="102985" end="102992" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016225" start="103114" end="103148" title="Aero Trasporti Italiani Flight 460" label="Aero Trasporti Italiani Flight 460"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877579" start="103291" end="103317" title="Uganda Airlines Flight 775" label="Uganda Airlines Flight 775"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428147" start="103453" end="103473" title="Banat Air Flight 166" label="Banat Air Flight 166"/>
<link wikidata="Q337467" start="103479" end="103492" title="Antonov An-24" label="Antonov An-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292497" start="103672" end="103704" title="Scandinavian Airlines Flight 686" label="Scandinavian Airlines Flight 686"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="103729" end="103734" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q828386" start="104033" end="104047" title="Linate Airport" label="Linate Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143589" start="104075" end="104093" title="Si Fly Flight 3275" label="Si Fly Flight 3275"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222832" start="104269" end="104289" title="Aeroflot Flight L-51" label="Aeroflot Flight L-51"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688267" start="104359" end="104393" title="Aeroflot accidents and incidents in the 1970s" label="An Aeroflot/Latvia Tupolev Tu-134A"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662495" start="104445" end="104464" title="Aeroflot Flight 343" label="Aeroflot Flight 343"/>
<link wikidata="Q182575" start="104490" end="104505" title="Ilyushin Il-62" label="Ilyushin Il-62M"/>
<link wikidata="Q58707" start="104518" end="104526" title="Aeroflot" label="Aeroflot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463967" start="104616" end="104634" title="Luxair Flight 9642" label="Luxair Flight 9642"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="104664" end="104674" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568779" start="104703" end="104744" title="1956 Scottish Airlines Malta air disaster" label="1956 Scottish Airlines Malta air disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980985" start="105001" end="105015" title="KLM Flight 861" label="KLM Flight 861"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="105039" end="105054" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747-206B"/>
<link wikidata="Q181912" start="105067" end="105070" title="KLM" label="KLM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273647" start="105106" end="105125" title="EgyptAir Flight 648" label="EgyptAir Flight 648"/>
<link wikidata="Q316408" start="105199" end="105208" title="Abu Nidal" label="Abu Nidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27630508" start="105358" end="105391" title="2016 Malta Fairchild Merlin crash" label="2016 Malta Fairchild Merlin crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393122" start="105414" end="105443" title="Fairchild Swearingen Metroliner" label="Fairchild SA227-AT Merlin IVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225332" start="105456" end="105468" title="CAE Aviation" label="CAE Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28053248" start="105553" end="105581" title="Afriqiyah Airways Flight 209" label="Afriqiyah Airways Flight 209"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475" start="105608" end="105619" title="Airbus A320" label="Airbus A320"/>
<link wikidata="Q898712" start="105624" end="105632" title="Aircraft hijacking" label="hijacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107732" start="105677" end="105699" title="JAT Airways Flight 769" label="JAT Airways Flight 769"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565736" start="105917" end="105957" title="1946 KLM Douglas DC-3 Amsterdam accident" label="1946 KLM Douglas DC-3 Amsterdam accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="105981" end="106003" title="Douglas C-47 Skytrain" label="Douglas C-47A Skytrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q181912" start="106016" end="106019" title="KLM" label="KLM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317794" start="106066" end="106080" title="KLM Flight 608" label="KLM Flight 608"/>
<link wikidata="Q503761" start="106102" end="106115" title="Douglas DC-6" label="Douglas DC-6B"/>
<link wikidata="Q181912" start="106128" end="106131" title="KLM" label="KLM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303215" start="106183" end="106208" title="NLM CityHopper Flight 431" label="NLM CityHopper Flight 431"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="106240" end="106247" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579458" start="106454" end="106479" title="KLM Cityhopper Flight 433" label="KLM Cityhopper Flight 433"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323799" start="106866" end="106883" title="El Al Flight 1862" label="El Al Flight 1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="106934" end="106943" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q862548" start="107102" end="107130" title="Turkish Airlines Flight 1951" label="Turkish Airlines Flight 1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="107133" end="107147" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737-800"/>
<link wikidata="Q86473" start="107160" end="107175" title="Atatürk Airport" label="Atatürk Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="107179" end="107187" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q9694" start="107191" end="107207" title="Schiphol Airport" label="Schiphol Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="107211" end="107220" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562567" start="107387" end="107407" title="Avioimpex Flight 110" label="Avioimpex Flight 110"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126582" start="107550" end="107587" title="Palair Macedonian Airlines Flight 301" label="Palair Macedonian Airlines Flight 301"/>
<link wikidata="Q11989628" start="107774" end="107809" title="British European Airways Flight 530" label="British European Airways Flight 530"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="107830" end="107852" title="Douglas C-47 Skytrain" label="Douglas C-47A Skytrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q919252" start="107865" end="107889" title="British European Airways" label="British European Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792457" start="107903" end="107913" title="Mistberget" label="Mistberget"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449781" start="107932" end="107950" title="Kvitbjørn disaster" label="Kvitbjørn disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587112" start="107972" end="107997" title="Short Sandringham" label="Shorts S.25 Sandringham 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q645830" start="108010" end="108037" title="Norwegian Air Lines" label="Det Norske Luftfartsselskap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119118" start="108079" end="108100" title="Bukken Bruse disaster" label="Bukken Bruse disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153376" start="108104" end="108115" title="flying boat" label="flying boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25804" start="108140" end="108149" title="Trondheim (city)" label="Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="108181" end="108197" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771343" start="108228" end="108246" title="Hurum air disaster" label="Hurum air disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="108270" end="108288" title="Douglas C-47 Skytrain" label="Douglas C-47A-25DK"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688142" start="108301" end="108313" title="Aero Holland" label="Aero Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5940948" start="108361" end="108386" title="Braathens SAFE Flight 253" label="Braathens SAFE Flight 253"/>
<link wikidata="Q176111" start="108409" end="108437" title="de Havilland Heron" label="de Havilland DH-114 Heron 2B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334889" start="108450" end="108464" title="Braathens" label="Braathens SAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953156" start="108513" end="108538" title="Braathens SAFE Flight 239" label="Braathens SAFE Flight 239"/>
<link wikidata="Q56869" start="108551" end="108556" title="Asker" label="Asker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363688" start="108573" end="108580" title="Fornebu" label="Fornebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="108590" end="108594" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884634" start="108704" end="108739" title="1961 Holtaheia Vickers Viking crash" label="1961 Holtaheia Vickers Viking crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514477" start="108884" end="108902" title="Widerøe Flight 933" label="Widerøe Flight 933"/>
<link wikidata="Q45823" start="108921" end="108932" title="Barents Sea" label="Barents Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917221" start="108938" end="108944" title="Mehamn" label="Mehamn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516946" start="109027" end="109045" title="Widerøe Flight 710" label="Widerøe Flight 710"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822713" start="109132" end="109159" title="Atlantic Airways Flight 670" label="Atlantic Airways Flight 670"/>
<link wikidata="Q589498" start="109163" end="109170" title="BAe 146" label="BAe 146"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704176" start="109197" end="109210" title="Stord Airport" label="Stord Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998695" start="109262" end="109280" title="Widerøe Flight 744" label="Widerøe Flight 744"/>
<link wikidata="Q683041" start="109303" end="109343" title="de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter" label="de Havilland Canada DHC-6-300 Twin Otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q28344" start="109356" end="109363" title="Widerøe" label="Widerøe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998696" start="109446" end="109464" title="Widerøe Flight 839" label="Widerøe Flight 839"/>
<link wikidata="Q683041" start="109468" end="109478" title="Twin Otter" label="Twin Otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q59279115" start="109506" end="109512" title="Værøya" label="Værøya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662518" start="109547" end="109575" title="Vnukovo Airlines Flight 2801" label="Vnukovo Airlines Flight 2801"/>
<link wikidata="Q172957" start="109579" end="109593" title="Tupolev Tu-154" label="Tupolev Tu-154"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="109621" end="109629" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11737195" start="109724" end="109757" title="1951 LOT Li-2 Tuszyn air disaster" label="1951 LOT Li-2 Tuszyn air disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q662591" start="109762" end="109774" title="Lisunov Li-2" label="Lisunov Li-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11737206" start="109947" end="109985" title="1962 LOT Vickers Viscount Warsaw crash" label="1962 LOT Vickers Viscount Warsaw crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="110016" end="110024" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="110051" end="110057" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="110127" end="110133" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475843" start="110296" end="110326" title="LOT Polish Airlines Flight 165" label="LOT Polish Airlines Flight 165"/>
<link wikidata="Q167783" start="110357" end="110363" title="Zawoja" label="Zawoja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573486" start="110367" end="110397" title="LOT Polish Airlines Flight 007" label="LOT Polish Airlines Flight 007"/>
<link wikidata="Q465071" start="110412" end="110426" title="Warsaw Frédéric Chopin Airport" label="Okęcie Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="110430" end="110436" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270393" start="110440" end="110471" title="LOT Polish Airlines Flight 5055" label="LOT Polish Airlines Flight 5055"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="110500" end="110506" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6459604" start="110511" end="110525" title="LOT Flight 703" label="LOT Flight 703"/>
<link wikidata="Q855976" start="110605" end="110616" title="Białobrzegi" label="Białobrzegi"/>
<link wikidata="Q468754" start="110621" end="110642" title="Lufthansa Flight 2904" label="Lufthansa Flight 2904"/>
<link wikidata="Q465071" start="110662" end="110676" title="Warsaw Frédéric Chopin Airport" label="Okęcie Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="110680" end="110686" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054084" start="110762" end="110791" title="LOT Polish Airlines Flight 16" label="LOT Polish Airlines Flight 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q465071" start="110869" end="110892" title="Frederic Chopin Airport" label="Frederic Chopin Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q406609" start="110913" end="110935" title="Air Transat Flight 236" label="Air Transat Flight 236"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="111007" end="111013" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q613025" start="111017" end="111044" title="Independent Air Flight 1851" label="Independent Air Flight 1851"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432755" start="111084" end="111103" title="Santa Maria Airport (Azores)" label="Santa Maria Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153850" start="111189" end="111209" title="Martinair Flight 495" label="Martinair Flight 495"/>
<link wikidata="Q667001" start="111232" end="111244" title="Faro Airport" label="Faro Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4847219" start="111287" end="111297" title="microburst" label="microburst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853075" start="111334" end="111357" title="TAP Portugal Flight 425" label="TAP Portugal Flight 425"/>
<link wikidata="Q639161" start="111380" end="111395" title="Madeira Airport" label="Madeira Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q60323" start="111448" end="111464" title="Viasa Flight 897" label="Viasa Flight 897"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104871" start="111574" end="111590" title="TAROM Flight 371" label="TAROM Flight 371"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102634" start="111606" end="111615" title="Baloteşti" label="Baloteşti"/>
<link wikidata="Q240656" start="111735" end="111752" title="TAROM Flight 3107" label="TAROM Flight 3107"/>
<link wikidata="Q727421" start="111780" end="111787" title="Otopeni" label="Otopeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254909" start="111913" end="111941" title="Austrian Airlines Flight 901" label="Austrian Airlines Flight 901"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574667" start="112043" end="112094" title="1971 January 22 Surgut Aeroflot Antonov An-12 crash" label="1971 January 22 Surgut Aeroflot Antonov An-12 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662335" start="112249" end="112300" title="1971 January 31 Surgut Aeroflot Antonov An-12 crash" label="1971 January 31 Surgut Aeroflot Antonov An-12 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688260" start="112455" end="112474" title="Aeroflot Flight 217" label="Aeroflot Flight 217"/>
<link wikidata="Q458321" start="112563" end="112590" title="Korean Air Lines Flight 902" label="Korean Air Lines Flight 902"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662643" start="112814" end="112834" title="Aeroflot Flight 1080" label="Aeroflot Flight 1080"/>
<link wikidata="Q887" start="112867" end="112880" title="Yekaterinburg" label="Yekaterinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q505663" start="112911" end="112926" title="Yakovlev Yak-40" label="Yakovlev Yak-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688263" start="113196" end="113216" title="Aeroflot Flight 3932" label="Aeroflot Flight 3932"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745489" start="113251" end="113273" title="spatial disorientation" label="spatial disorientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688266" start="113500" end="113519" title="Aeroflot Flight 964" label="Aeroflot Flight 964"/>
<link wikidata="Q15087637" start="113812" end="113832" title="Aeroflot Flight 2003" label="Aeroflot Flight 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q16486635" start="113930" end="113958" title="1976 Anapa mid-air collision" label="1976 Anapa mid-air collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q15758" start="114030" end="114035" title="Anapa" label="Anapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680" start="114037" end="114051" title="Krasnodar Krai" label="Krasnodar Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254794" start="114250" end="114270" title="Aeroflot Flight 1691" label="Aeroflot Flight 1691"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055760" start="114524" end="114546" title="1981 Pushkin Tu-104 crash" label="Aeroflot Tu-104A crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662433" start="114901" end="114920" title="Aeroflot Flight 498" label="Aeroflot Flight 498"/>
<link wikidata="Q275031" start="114926" end="114940" title="Ilyushin Il-14" label="Ilyushin Il-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q994485" start="114979" end="114991" title="Ust-Barguzin" label="Ust-Barguzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15644543" start="115080" end="115099" title="Aeroflot Flight 811" label="Aeroflot Flight 811"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071461" start="115141" end="115167" title="Komsomolsk-on-Amur Airport" label="Komsomolsk-on-Amur Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621252" start="115427" end="115447" title="Aeroflot Flight 3603" label="Aeroflot Flight 3603"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406531" start="115482" end="115497" title="Norilsk Airport" label="Norilsk Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190969" start="115661" end="115680" title="Aeroflot Flight 411" label="Aeroflot Flight 411"/>
<link wikidata="Q192733" start="115706" end="115726" title="Sheremetyevo International Airport" label="Sheremetyevo Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q381461" start="115745" end="115764" title="Aeroflot Flight 593" label="Aeroflot Flight 593"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662348" start="115821" end="115840" title="Aeroflot Flight 601" label="Aeroflot Flight 601"/>
<link wikidata="Q4217224" start="115981" end="116001" title="Aeroflot Flight 2808" label="Aeroflot Flight 2808"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375420" start="116112" end="116132" title="Aeroflot Flight 3352" label="Aeroflot Flight 3352"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432246" start="116183" end="116195" title="Omsk Airport" label="Omsk Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15961958" start="116276" end="116296" title="Aeroflot Flight 3519" label="Aeroflot Flight 3519"/>
<link wikidata="Q919" start="116416" end="116427" title="Krasnoyarsk" label="Krasnoyarsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055767" start="116487" end="116513" title="Baikal Airlines Flight 130" label="Baikal Airlines Flight 130"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576" start="116548" end="116555" title="Irkutsk" label="Irkutsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398641" start="116639" end="116646" title="1994 Vanavara Air Disaster" label="crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q147317" start="116652" end="116660" title="Vanavara (rural locality)" label="Vanavara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375246" start="116758" end="116786" title="Siberia Airlines Flight 1047" label="Siberia Airlines Flight 1047"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375246" start="116791" end="116820" title="Volga-AviaExpress Flight 1303" label="Volga-AviaExpress Flight 1303"/>
<link wikidata="Q15617473" start="116918" end="116947" title="Regional Airlines Flight 9288" label="Regional Airlines Flight 9288"/>
<link wikidata="Q337467" start="116952" end="116967" title="Antonov An-24" label="Antonov An-24RV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4103583" start="117038" end="117054" title="Varandey Airport" label="Varandey Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164" start="117058" end="117084" title="Nenetskiy Avtonomnyy Okrug, Russia" label="Nenetskiy Avtonomnyy Okrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202322" start="117141" end="117163" title="S7 Airlines Flight 778" label="S7 Airlines Flight 778"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576" start="117194" end="117201" title="Irkutsk" label="Irkutsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055766" start="117372" end="117388" title="UTAir Flight 471" label="UTAir Flight 471"/>
<link wikidata="Q381468" start="117562" end="117581" title="Aeroflot Flight 821" label="Aeroflot Flight 821"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430981" start="117605" end="117617" title="Perm Airport" label="Perm Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q131311" start="117702" end="117736" title="2010 Polish Air Force Tu-154 crash" label="2010 Polish Air Force Tu-154 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q172957" start="117740" end="117754" title="Tupolev Tu-154" label="Tupolev Tu-154"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337" start="117912" end="117920" title="Smolensk" label="Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757" start="117950" end="117964" title="Lech Kaczyński" label="Lech Kaczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055773" start="117990" end="118011" title="Katekavia Flight 9357" label="Katekavia Flight 9357"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405347" start="118273" end="118291" title="Kolavia Flight 348" label="Kolavia Flight 348"/>
<link wikidata="Q183002" start="118325" end="118331" title="Surgut" label="Surgut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762806" start="118472" end="118490" title="RusAir Flight 9605" label="RusAir Flight 9605"/>
<link wikidata="Q625613" start="118663" end="118678" title="Vladimir Pettay" label="Vladimir Pettay"/>
<link wikidata="Q530498" start="118725" end="118752" title="Angara Airlines Flight 9007" label="Angara Airlines Flight 9007"/>
<link wikidata="Q183002" start="118803" end="118809" title="Surgut" label="Surgut"/>
<link wikidata="Q976" start="118813" end="118818" title="Tomsk" label="Tomsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q973" start="118881" end="118889" title="Ob River" label="Ob River"/>
<link wikidata="Q182085" start="118975" end="119011" title="2011 Lokomotiv Yaroslavl plane crash" label="2011 Lokomotiv Yaroslavl plane crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="119155" end="119160" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q350998" start="119213" end="119230" title="Alexander Galimov" label="Alexander Galimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q633870" start="119268" end="119284" title="UTair Flight 120" label="UTAir Flight 120"/>
<link wikidata="Q219764" start="119306" end="119312" title="ATR 72" label="ATR 72"/>
<link wikidata="Q73736" start="119441" end="119480" title="Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky Air Flight 251 (2012)" label="Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky Air Flight 251"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033524" start="119648" end="119678" title="Red Wings Airlines Flight 9268" label="Red Wings Airlines Flight 9268"/>
<link wikidata="Q15198571" start="119931" end="119960" title="Tatarstan Airlines Flight 363" label="Tatarstan Airlines Flight 363"/>
<link wikidata="Q900" start="120072" end="120077" title="Kazan" label="Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23253749" start="120221" end="120240" title="Flydubai Flight 981" label="Flydubai Flight 981"/>
<link wikidata="Q908" start="120327" end="120340" title="Rostov-on-Don" label="Rostov-on-Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q28055770" start="120425" end="120475" title="2016 Russian Defence Ministry Tupolev Tu-154 crash" label="2016 Russian Defence Ministry Tupolev Tu-154 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q39420" start="120523" end="120528" title="Sochi" label="Sochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q620990" start="120607" end="120626" title="Alexandrov Ensemble" label="Alexandrov Ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q63490143" start="120636" end="120656" title="Aeroflot Flight 1492" label="Aeroflot Flight 1492"/>
<link wikidata="Q486066" start="120660" end="120679" title="Sukhoi Superjet 100" label="Sukhoi Superjet 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q192733" start="120748" end="120768" title="Sheremetyevo Airport" label="Sheremetyevo Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488717" start="121099" end="121145" title="TABSO Flight 101" label="Ilyushin IL-18B of the Bulgarian carrier TABSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q426712" start="121230" end="121248" title="Little Carpathians" label="Little Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="121255" end="121265" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502611" start="121313" end="121327" title="ČSA Flight 001" label="ČSA Flight 001"/>
<link wikidata="Q207224" start="121519" end="121531" title="Zlaté piesky" label="Zlaté piesky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969273" start="121570" end="121598" title="Britannia Airways Flight 105" label="Britannia Airways Flight 105"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="121627" end="121636" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q223288" start="121706" end="121721" title="KLM Flight 4805" label="KLM Flight 4805"/>
<link wikidata="Q223288" start="121726" end="121744" title="Pan Am Flight 1736" label="Pan Am Flight 1736"/>
<link wikidata="Q40846" start="121773" end="121781" title="Tenerife" label="Tenerife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="121789" end="121803" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q223288" start="121853" end="121878" title="Tenerife airport disaster" label="Tenerife airport disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213023" start="122137" end="122156" title="Dan-Air Flight 1008" label="Dan-Air Flight 1008"/>
<link wikidata="Q40846" start="122184" end="122192" title="Tenerife" label="Tenerife"/>
<link wikidata="Q932514" start="122198" end="122208" title="Los Rodeos" label="Los Rodeos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057459" start="122216" end="122227" title="pilot error" label="pilot error"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254501" start="122283" end="122300" title="Aviaco Flight 118" label="Aviaco Flight 118"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239140" start="122451" end="122469" title="Spantax Flight 995" label="Spantax Flight 995"/>
<link wikidata="Q8851" start="122533" end="122539" title="Málaga" label="Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119385" start="122562" end="122580" title="Avianca Flight 011" label="Avianca Flight 011"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728635" start="122781" end="122803" title="Madrid runway disaster" label="Madrid runway disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544585" start="122979" end="122989" title="Fanny Cano" label="Fanny Cano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892767" start="123016" end="123033" title="Marc Raubenheimer" label="Marc Raubenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334888" start="123037" end="123063" title="Iberia Airlines Flight 610" label="Iberia Airlines Flight 610"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148890" start="123360" end="123380" title="PauknAir Flight 4101" label="PauknAir Flight 4101"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163567" start="123523" end="123552" title="Britannia Airways Flight 226A" label="Britannia Airways Flight 226A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142410" start="123576" end="123602" title="Girona-Costa Brava Airport" label="Girona-Costa Brava Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q152758" start="123625" end="123644" title="Spanair Flight 5022" label="Spanair Flight 5022"/>
<link wikidata="Q166276" start="123727" end="123763" title="Madrid Barajas International Airport" label="Madrid Barajas International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8186827" start="123918" end="123937" title="Dan-Air Flight 1903" label="Dan-Air Flight 1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q26159" start="123943" end="123977" title="De Havilland Comet" label="de Havilland DH 106 Comet series 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q92555344" start="124181" end="124202" title="Flightline Flight 101" label="Flightline Flight 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q10674369" start="124333" end="124359" title="1970 Spantax Convair crash" label="1970 Spantax Convair crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q223499" start="124410" end="124435" title="Stockholm Arlanda Airport" label="Stockholm Arlanda Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q10562735" start="124467" end="124487" title="Linjeflyg Flight 267" label="Linjeflyg Flight 267"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057459" start="124719" end="124730" title="pilot error" label="pilot error"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554197" start="124734" end="124754" title="Linjeflyg Flight 618" label="Linjeflyg Flight 618"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529863" start="125025" end="125039" title="Scandinavian Airlines Flight 751" label="SAS Flight 751"/>
<link wikidata="Q21995232" start="125096" end="125122" title="West Air Sweden Flight 294" label="West Air Sweden Flight 294"/>
<link wikidata="Q419614" start="125136" end="125145" title="Akkajaure" label="Akkajaure"/>
<link wikidata="Q673726" start="125168" end="125187" title="Swissair Flight 330" label="Swissair Flight 330"/>
<link wikidata="Q384469" start="125194" end="125210" title="Convair Coronado" label="Convair Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q64219" start="125229" end="125240" title="Würenlingen" label="Würenlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15732457" start="125313" end="125342" title="Ethiopian Airlines Flight 702" label="Ethiopian Airlines Flight 702"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647284" start="125502" end="125521" title="Alitalia Flight 404" label="Alitalia Flight 404"/>
<link wikidata="Q173973" start="125741" end="125760" title="Swissair Flight 306" label="Swissair Flight 306"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671791" start="126046" end="126087" title="Invicta International Airlines Flight 435" label="Invicta International Airlines Flight 435"/>
<link wikidata="Q569392" start="126201" end="126221" title="Crossair Flight 3597" label="Crossair Flight 3597"/>
<link wikidata="Q689359" start="126407" end="126426" title="Crossair Flight 498" label="Crossair Flight 498"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822697" start="126565" end="126586" title="Air France Flight 152" label="Air France Flight 152"/>
<link wikidata="Q15943067" start="126590" end="126619" title="Lockheed L-749 Constellation" label="Lockheed L-749A Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="126638" end="126655" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23581795" start="126660" end="126677" title="Kızılada, Fethiye" label="Kızılada, Fethiye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429941" start="126747" end="126786" title="Scandinavian Airlines System Flight 871" label="Scandinavian Airlines System Flight 871"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503" start="126790" end="126812" title="Sud Aviation Caravelle" label="Sud Aviation Caravelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q430490" start="126867" end="126897" title="Esenboğa International Airport" label="Esenboğa International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240494" start="126933" end="126960" title="Turkish Airlines Flight 452" label="Turkish Airlines Flight 452"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409" start="126964" end="126978" title="Boeing 727" label="Boeing 727-2F2"/>
<link wikidata="Q171031" start="127025" end="127032" title="Isparta" label="Isparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855224" start="127077" end="127104" title="Turkish Airlines Flight 158" label="Turkish Airlines Flight 158"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="127108" end="127122" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737-4Q8"/>
<link wikidata="Q430490" start="127169" end="127192" title="Esenboğa International Airport" label="Ankara Esenboğa Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159340" start="127243" end="127272" title="Condor Flugdienst Flight 3782" label="Condor Flugdienst Flight 3782"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="127276" end="127290" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737-230"/>
<link wikidata="Q504382" start="127357" end="127379" title="Adnan Menderes Airport" label="Adnan Menderes Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254605" start="127437" end="127464" title="Turkish Airlines Flight 278" label="Turkish Airlines Flight 278"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="127468" end="127482" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737-4Y0"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431293" start="127529" end="127552" title="Van Ferit Melen Airport" label="Van Ferit Melen Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855227" start="127605" end="127633" title="Turkish Airlines Flight 5904" label="Turkish Airlines Flight 5904"/>
<link wikidata="Q185346" start="127664" end="127670" title="Ceyhan" label="Ceyhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430728" start="127700" end="127723" title="Adana Şakirpaşa Airport" label="Adana Şakirpaşa Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037884" start="127755" end="127782" title="Turkish Airlines Flight 634" label="Turkish Airlines Flight 634"/>
<link wikidata="Q589498" start="127787" end="127797" title="BAe 146" label="Avro RJ100"/>
<link wikidata="Q525377" start="127847" end="127865" title="Diyarbakır Airport" label="Diyarbakır Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q757299" start="127899" end="127919" title="Atlasjet Flight 4203" label="Atlasjet Flight 4203"/>
<link wikidata="Q207400" start="127923" end="127946" title="McDonnell Douglas MD-80" label="McDonnell Douglas MD-83"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264524" start="127984" end="128016" title="Isparta Süleyman Demirel Airport" label="Isparta Süleyman Demirel Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254625" start="128068" end="128088" title="Aeroflot Flight 1491" label="Aeroflot Flight 1491"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375128" start="128272" end="128311" title="1979 Dniprodzerzhynsk mid-air collision" label="1979 Dniprodzerzhynsk mid-air collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q159067" start="128326" end="128340" title="Tupolev Tu-134" label="Tupolev Tu-134"/>
<link wikidata="Q156719" start="128356" end="128372" title="Kamianske" label="Dniprodzerzhynsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q14778492" start="128428" end="128447" title="Aeroflot Flight 528" label="Aeroflot Flight 528"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948131" start="128639" end="128659" title="Aeroflot Flight 8381" label="Aeroflot Flight 8381"/>
<link wikidata="Q282909" start="128706" end="128718" title="Lviv Airport" label="Lviv Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="128743" end="128759" title="Soviet Air Force" label="Soviet Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q62156" start="128760" end="128773" title="Antonov An-26" label="Antonov An-26"/>
<link wikidata="Q623594" start="128855" end="128863" title="Zolochiv, Lviv Oblast" label="Zolochiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q17374096" start="128887" end="128914" title="Malaysia Airlines Flight 17" label="Malaysia Airlines Flight 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425" start="128918" end="128934" title="Boeing 777" label="Boeing 777-200ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q500253" start="128978" end="129012" title="Kuala Lumpur International Airport" label="Kuala Lumpur International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4147285" start="129327" end="129334" title="Hrabove, Donetsk Oblast" label="Hrabove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945321" start="129426" end="129464" title="Pulkovo Aviation Enterprise Flight 612" label="Pulkovo Aviation Enterprise Flight 612"/>
<link wikidata="Q172957" start="129487" end="129502" title="Tupolev Tu-154" label="Tupolev Tu-154M"/>
<link wikidata="Q25855" start="129824" end="129844" title="international waters" label="international waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q743060" start="129931" end="129950" title="Iran Air Flight 655" label="Iran Air Flight 655"/>
<link wikidata="Q385541" start="130086" end="130099" title="USS Vincennes (CG-49)" label="USS Vincennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q185380" start="130168" end="130189" title="Air France Flight 447" label="Air France Flight 447"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="130196" end="130207" title="Airbus A330" label="Airbus A330"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="130237" end="130251" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="130255" end="130260" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197176" start="130303" end="130311" title="airspeed" label="airspeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q752034" start="130407" end="130425" title="deep stall" label="deepened the stall"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="130454" end="130468" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254949" start="130494" end="130516" title="Air France Flight 1611" label="Air France Flight 1611"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="130558" end="130562" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q406588" start="130626" end="130646" title="Air India Flight 182" label="Air India Flight 182"/>
<link wikidata="Q463206" start="130907" end="130934" title="2001 American Airlines Flight 63 bombing attempt" label="American Airlines Flight 63"/>
<link wikidata="Q435223" start="131016" end="131036" title="Birgenair Flight 301" label="Birgenair Flight 301"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343232" start="131244" end="131259" title="BOAC Flight 777" label="BOAC Flight 777"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="131277" end="131286" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41573" start="131309" end="131322" title="Bay of Biscay" label="Bay of Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q156178" start="131375" end="131388" title="Leslie Howard (actor)" label="Leslie Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608588" start="131392" end="131409" title="Cubana Flight 455" label="Cubana Flight 455"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290887" start="131463" end="131491" title="Dominicana DC-9 air disaster" label="Dominicana DC-9 air disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q722529" start="131551" end="131570" title="EgyptAir Flight 990" label="EgyptAir Flight 990"/>
<link wikidata="Q49149" start="131607" end="131616" title="Nantucket" label="Nantucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289446" start="131648" end="131664" title="KLM Flight 607-E" label="KLM Flight 607-E"/>
<link wikidata="Q611919" start="131681" end="131697" title="Shannon, Ireland" label="Shannon, Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553353" start="131844" end="131858" title="Linea Aeropostal Venezolana Flight 253 (June 1956)" label="LAV Flight 253"/>
<link wikidata="Q201127" start="131891" end="131914" title="Asbury Park, New Jersey" label="Asbury Park, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q461911" start="131955" end="131974" title="Swissair Flight 111" label="Swissair Flight 111"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="132011" end="132022" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q908717" start="132027" end="132041" title="TWA Flight 800" label="TWA Flight 800"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462105" start="132371" end="132394" title="East Moriches, New York" label="East Moriches, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928392" start="132530" end="132558" title="Vieques Air Link Flight 901A" label="Vieques Air Link Flight 901A"/>
<link wikidata="Q737624" start="132597" end="132617" title="Vieques, Puerto Rico" label="Vieques, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475745" start="132654" end="132682" title="Siberia Airlines Flight 1812" label="Siberia Airlines Flight 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="132962" end="132969" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="132988" end="133000" title="Siberia Airlines Flight 1812#Compensation payments" label="compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833750" start="133030" end="133061" title="Transair Georgian Airline Crash" label="Transair Georgian Airline Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894153" start="133158" end="133173" title="LIAT Flight 319" label="LIAT Flight 319"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431475" start="133207" end="133238" title="Hewanorra International Airport" label="Hewanorra International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q760" start="133242" end="133253" title="Saint Lucia" label="Saint Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652401" start="133331" end="133345" title="ALM Flight 980" label="ALM Flight 980"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555483" start="133509" end="133527" title="Lionair Flight 602" label="Lionair Flight 602"/>
<link wikidata="Q495953" start="133691" end="133712" title="Korean Air Flight 858" label="Korean Air Flight 858"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="133748" end="133759" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q715683" start="133814" end="133846" title="South African Airways Flight 295" label="South African Airways Flight 295"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="133918" end="133927" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q15908324" start="134059" end="134087" title="Malaysia Airlines Flight 370" label="Malaysia Airlines Flight 370"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="134142" end="134154" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="134158" end="134165" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q381615" start="134237" end="134256" title="Aeroperú Flight 603" label="Aeroperú Flight 603"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="134276" end="134280" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q770935" start="134283" end="134309" title="Alaska Airlines Flight 261" label="Alaska Airlines Flight 261"/>
<link wikidata="Q209338" start="134329" end="134347" title="Oxnard, California" label="Oxnard, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q703762" start="134351" end="134376" title="China Airlines Flight 006" label="China Airlines Flight 006"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463546" start="134445" end="134474" title="Flying Tigers Line Flight 739" label="Flying Tigers Line Flight 739"/>
<link wikidata="Q18180" start="134490" end="134511" title="Korean Air Flight 007" label="Korean Air Flight 007"/>
<link wikidata="Q41602" start="134533" end="134547" title="Sea of Okhotsk" label="Sea of Okhotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="134551" end="134557" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q486045" start="134570" end="134596" title="Asiana Airlines Flight 991" label="Asiana Airlines Flight 991"/>
<link wikidata="Q29151" start="134604" end="134615" title="Jeju Island" label="Jeju Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="134617" end="134628" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816505" start="134631" end="134661" title="Philippine Airlines Flight 434" label="Philippine Airlines Flight 434"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204188" start="134692" end="134711" title="Minami Daito Island" label="Minami Daito Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="134740" end="134747" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q435806" start="134757" end="134782" title="China Airlines Flight 611" label="China Airlines Flight 611"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="134789" end="134795" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206792" start="134829" end="134841" title="1931 Avro Ten Southern Cloud disappearance" label="ANA Avro Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577859" start="134857" end="134872" title="Snowy Mountains" label="Snowy Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="134874" end="134889" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q19574742" start="134908" end="134919" title="1937 Airlines of Australia Stinson crash" label="ANA Stinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="134947" end="134957" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="134962" end="134977" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564273" start="134999" end="135007" title="1938 Kyeema crash" label="ANA DC-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895478" start="135021" end="135036" title="Mount Dandenong (Victoria)" label="Mount Dandenong"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="135038" end="135046" title="Victoria, Australia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565525" start="135067" end="135097" title="1945 Australian National Airways Stinson crash" label="ANA Stinson &amp;quot;Tokana&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305797" start="135111" end="135130" title="Redesdale, Victoria" label="Redesdale, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565710" start="135151" end="135159" title="1946 Australian National Airways DC-3 crash" label="ANA DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q21923426" start="135171" end="135197" title="Seven-Mile Beach, Tasmania" label="Seven-Mile Beach, Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566211" start="135216" end="135224" title="1948 Australian National Airways DC-3 crash" label="ANA DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="135236" end="135251" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566606" start="135273" end="135310" title="1949 Queensland Airlines Lockheed Lodestar crash" label="Queensland Airlines Lockheed Lodestar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386146" start="135322" end="135345" title="Coolangatta, Queensland" label="Coolangatta, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566557" start="135364" end="135424" title="1949 MacRobertson Miller Aviation DC-3 crash" label="MacRobertson Miller Aviation&amp;#x27;s DC-3 &amp;quot;Fitzroy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="135464" end="135469" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566785" start="135488" end="135496" title="1950 Australian National Airways Douglas DC-4 crash" label="ANA DC-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="135521" end="135526" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833655" start="135563" end="135584" title="TAA Fokker Friendship disaster" label="TAA Fokker Friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q704371" start="135633" end="135651" title="Mackay, Queensland" label="Mackay, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770643" start="135669" end="135690" title="Ansett-ANA Flight 325" label="Ansett-ANA Flight 325"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137051" start="135694" end="135710" title="Vickers Viscount" label="Vickers Viscount"/>
<link wikidata="Q894682" start="135724" end="135734" title="Botany Bay" label="Botany Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="135736" end="135751" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770640" start="135773" end="135794" title="Ansett-ANA Flight 149" label="Ansett-ANA Flight 149"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026409" start="135871" end="135889" title="Winton, Queensland" label="Winton, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722105" start="135912" end="135952" title="MacRobertson Miller Airlines Flight 1750" label="MacRobertson Miller Airlines Flight 1750"/>
<link wikidata="Q550465" start="135986" end="136017" title="Port Hedland, Western Australia" label="Port Hedland, Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906918" start="136042" end="136062" title="VH-AAV crash" label="Beech Super King Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q17581" start="136091" end="136105" title="Sydney Airport" label="Sydney Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597179" start="136289" end="136309" title="2000 Australia Beechcraft King Air crash" label="Beech Super King Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935476" start="136400" end="136427" title="Lockhart River air disaster" label="Lockhart River air disaster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="136520" end="136545" title="2017 Essendon Airport Beechcraft King Air crash#Investigation" label="B200 Super King Air Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224435" start="136754" end="136773" title="Air Fiji Flight 121" label="Air Fiji Flight 121"/>
<link wikidata="Q56764495" start="136912" end="136933" title="Air Niugini Flight 73" label="Air Niugini Flight 73"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129577" start="137057" end="137074" title="Pan Am Flight 816" label="Pan Am Flight 816"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562565" start="137168" end="137190" title="Air Moorea Flight 1121" label="Air Moorea Flight 1121"/>
<link wikidata="Q485120" start="137318" end="137339" title="Korean Air Flight 801" label="Korean Air Flight 801"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136355" start="137363" end="137403" title="Antonio B. Won Pat International Airport" label="Antonio B. Won Pat International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="137444" end="137454" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015530" start="137490" end="137541" title="New Zealand National Airways Corporation Flight 441" label="New Zealand National Airways Corporation Flight 441"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721437" start="137557" end="137570" title="Kaimai Ranges" label="Kaimai Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q29018017" start="137626" end="137653" title="Air New Zealand Flight 4374" label="Air New Zealand Flight 4374"/>
<link wikidata="Q45938" start="137677" end="137693" title="Auckland Airport" label="Auckland Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275613" start="137699" end="137715" title="Gisborne Airport" label="Gisborne Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770648" start="137779" end="137808" title="Ansett New Zealand Flight 703" label="Ansett New Zealand Flight 703"/>
<link wikidata="Q212289" start="137836" end="137852" title="Palmerston North" label="Palmerston North"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325012" start="137905" end="137930" title="Eagle Airways Flight 2279" label="Eagle Airways Flight 2279"/>
<link wikidata="Q883831" start="137980" end="137988" title="Blenheim, New Zealand" label="Blenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="137992" end="138004" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016231" start="138032" end="138056" title="Airlines PNG Flight 4684" label="Airlines PNG Flight 4684"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501432" start="138270" end="138294" title="Airlines PNG Flight 1600" label="Airlines PNG Flight 1600"/>
<link wikidata="Q736765" start="138319" end="138345" title="de Havilland Canada Dash 8" label="de Havilland Canada Dash 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q830601" start="138362" end="138376" title="Madang Airport" label="Madang Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q24908390" start="138703" end="138730" title="2016 Sunbird Aviation crash" label="2016 Sunbird Aviation crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833505" start="138933" end="138966" title="Trans-Canada Air Lines Flight 810" label="Trans-Canada Air Lines Flight 810"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540144" start="138980" end="138992" title="Mount Slesse" label="Mount Slesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q983026" start="138998" end="139026" title="Chilliwack" label="Chilliwack, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079315" start="139165" end="139198" title="Trans-Canada Air Lines Flight 831" label="Trans-Canada Air Lines Flight 831"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030419" start="139337" end="139372" title="Canadian Pacific Airlines Flight 21" label="Canadian Pacific Airlines Flight 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q165174" start="139386" end="139418" title="100 Mile House, British Columbia" label="100 Mile House, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746913" start="139493" end="139514" title="Air Canada Flight 621" label="Air Canada Flight 621"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122767" start="139637" end="139672" title="Pacific Western Airlines Flight 314" label="Pacific Western Airlines Flight 314"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697779" start="139881" end="139902" title="Air Canada Flight 189" label="Air Canada Flight 189"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269864" start="140022" end="140042" title="Quebecair Flight 255" label="Quebecair Flight 255"/>
<link wikidata="Q370555" start="140158" end="140179" title="Air Canada Flight 143" label="Air Canada Flight 143"/>
<link wikidata="Q370555" start="140203" end="140215" title="Gimli Glider" label="Gimli Glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="140221" end="140231" title="Boeing 767" label="Boeing 767"/>
<link wikidata="Q76034" start="140257" end="140272" title="Canadian Shield" label="Canadian Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659757" start="140354" end="140369" title="Gimli, Manitoba" label="Gimli, Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122768" start="140389" end="140424" title="Pacific Western Airlines Flight 501" label="Pacific Western Airlines Flight 501"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160343" start="140461" end="140490" title="Calgary International Airport" label="Calgary International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180238" start="140558" end="140579" title="Arrow Air Flight 1285" label="Arrow Air Flight 1285"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632428" start="140663" end="140686" title="Air Ontario Flight 1363" label="Air Ontario Flight 1363"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562607" start="140789" end="140810" title="Air Canada Flight 646" label="Air Canada Flight 646"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735729" start="140886" end="140919" title="Fredericton International Airport" label="Fredericton International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138" start="140923" end="140934" title="Fredericton" label="Fredericton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="140936" end="140949" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058384" start="141016" end="141034" title="Propair Flight 420" label="Propair Flight 420"/>
<link wikidata="Q736627" start="141090" end="141113" title="Montréal–Trudeau International Airport" label="Montreal-Dorval Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q776930" start="141117" end="141138" title="Peterborough, Ontario" label="Peterborough, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q794552" start="141226" end="141241" title="Montréal–Mirabel International Airport" label="Mirabel Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q461911" start="141289" end="141308" title="Swissair Flight 111" label="Swissair Flight 111"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589882" start="141407" end="141437" title="St. Margarets Bay, Nova Scotia" label="St. Margarets Bay, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875706" start="141609" end="141632" title="MK Airlines Flight 1602" label="MK Airlines Flight 1602"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345785" start="141669" end="141708" title="Halifax Stanfield International Airport" label="Halifax Stanfield International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q406503" start="141819" end="141840" title="Air France Flight 358" label="Air France Flight 358"/>
<link wikidata="Q242066" start="141892" end="141929" title="Toronto Pearson International Airport" label="Toronto Pearson International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q947605" start="141976" end="141997" title="First Air Flight 6560" label="First Air Flight 6560"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129232" start="142009" end="142039" title="controlled flight into terrain" label="controlled flight into terrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q606622" start="142084" end="142101" title="Resolute, Nunavut" label="Resolute, Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q19693134" start="142201" end="142222" title="Air Canada Flight 624" label="Air Canada Flight 624"/>
<link wikidata="Q27137" start="142230" end="142244" title="electric power" label="electric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345785" start="142305" end="142344" title="Halifax Stanfield International Airport" label="Halifax Stanfield International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="142346" end="142357" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688341" start="142478" end="142499" title="Aeroméxico Flight 229" label="Aeroméxico Flight 229"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666312" start="142557" end="142608" title="Licenciado Gustavo Díaz Ordaz International Airport" label="Licenciado Gustavo Díaz Ordaz International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688331" start="142660" end="142681" title="Aeromexico Flight 230" label="Aeromexico Flight 230"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688217" start="142819" end="142841" title="Aerocaribe Flight 7831" label="Aerocaribe Flight 7831"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726692" start="142921" end="142940" title="Mexicana Flight 704" label="Mexicana Flight 704"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381192" start="143110" end="143129" title="Mexicana Flight 940" label="Mexicana Flight 940"/>
<link wikidata="Q28448496" start="143330" end="143385" title="1987 Belize Air International C-97 Mexico City crash" label="A Belize Air International Boeing C-97G Stratofreighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669220" start="143441" end="143457" title="TAESA Flight 725" label="TAESA Flight 725"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562580" start="143549" end="143577" title="Western Airlines Flight 2605" label="Western Airlines Flight 2605"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707543" start="143758" end="143788" title="2008 Mexico City Learjet crash" label="2008 Mexico City Learjet crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382075" start="144019" end="144040" title="Aeroméxico Flight 576" label="Aeroméxico Flight 576"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677721" start="144133" end="144153" title="AeroUnion Flight 302" label="AeroUnion Flight 302"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837473" start="144262" end="144286" title="Magnicharters" label="Magnicharters Flight 779"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463086" start="144403" end="144430" title="FlyMex" label="A FlyMex Dornier 328JET-310"/>
<link wikidata="Q55859110" start="144489" end="144519" title="Aeroméxico Connect Flight 2431" label="Aeroméxico Connect Flight 2431"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833226" start="144659" end="144687" title="Calafia Airlines" label="Calafia Airlines Flight 7872"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688298" start="144816" end="144848" title="Aerolíneas Argentinas Flight 644" label="Aerolíneas Argentinas Flight 644"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688302" start="144995" end="145027" title="Aerolíneas Argentinas Flight 707" label="Aerolíneas Argentinas Flight 707"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823381" start="145309" end="145340" title="Austral Líneas Aéreas Flight 46" label="Austral Líneas Aéreas Flight 46"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498918" start="145455" end="145500" title="Libertador General Jose de San Martin Airport" label="Libertador General Jose de San Martin Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823384" start="145552" end="145584" title="Austral Líneas Aéreas Flight 901" label="Austral Líneas Aéreas Flight 901"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317347" start="145830" end="145846" title="LAPA Flight 3142" label="LAPA Flight 3142"/>
<link wikidata="Q999047" start="145860" end="145884" title="Aeroparque Jorge Newbery" label="Aeroparque Jorge Newbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="145886" end="145898" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499141" start="145902" end="145931" title="Sol Líneas Aéreas Flight 5428" label="Sol Líneas Aéreas Flight 5428"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237745" start="145945" end="145956" title="Prahuaniyeu" label="Prahuaniyeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q44802" start="145958" end="145967" title="Río Negro Province" label="Río Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q18466708" start="145986" end="146029" title="1976 Lloyd Aéreo Boliviano Boeing 707 crash" label="1976 Lloyd Aéreo Boliviano Boeing 707 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562643" start="146164" end="146192" title="Eastern Air Lines Flight 980" label="Eastern Air Lines Flight 980"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984127" start="146303" end="146340" title="1960 Rio de Janeiro mid-air collision" label="1960 Rio de Janeiro mid-air collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="146345" end="146363" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q503761" start="146364" end="146376" title="Douglas DC-6" label="Douglas DC-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q926160" start="146569" end="146601" title="Aerolíneas Argentinas Flight 322" label="Aerolíneas Argentinas Flight 322"/>
<link wikidata="Q822853" start="146716" end="146736" title="Lufthansa Flight 502" label="Lufthansa Flight 502"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418274" start="146743" end="146779" title="Lockheed L-1049G Super Constellation" label="Lockheed L-1049G Super Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346080" start="146953" end="146968" title="VASP Flight 168" label="VASP Flight 168"/>
<link wikidata="Q690883" start="147037" end="147053" title="Varig Flight 254" label="Varig Flight 254"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833816" start="147153" end="147175" title="Transbrasil Flight 303" label="Transbrasil Flight 303"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177188" start="147256" end="147299" title="TAM Transportes Aéreos Regionais Flight 402" label="TAM Transportes Aéreos Regionais Flight 402"/>
<link wikidata="Q862401" start="147319" end="147339" title="airport of Congonhas" label="airport of Congonhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="147343" end="147352" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351598" start="147395" end="147429" title="Gol Transportes Aereos Flight 1907" label="Gol Transportes Aereos Flight 1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q865870" start="147990" end="148014" title="TAM Airlines Flight 3054" label="TAM Airlines Flight 3054"/>
<link wikidata="Q862401" start="148034" end="148054" title="airport of Congonhas" label="airport of Congonhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="148058" end="148067" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10265411" start="148217" end="148252" title="1982 TABA Fairchild FH-227 accident" label="1982 TABA Fairchild FH-227 accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576078" start="148286" end="148317" title="Tabatinga International Airport" label="Tabatinga International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q19574757" start="148320" end="148380" title="1984 TAM – Transportes Aéreos Regionais Bandeirante accident" label="1984 TAM – Transportes Aéreos Regionais Bandeirante accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335137" start="148386" end="148413" title="Embraer EMB-110 Bandeirante" label="Embraer EMB-110 Bandeirante"/>
<link wikidata="Q65246489" start="148468" end="148483" title="VASP Flight 210" label="VASP Flight 210"/>
<link wikidata="Q128796456" start="148624" end="148657" title="Voepass Linhas Aéreas Flight 2283" label="Voepass Linhas Aéreas Flight 2283"/>
<link wikidata="Q219764" start="148662" end="148672" title="ATR 72-500" label="ATR 72-500"/>
<link wikidata="Q983534" start="148704" end="148711" title="Vinhedo" label="Vinhedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q175" start="148713" end="148722" title="São Paulo (state)" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q910917" start="148743" end="148747" title="spin (aerodynamics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q385406" start="148766" end="148797" title="Guarulhos International Airport" label="Guarulhos International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9094825" start="148849" end="148867" title="Aeronor Flight 304" label="Aeronor Flight 304"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457048" start="148999" end="149019" title="LAN Chile Flight 160" label="LAN Chile Flight 160"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841" start="149045" end="149051" title="Colina, Chile" label="Colina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997251" start="149088" end="149108" title="LAN Chile Flight 210" label="LAN Chile Flight 210"/>
<link wikidata="Q6164938" start="149297" end="149317" title="LAN Chile Flight 107" label="LAN Chile Flight 107"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971082" start="149423" end="149453" title="British South American Airways" label="British South American Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q337044" start="149477" end="149486" title="Star Dust (aircraft)" label="Star Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960378" start="149575" end="149604" title="Aeropesca Colombia Flight 221" label="Aeropesca Colombia Flight 221"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970536" start="149779" end="149808" title="Aeropesca Colombia Flight 217" label="Aeropesca Colombia Flight 217"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083143" start="149918" end="149939" title="Air France Flight 422" label="Air France Flight 422"/>
<link wikidata="Q941612" start="150094" end="150122" title="American Airlines Flight 965" label="American Airlines Flight 965"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="150152" end="150160" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057459" start="150199" end="150210" title="Pilot error" label="Pilot error"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828576" start="150233" end="150249" title="Avianca Flight 4" label="Avianca Flight 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697152" start="150403" end="150421" title="Avianca Flight 203" label="Avianca Flight 203"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011151" start="150495" end="150501" title="Soacha" label="Soacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087069" start="150505" end="150523" title="Avianca Flight 410" label="Avianca Flight 410"/>
<link wikidata="Q235166" start="150537" end="150546" title="Santander Department" label="Santander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651994" start="150560" end="150577" title="AIRES Flight 8250" label="AIRES Flight 8250"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732053" start="150607" end="150650" title="Gustavo Rojas Pinilla International Airport" label="Gustavo Rojas Pinilla International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q13441139" start="150850" end="150889" title="Intercontinental de Aviación Flight 256" label="Intercontinental de Aviación Flight 256"/>
<link wikidata="Q27925924" start="151159" end="151176" title="LaMia Flight 2933" label="LaMia Flight 2933"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388641" start="151576" end="151599" title="SAM Colombia Flight 501" label="SAM Colombia Flight 501"/>
<link wikidata="Q535161" start="151702" end="151742" title="José María Córdova International Airport" label="José María Córdova International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9094823" start="151895" end="151910" title="TAME Flight 120" label="TAME Flight 120"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374459" start="151951" end="152005" title="Teniente Coronel Luis a Mantilla International Airport" label="Teniente Coronel Luis a Mantilla International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6164992" start="152219" end="152253" title="West Caribbean Airways Flight 9955" label="West Caribbean Airways flight 9955"/>
<link wikidata="Q157925" start="152257" end="152275" title="Let L-410 Turbolet" label="Let L-410 Turbolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322429" start="152314" end="152332" title="El Embrujo Airport" label="El Embrujo Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377742" start="152376" end="152380" title="Engine failure on takeoff" label="EFTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827138" start="152442" end="152480" title="1982 Aerocondor DHC-4 Caribou accident" label="1982 Aerocondor DHC-4 Caribou accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669292" start="152507" end="152528" title="1983 TAME Boeing 737 crash" label="TAME Boeing 737 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207735" start="152937" end="152966" title="Caribbean Airlines Flight 523" label="Caribbean Airlines Flight 523"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333912" start="152985" end="153019" title="Cheddi Jagan International Airport" label="Cheddi Jagan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438057" start="153186" end="153204" title="Faucett Flight 251" label="Faucett Flight 251"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430861" start="153268" end="153306" title="Rodríguez Ballón International Airport" label="Rodríguez Ballón International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q159273" start="153310" end="153318" title="Arequipa" label="Arequipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797867" start="153354" end="153370" title="LANSA Flight 508" label="LANSA Flight 508"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457040" start="153508" end="153524" title="LANSA Flight 501" label="LANSA Flight 501"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688296" start="153624" end="153656" title="Aerolíneas Argentinas Flight 386" label="Aerolíneas Argentinas Flight 386"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669317" start="153729" end="153749" title="TANS Perú Flight 222" label="TANS Perú Flight 222"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648885" start="153787" end="153807" title="TANS Peru Flight 204" label="TANS Peru Flight 204"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="153878" end="153882" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q115277477" start="153959" end="153981" title="LATAM Perú Flight 2213" label="LATAM Perú Flight 2213"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610182" start="154126" end="154152" title="Surinam Airways Flight 764" label="Surinam Airways Flight 764"/>
<link wikidata="Q146633" start="154238" end="154246" title="Zanderij" label="Zanderij"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="154256" end="154264" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028762" start="154385" end="154418" title="Austral Líneas Aéreas Flight 2553" label="Austral Líneas Aéreas Flight 2553"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714088" start="154686" end="154698" title="Nuevo Berlín" label="Nuevo Berlín"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="154700" end="154707" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254515" start="154780" end="154796" title="Viasa Flight 742" label="Viasa Flight 742"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="154800" end="154825" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-9-32" label="McDonnell Douglas DC-9-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553354" start="154938" end="154992" title="Linea Aeropostal Venezolana Flight 253 (November 1956)" label="Linea Aeropostal Venezolana Flight 253 (November 1956)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320123" start="155147" end="155180" title="West Caribbean Airways Flight 708" label="West Caribbean Airways Flight 708"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="155197" end="155206" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236167" start="155396" end="155405" title="Machiques" label="Machiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580923" start="155450" end="155480" title="1983 Avensa Douglas DC-9 crash" label="1983 Avensa Douglas DC-9 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688400" start="155510" end="155549" title="Aeropostal Alas de Venezuela Flight 108" label="Aeropostal Alas de Venezuela Flight 108"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192131" start="155736" end="155765" title="Cubana de Aviación Flight 310" label="Cubana de Aviación Flight 310"/>
<link wikidata="Q505649" start="155781" end="155787" title="Yak-42" label="Yak-42"/>
<link wikidata="Q54880" start="155801" end="155820" title="Valencia, Venezuela" label="Valencia, Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087193" start="155859" end="155892" title="Santa Bárbara Airlines Flight 518" label="Santa Bárbara Airlines Flight 518"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834411" start="156007" end="156083" title="List of aircraft accidents and incidents resulting in at least 50 fatalities" label="List of aircraft accidents and incidents resulting in at least 50 fatalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306941" start="156086" end="156148" title="List of accidents and incidents involving airliners by airline" label="List of accidents and incidents involving airliners by airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q354069" start="156151" end="156212" title="List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft" label="List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407814" wikidata="Q2109172" url="?curid=407814" title="Hygiene hypothesis">
<text>In medicine, the hygiene hypothesis states that early childhood exposure to particular microorganisms (such as the gut flora and helminth parasites) protects against allergies by properly tuning the immune system. In particular, a lack of such exposure is thought to lead to poor immune tolerance. The time period for exposure begins before birth and ends at school age.

While early versions of the hypothesis referred to microorganism exposure in general, later versions apply to a specific set of microbes that have co-evolved with humans. The updates have been given various names, including the microbiome depletion hypothesis, the microflora hypothesis, and the &quot;old friends&quot; hypothesis. There is a significant amount of evidence supporting the idea that lack of exposure to these microbes is linked to allergies or other conditions, although it is still rejected by many scientists.

The term &quot;hygiene hypothesis&quot; has been described as a misnomer because people incorrectly interpret it as referring to their own cleanliness. Having worse personal hygiene, such as not washing hands before eating, only increases the risk of infection without affecting the risk of allergies or immune disorders. Hygiene is essential for protecting vulnerable populations such as the elderly from infections, preventing the spread of antibiotic resistance, and combating emerging infectious diseases such as Ebola. The hygiene hypothesis does not suggest that having more infections during childhood would be an overall benefit.

== Overview ==

The idea of a link between parasite infection and immune disorders was first suggested in 1968 before the advent of large scale DNA sequencing techniques. The original formulation of the hygiene hypothesis dates from 1989, when David Strachan proposed that lower incidence of infection in early childhood could be an explanation for the rise in allergic diseases such as asthma and hay fever during the 20th century.

The hygiene hypothesis has also been expanded beyond allergies, and is also studied in the context of a broader range of conditions affected by the immune system, particularly inflammatory diseases. These include type 1 diabetes, multiple sclerosis, and also some types of depression and cancer. For example, the global distribution of multiple sclerosis is negatively correlated with that of the helminth &quot;Trichuris trichiura&quot; and its incidence is negatively correlated with &quot;Helicobacter pylori&quot; infection. Strachan&#x27;s original hypothesis could not explain how various allergic conditions spiked or increased in prevalence at different times, such as why respiratory allergies began to increase much earlier than food allergies, which did not become more common until near the end of the 20th century.

In 2003, Graham Rook proposed the &quot;old friends&quot; hypothesis which has been described as a more rational explanation for the link between microbial exposure and inflammatory disorders. The hypothesis states that the vital microbial exposures are not colds, influenza, measles and other common childhood infections which have evolved relatively recently over the last 10,000 years, but rather the microbes already present during mammalian and human evolution, that could persist in small hunter-gatherer groups as microbiota, tolerated latent infections, or carrier states. He proposed that coevolution with these species has resulted in their gaining a role in immune system development.

Strachan&#x27;s original formulation of the hygiene hypothesis also centred around the idea that smaller families provided insufficient microbial exposure partly because of less person-to-person spread of infections, but also because of &quot;improved household amenities and higher standards of personal cleanliness&quot;. It seems likely that this was the reason he named it the &quot;hygiene hypothesis&quot;. Although the &quot;hygiene revolution&quot; of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries may have been a major factor, it now seems more likely that, while public health measures such as sanitation, potable water and garbage collection were instrumental in reducing our exposure to cholera, typhoid and so on, they also deprived people of their exposure to the &quot;old friends&quot; that occupy the same environmental habitats.

The rise of autoimmune diseases and acute lymphoblastic leukemia in young people in the developed world was linked to the hygiene hypothesis. Autism may be associated with changes in the gut microbiome and early infections. The risk of chronic inflammatory diseases also depends on factors such as diet, pollution, physical activity, obesity, socio-economic factors, and stress. Genetic predisposition is also a factor.

== History ==

Since allergies and other chronic inflammatory diseases are largely diseases of the last 100 years or so, the &quot;hygiene revolution&quot; of the last 200 years came under scrutiny as a possible cause. During the 1800s, radical improvements to sanitation and water quality occurred in Europe and North America. The introduction of toilets and sewer systems and the cleanup of city streets, and cleaner food were part of this program. This in turn led to a rapid decline in infectious diseases, particularly during the period 1900–1950, through reduced exposure to infectious agents.

Although the idea that exposure to certain infections may decrease the risk of allergy is not new, Strachan was one of the first to formally propose it, in an article published in the &quot;British Medical Journal&quot; in 1989. This article proposed to explain the observation that hay fever and eczema, both allergic diseases, were less common in children from larger families, which were presumably exposed to more infectious agents through their siblings, than in children from families with only one child. The increased occurrence of allergies had previously been thought to be a result of increasing pollution. The hypothesis was extensively investigated by immunologists and epidemiologists and has become an important theoretical framework for the study of chronic inflammatory disorders.

The &quot;old friends hypothesis&quot; proposed in 2003 may offer a better explanation for the link between microbial exposure and inflammatory diseases. This hypothesis argues that the vital exposures are not common cold and other recently evolved infections, which are no older than 10,000 years, but rather microbes already present in hunter-gatherer times when the human immune system was evolving. Conventional childhood infections are mostly &quot;crowd infections&quot; that kill or immunise and thus cannot persist in isolated hunter-gatherer groups. Crowd infections started to appear after the neolithic agricultural revolution, when human populations increased in size and proximity. The microbes that co-evolved with mammalian immune systems are much more ancient. According to this hypothesis, humans became so dependent on them that their immune systems can neither develop nor function properly without them.

Rook proposed that these microbes most likely include:

* Ambient species that exist in the same environments as humans
* Species that inhabit human skin, gut and respiratory tract, and that of the animals we live with
* Organisms such as viruses and helminths (worms) that establish chronic infections or carrier states that humans can tolerate and so could co-evolve a specific immunoregulatory relationship with the immune system.

The modified hypothesis later expanded to include exposure to symbiotic bacteria and parasites.

&quot;Evolution turns the inevitable into a necessity.&quot; This means that the majority of mammalian evolution took place in mud and rotting vegetation and more than 90 percent of human evolution took place in isolated hunter-gatherer communities and farming communities. Therefore, the human immune systems have evolved to anticipate certain types of microbial input, making the inevitable exposure into a necessity. The organisms that are implicated in the hygiene hypothesis are not proven to cause the disease prevalence, however there are sufficient data on lactobacilli, saprophytic environment mycobacteria, and helminths and their association. These bacteria and parasites have commonly been found in vegetation, mud, and water throughout evolution.

Multiple possible mechanisms have been proposed for how the &#x27;Old Friends&#x27; microorganisms prevent autoimmune diseases and asthma. They include: 
# Reciprocal inhibition between immune responses directed against distinct antigens of the Old Friends microbes which elicit stronger immune responses than the weaker autoantigens and allergens of autoimmune disease and allergy respectively.
# Competition for cytokines, MHC receptors and growth factors needed by the immune system to mount an immune response.
# Immunoregulatory interactions with host TLRs.

The &quot;microbial diversity&quot; hypothesis, proposed by Paolo Matricardi and developed by von Hertzen, holds that diversity of microbes in the gut and other sites is a key factor for priming the immune system, rather than stable colonization with a particular species. Exposure to diverse organisms in early development builds a &quot;database&quot; that allows the immune system to identify harmful agents and normalize once the danger is eliminated.

For allergic disease, the most important times for exposure are: early in development; later during pregnancy; and the first few days or months of infancy. Exposure needs to be maintained over a significant period. This fits with evidence that delivery by Caesarean section may be associated with increased allergies, whilst breastfeeding can be protective.

== Evolution of the adaptive immune system ==

Humans and the microbes they harbor have co-evolved for thousands of centuries; however, it is thought that the human species has gone through numerous phases in history characterized by different pathogen exposures. For instance, in very early human societies, small interaction between its members has given particular selection to a relatively limited group of pathogens that had high transmission rates. It is considered that the human immune system is likely subjected to a selective pressure from pathogens that are responsible for down regulating certain alleles and therefore phenotypes in humans. The thalassemia genes that are shaped by the &quot;Plasmodium&quot; species expressing the selection pressure might be a model for this theory but is not shown in-vivo.

Recent comparative genomic studies have shown that immune response genes (protein coding and non-coding regulatory genes) have less evolutionary constraint, and are rather more frequently targeted by positive selection from pathogens that coevolve with the human subject. Of all the various types of pathogens known to cause disease in humans, helminths warrant special attention, because of their ability to modify the prevalence or severity of certain immune-related responses in human and mouse models. In fact recent research has shown that parasitic worms have served as a stronger selective pressure on select human genes encoding interleukins and interleukin receptors when compared to viral and bacterial pathogens. Helminths are thought to have been as old as the adaptive immune system, suggesting that they may have co-evolved, also implying that our immune system has been strongly focused on fighting off helminthic infections, insofar as to potentially interact with them early in infancy. The host-pathogen interaction is a very important relationship that serves to shape the immune system development early on in life.

== Biological basis ==

The primary proposed mechanism of the hygiene hypothesis is an imbalance between the TH1 and TH2 subtypes of T helper cells. Insufficient activation of the TH1 arm would stimulate the cell defense of the immune system and lead to an overactive TH2 arm, stimulating the antibody-mediated immunity of the immune systems, which in turn led to allergic disease.

However, this explanation cannot explain the rise in incidence (similar to the rise of allergic diseases) of several TH1-mediated autoimmune diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis and type I diabetes. [Figure 1Bach] However, the North South Gradient seen in the prevalence of multiple sclerosis has been found to be inversely related to the global distribution of parasitic infection.[Figure 2Bach] Additionally, research has shown that MS patients infected with parasites displayed TH2 type immune responses as opposed to the proinflammatory TH1 immune phenotype seen in non-infected multiple sclerosis patients.[Fleming] Parasite infection has also been shown to improve inflammatory bowel disease and may act in a similar fashion as it does in multiple sclerosis.[Lee]

Allergic conditions are caused by inappropriate immunological responses to harmless antigens driven by a TH2-mediated immune response, TH2 cells produce interleukin 4, interleukin 5, interleukin 6, interleukin 13 and predominantly stimulate immunoglobulin E production. Many bacteria and viruses elicit a TH1-mediated immune response, which down-regulates TH2 responses. TH1 immune responses are characterized by the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin 2, IFNγ, and TNFα. Factors that favor a predominantly TH1 phenotype include: older siblings, large family size, early day care attendance, infection (TB, measles, or hepatitis), rural living, or contact with animals. A TH2-dominated phenotype is associated with high antibiotic use, western lifestyle, urban environment, diet, and sensitivity to dust mites and cockroaches. TH1 and TH2 responses are reciprocally inhibitory, so when one is active, the other is suppressed.

An alternative explanation is that the developing immune system must receive stimuli (from infectious agents, symbiotic bacteria, or parasites) to adequately develop regulatory T cells. Without that stimuli it becomes more susceptible to autoimmune diseases and allergic diseases, because of insufficiently repressed TH1 and TH2 responses, respectively. For example, all chronic inflammatory disorders show evidence of failed immunoregulation. Secondly, helminths, non-pathogenic ambient pseudocommensal bacteria or certain gut commensals and probiotics, drive immunoregulation. They block or treat models of all chronic inflammatory conditions.

== Evidence ==

There is a significant amount of evidence supporting the idea that microbial exposure is linked to allergies or other conditions, although scientific disagreement still exists. Since hygiene is difficult to define or measure directly, surrogate markers are used such as socioeconomic status, income, and diet.

Studies have shown that various immunological and autoimmune diseases are much less common in the developing world than the industrialized world and that immigrants to the industrialized world from the developing world increasingly develop immunological disorders in relation to the length of time since arrival in the industrialized world. This is true for asthma and other chronic inflammatory disorders. The increase in allergy rates is primarily attributed to diet and reduced microbiome diversity, although the mechanistic reasons are unclear.

The use of antibiotics in the first year of life has been linked to asthma and other allergic diseases, and increased asthma rates are also associated with birth by Caesarean section. However, at least one study suggests that personal hygienic practices may be unrelated to the incidence of asthma. Antibiotic usage reduces the diversity of gut microbiota. Although several studies have shown associations between antibiotic use and later development of asthma or allergy, other studies suggest that the effect is due to more frequent antibiotic use in asthmatic children. Trends in vaccine use may also be relevant, but epidemiological studies provide no consistent support for a detrimental effect of vaccination/immunization on atopy rates. In support of the old friends hypothesis, the intestinal microbiome was found to differ between allergic and non-allergic Estonian and Swedish children (although this finding was not replicated in a larger cohort), and the biodiversity of the intestinal flora in patients with Crohn&#x27;s disease was diminished.

===Limitations===

The hygiene hypothesis does not apply to all populations. For example, in the case of inflammatory bowel disease, it is primarily relevant when a person&#x27;s level of affluence increases, either due to changes in society or by moving to a more affluent country, but not when affluence remains constant at a high level.

The hygiene hypothesis has difficulty explaining why allergic diseases also occur in less affluent regions. Additionally, exposure to some microbial species actually increases future susceptibility to disease instead, as in the case of infection with rhinovirus (the main source of the common cold) which increases the risk of asthma.

== Treatment ==

Current research suggests that manipulating the intestinal microbiota may be able to treat or prevent allergies and other immune-related conditions. Various approaches are under investigation. Probiotics (drinks or foods) have never been shown to reintroduce microbes to the gut. As yet, therapeutically relevant microbes have not been specifically identified. However, probiotic bacteria have been found to reduce allergic symptoms in some studies. Other approaches being researched include prebiotics, which promote the growth of gut flora, and synbiotics, the use of prebiotics and probiotics at the same time.

Should these therapies become accepted, public policy implications include providing green spaces in urban areas or even providing access to agricultural environments for children.

Helminthic therapy is the treatment of autoimmune diseases and immune disorders by means of deliberate infestation with a helminth larva or ova. Helminthic therapy emerged from the search for reasons why the incidence of immunological disorders and autoimmune diseases correlates with the level of industrial development. The exact relationship between helminths and allergies is unclear, in part because studies tend to use different definitions and outcomes, and because of the wide variety among both helminth species and the populations they infect. The infections induce a type 2 immune response, which likely evolved in mammals as a result of such infections; chronic helminth infection has been linked with a reduced sensitivity in peripheral T cells, and several studies have found deworming to lead to an increase in allergic sensitivity. However, in some cases helminths and other parasites are a cause of developing allergies instead. In addition, such infections are not themselves a treatment as they are a major disease burden and in fact they are one of the most important neglected diseases. The development of drugs that mimic the effects without causing disease is in progress.

== Public health ==

The reduction of public confidence in hygiene has significant possible consequences for public health. Hygiene is essential for protecting vulnerable populations such as the elderly from infections, preventing the spread of antibiotic resistance, and for combating emerging infectious diseases such as SARS and Ebola.

The misunderstanding of the term &quot;hygiene hypothesis&quot; has resulted in unwarranted opposition to vaccination as well as other important public health measures. It has been suggested that public awareness of the initial form of the hygiene hypothesis has led to an increased disregard for hygiene in the home. The effective communication of science to the public has been hindered by the presentation of the hygiene hypothesis and other health-related information in the media.

===Cleanliness===
No evidence supports the idea that reducing modern practices of cleanliness and hygiene would have any impact on rates of chronic inflammatory and allergic disorders, but a significant amount of evidence indicates that reducing hygiene would increase the risks of infectious diseases. The phrase &quot;targeted hygiene&quot; has been used in order to recognize the importance of hygiene in avoiding pathogens.

If home and personal cleanliness contributes to reduced exposure to vital microbes, its role is likely to be small. The idea that homes can be made “sterile” through excessive cleanliness is implausible, and the evidence shows that after cleaning, microbes are quickly replaced by dust and air from outdoors, by shedding from the body and other living things, as well as from food. The key point may be that the microbial content of urban housing has altered, not because of home and personal hygiene habits, but because they are part of urban environments. Diet and lifestyle changes also affects the gut, skin and respiratory microbiota.

At the same time that concerns about allergies and other chronic inflammatory diseases have been increasing, so also have concerns about infectious disease. Infectious diseases continue to exert a heavy health toll. Preventing pandemics and reducing antibiotic resistance are global priorities, and hygiene is a cornerstone of containing these threats.

=== Infection risk management ===

The International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene has developed a risk management approach to reducing home infection risks. This approach uses microbiological and epidemiological evidence to identify the key routes of infection transmission in the home. These data indicate that the critical routes involve the hands, hand and food contact surfaces and cleaning utensils. Clothing and household linens involve somewhat lower risks. Surfaces that contact the body, such as baths and hand basins, can act as infection vehicles, as can surfaces associated with toilets. Airborne transmission can be important for some pathogens. A key aspect of this approach is that it maximises protection against pathogens and infection, but is more relaxed about visible cleanliness in order to sustain normal exposure to other human, animal and environmental microbes.

== See also ==
* Antibacterial soap
* Antifragility
* Diseases of affluence
* Germ theory of disease
* Helminthic therapy 
* Hookworm
* Human microbiome
* Microbiomes of the built environment
* Vaginal seeding

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2109172" start="17" end="35" title="Hygiene hypothesis" label="hygiene hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q739734" start="115" end="124" title="gut flora" label="gut flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129936" start="129" end="137" title="helminth" label="helminth"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="166" end="175" title="allergy" label="allergies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="199" end="212" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356761" start="280" end="296" title="immune tolerance" label="immune tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q208841" start="519" end="529" title="Coevolution" label="co-evolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623796" start="600" end="610" title="Human microbiota" label="microbiome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109172" start="668" end="702" title="Hygiene hypothesis" label="&amp;quot;old friends&amp;quot; hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q63391344" start="1344" end="1365" title="antibiotic resistance" label="antibiotic resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q609748" start="1381" end="1409" title="emerging infectious diseases" label="emerging infectious diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q51993" start="1418" end="1423" title="Ebola" label="Ebola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1672" end="1709" title="DNA_sequencing#High-throughput_sequencing_(HTS)_methods" label="large scale DNA sequencing techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="1832" end="1841" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="1927" end="1933" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q272436" start="1938" end="1947" title="hay fever" label="hay fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="2150" end="2170" title="inflammatory disease" label="inflammatory disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q124407" start="2187" end="2202" title="type 1 diabetes" label="type 1 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154414" start="2386" end="2405" title="Trichuris trichiura" label="Trichuris trichiura"/>
<link wikidata="Q180556" start="2466" end="2485" title="Helicobacter pylori" label="Helicobacter pylori"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2837" end="2871" title="Old Friends hypothesis (biology)" label="&amp;quot;old friends&amp;quot; hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q208841" start="3401" end="3412" title="coevolution" label="coevolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="4097" end="4107" title="sanitation" label="sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892" start="4109" end="4122" title="potable water" label="potable water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324934" start="4127" end="4145" title="garbage collection" label="garbage collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="4192" end="4199" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="4201" end="4208" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084905" start="4353" end="4371" title="autoimmune disease" label="autoimmune disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q180664" start="4377" end="4405" title="acute lymphoblastic leukemia" label="acute lymphoblastic leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="4483" end="4489" title="Autism" label="Autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q546003" start="5553" end="5576" title="British Medical Journal" label="British Medical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q272436" start="5646" end="5655" title="hay fever" label="hay fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q229256" start="5660" end="5666" title="eczema" label="eczema"/>
<link wikidata="Q101929" start="6028" end="6041" title="immunology" label="immunologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="6046" end="6061" title="epidemiology" label="epidemiologists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6616" end="6632" title="crowd infections" label="crowd infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q180548" start="6766" end="6788" title="neolithic agriculture" label="neolithic agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="7326" end="7331" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129936" start="7338" end="7346" title="helminth" label="helminth"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610" start="7584" end="7593" title="symbiotic" label="symbiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q739734" start="9075" end="9094" title="Gut flora" label="microbes in the gut"/>
<link wikidata="Q228036" start="9657" end="9674" title="Caesarean section" label="Caesarean section"/>
<link wikidata="Q185137" start="10417" end="10428" title="thalassemia" label="thalassemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130948" start="10464" end="10474" title="Plasmodium" label="Plasmodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645075" start="11356" end="11378" title="adaptive immune system" label="adaptive immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q632518" start="11853" end="11866" title="T helper cell" label="T helper cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q192360" start="12233" end="12252" title="autoimmunity" label="autoimmune diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q917447" start="12264" end="12290" title="inflammatory bowel disease" label="inflammatory bowel disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="12292" end="12310" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q124407" start="12315" end="12330" title="Diabetes mellitus type 1" label="type I diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="12988" end="12996" title="antigens" label="antigens"/>
<link wikidata="Q632518" start="13009" end="13012" title="t helper cell" label="TH2"/>
<link wikidata="Q118368435" start="13057" end="13070" title="interleukin 4" label="interleukin 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q14877650" start="13072" end="13085" title="interleukin 5" label="interleukin 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q412889" start="13087" end="13100" title="interleukin 6" label="interleukin 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q14878303" start="13102" end="13116" title="interleukin 13" label="interleukin 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q79455" start="13145" end="13161" title="immunoglobulin E" label="immunoglobulin E"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="13179" end="13187" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="13192" end="13197" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q632518" start="13209" end="13212" title="t helper cell" label="TH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q410130" start="13369" end="13382" title="interleukin 2" label="interleukin 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q24741149" start="13384" end="13388" title="IFNγ" label="IFNγ"/>
<link wikidata="Q21173843" start="13394" end="13398" title="TNFα" label="TNFα"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550619" start="14021" end="14038" title="regulatory T cell" label="regulatory T cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q191934" start="14383" end="14392" title="commensal" label="commensal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816730" start="14398" end="14408" title="probiotics" label="probiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q228036" start="15544" end="15561" title="Caesarean section" label="Caesarean section"/>
<link wikidata="Q757678" start="16110" end="16115" title="atopy" label="atopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q917447" start="16543" end="16569" title="inflammatory bowel disease" label="inflammatory bowel disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351647" start="17030" end="17040" title="rhinovirus" label="rhinovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125" start="17065" end="17076" title="common cold" label="common cold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816730" start="17325" end="17334" title="Probiotic" label="Probiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q218870" start="17624" end="17634" title="Prebiotic (nutrition)" label="prebiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375654" start="17679" end="17689" title="synbiotics" label="synbiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135101" start="17929" end="17947" title="Helminthic therapy" label="Helminthic therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084905" start="17968" end="17986" title="autoimmune disease" label="autoimmune disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843811" start="17992" end="18007" title="immune disorder" label="immune disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129936" start="18051" end="18059" title="helminth" label="helminth"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="18060" end="18065" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321695" start="18069" end="18072" title="Ovum" label="ova"/>
<link wikidata="Q578994" start="18947" end="18969" title="Helminthiasis" label="a major disease burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q929451" start="19017" end="19034" title="neglected disease" label="neglected disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q63391344" start="19371" end="19392" title="antibiotic resistance" label="antibiotic resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q609748" start="19412" end="19440" title="emerging infectious diseases" label="emerging infectious diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q103177" start="19449" end="19453" title="SARS" label="SARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q51993" start="19458" end="19463" title="Ebola" label="Ebola"/>
<link wikidata="Q110304251" start="19558" end="19583" title="Anti-vaccination movement" label="opposition to vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184" start="21250" end="21259" title="pandemics" label="pandemics"/>
<link wikidata="Q63391344" start="21273" end="21294" title="antibiotic resistance" label="antibiotic resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774533" start="22286" end="22304" title="Antibacterial soap" label="Antibacterial soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q18352621" start="22307" end="22320" title="Antifragility" label="Antifragility"/>
<link wikidata="Q206866" start="22323" end="22344" title="Diseases of affluence" label="Diseases of affluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425837" start="22347" end="22369" title="Germ theory of disease" label="Germ theory of disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135101" start="22372" end="22390" title="Helminthic therapy" label="Helminthic therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12212063" start="22394" end="22402" title="Hookworm" label="Hookworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500347" start="22405" end="22421" title="Human microbiome" label="Human microbiome"/>
<link wikidata="Q28231509" start="22424" end="22460" title="Microbiomes of the built environment" label="Microbiomes of the built environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q25091551" start="22463" end="22478" title="Vaginal seeding" label="Vaginal seeding"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="407822" wikidata="Q5559352" url="?curid=407822" title="Grouper">
<text>Groupers are fish of any of a number of genera in the subfamily Epinephelinae of the family Serranidae, in the order Perciformes.

Not all serranids are called &quot;groupers&quot;; the family also includes the sea basses. The common name &quot;grouper&quot; is usually given to fish in one of two large genera: &quot;Epinephelus&quot; and &quot;Mycteroperca&quot;. In addition, the species classified in the small genera &quot;Anyperidon&quot;, &quot;Cromileptes&quot;, &quot;Dermatolepis&quot;, &quot;Graciela&quot;, &quot;Saloptia&quot;, and &quot;Triso&quot; are also called &quot;groupers&quot;. Fish in the genus &quot;Plectropomus&quot; are referred to as &quot;coral groupers&quot;. These genera are all classified in the subfamily Epiphelinae. However, some of the hamlets (genus &quot;Alphestes&quot;), the hinds (genus &quot;Cephalopholis&quot;), the lyretails (genus &quot;Variola&quot;), and some other small genera (&quot;Gonioplectrus&quot;, &quot;Niphon&quot;, &quot;Paranthias&quot;) are also in this subfamily, and occasional species in other serranid genera have common names involving the word &quot;grouper&quot;. Nonetheless, the word &quot;grouper&quot; on its own is usually taken as meaning the subfamily Epinephelinae.

== Description ==
Groupers are teleosts, typically having a stout body and a large mouth. They are not built for long-distance, fast swimming. They can be quite large: in length, over a meter. The largest is the Atlantic goliath grouper (&quot;Epinephelus itajara&quot;) which has been weighed at and a length of , though in such a large group, species vary considerably. They swallow prey rather than biting pieces off of them. They do not have many teeth on the edges of their jaws, but they have heavy crushing tooth plates inside the pharynx. They habitually eat fish, octopuses, and crustaceans. Some species prefer to ambush their prey, while others are active predators. Reports of fatal attacks on humans by the largest species, such as the giant grouper (&quot;Epinephelus lanceolatus&quot;), are unconfirmed.

Their mouths and gills form a powerful vacuum that pulls their prey in from a distance. They also use their mouths to dig into sand to form their shelters under big rocks, jetting it out through their gills.

Research indicates roving coralgroupers (&quot;Plectropomus pessuliferus&quot;) sometimes cooperate with giant morays in hunting. Groupers are also one of the only animals that eat invasive red lionfish.

==Systematics==

=== Etymology ===
The word &quot;grouper&quot; is from the Portuguese name, &quot;garoupa&quot;, which has been speculated to come from an indigenous South American language.

In Australia, &quot;groper&quot; is used instead of &quot;grouper&quot; for several species, such as the Queensland grouper (&quot;Epinephelus lanceolatus&quot;). In New Zealand, &quot;groper&quot; refers to a type of wreckfish, &quot;Polyprion oxygeneios&quot;, which goes by the name &quot;hapuka&quot; (from the Māori language ). In the Philippines, groupers are generally known as &quot;lapu-lapu&quot; in Luzon, while in the Visayas and Mindanao they are known as &quot;pugapo&quot;. It is known as &quot;kerapu&quot; in both Indonesian and Malay. In the Middle East, the fish is known as &#x27;hammour&#x27;, and is widely eaten, especially in the Persian Gulf region. In Latin America, the fish is known as &#x27;mero&#x27;.

The species in the tribes Grammistini and Diploprionini secrete a mucus-like toxin in their skin called grammistin, and when they are confined in a restricted space and subjected to stress, the mucus produces a foam that is toxic to nearby fish. These fishes are often called soapfishes. They have been classified either as their own families or within subfamilies, although the fifth Edition of the &quot;Fishes of the World&quot; classifies these two groups as tribes within the subfamily Epinephelinae.

===Classification===
According to the 5th edition of &quot;Fishes of the World,&quot; the subfamily is divided up into 5 tribes containing a total of 32 genera and 234 species.

Subfamily Epinephelinae (groupers)
*Tribe Niphonini 
** &quot;Niphon&quot; 
*Tribe Epinephelini 
** &quot;Aethaloperca&quot; 
** &quot;Alphestes&quot; 
** &quot;Anyperodon&quot; 
** &quot;Cephalopholis&quot; 
** &quot;Chromileptes&quot; 
** &quot;Dermatolepis&quot; 
** &quot;Epinephelus&quot; 
** &quot;Gonioplectrus&quot; 
** &quot;Gracila&quot; 
** &quot;Hyporthodus&quot; 
** &quot;Mycteroperca&quot; 
** &quot;Paranthias&quot; 
** &quot;Plectropomus&quot; 
** &quot;Saloptia&quot; 
** &quot;Triso&quot; 
** &quot;Variola&quot; 
*Tribe Diploprionini 
** &quot;Aulacocephalus&quot; 
** &quot;Belonoperca&quot; 
** &quot;Diploprion&quot; 
* Tribe Liopropomini 
** &quot;Bathyanthias&quot; 
** &quot;Liopropoma&quot; 
** &quot;Rainfordia&quot; 
*Tribe Grammistini 
** &quot;Aporops&quot; 
** &quot;Grammistes&quot; 
** &quot;Grammistops&quot; 
** &quot;Jeboehlkia&quot; 
** &quot;Pogonoperca&quot; 
** &quot;Pseudogramma&quot; 
** &quot;Rypticus&quot; 
** &quot;Suttonia&quot; 

== Reproduction ==
Groupers are mostly monandric protogynous hermaphrodites, i.e., they mature only as females and can change sex after sexual maturity. Some species of groupers grow about a kilogram per year and are generally adolescents until they reach three kilograms when they become female. The largest males often control harems containing three to 15 females. Groupers often pair spawn, which enables large males to competitively exclude smaller males from reproducing. As such, if a small female grouper were to change sex before it could control a harem as a male, its fitness would decrease. If no male is available, the largest female that can increase fitness by changing sex will do so.

However, some groupers are gonochoristic. Gonochorism, or a reproductive strategy with two distinct sexes, has evolved independently in groupers at least five times. The evolution of gonochorism is linked to group spawning high amounts of habitat cover. Both group spawning and habitat cover increase the likelihood of a smaller male reproducing in the presence of large males. The fitness of male groupers in environments where competitive exclusion of smaller males is impossible is correlated with sperm production and thus testicle size. Gonochoristic groupers have larger testes than protogynous groupers (10% of body mass compared to 1% of body mass), indicating the evolution of gonochorism increased male grouper fitness in environments where large males were unable to competitively exclude small males from reproducing.

== Parasites ==
Like other fish, groupers harbor parasites, including digeneans, nematodes, cestodes, monogeneans, isopods, and copepods. A study conducted in New Caledonia has shown that coral reef-associated groupers have about ten species of parasites per fish species. Species of &quot;Pseudorhabdosynochus&quot;, monogeneans of the family Diplectanidae are typical of and especially numerous on groupers.

== Modern use ==
Many groupers are important food fish; some are now farmed. Unlike most other fish species, which are chilled or frozen, groupers are usually sold alive in markets. Many species are popular game fish for sea-angling. Some species are small enough to be kept in aquaria, though even the small species are inclined to grow rapidly. 

Groupers are commonly reported as a source of ciguatera fish poisoning. DNA barcoding of grouper species might help control Ciguatera fish poisoning since fish are easily identified, even from meal remnants, with molecular tools.

== Size ==
Malaysian newspaper &quot;The Star&quot; reported a grouper being caught off the waters near Pulau Sembilan in the Strait of Malacca in January 2008. Shenzhen News in China reported that a grouper swallowed a whitetip reef shark at the Fuzhou Sea World aquarium.

In September 2010, a Costa Rican newspaper reported a grouper in Cieneguita, Limón. The weight of the fish was , and it was lured using one kilogram of bait. In November 2013, a grouper had been caught and sold to a hotel in Dongyuan, China.
In August 2014, off Bonita Springs in Florida (USA), a big grouper took in one gulp a 4-foot shark that an angler had caught.

== See also ==
* Dusky grouper

== References ==
== External links ==

* The Ultimate Guide to Fly Fishing for Grouper
*ARKive – images and movies of the humpback grouper &quot;(Chromileptes altivelis)&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5559352" start="0" end="8" title="Grouper" label="Groupers"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="13" end="17" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="40" end="46" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559352" start="64" end="77" title="Grouper" label="Epinephelinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="85" end="91" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q207941" start="92" end="102" title="Serranidae" label="Serranidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q127595" start="117" end="128" title="Perciformes" label="Perciformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224135" start="211" end="221" title="Bass (fish)" label="sea basses"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="304" end="310" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q284420" start="318" end="329" title="Epinephelus" label="Epinephelus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286852" start="346" end="358" title="Mycteroperca" label="Mycteroperca"/>
<link wikidata="Q135409" start="625" end="637" title="Plectropomus" label="Plectropomus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882388" start="862" end="871" title="yellow-edged lyretail" label="lyretails"/>
<link wikidata="Q204861" start="1277" end="1284" title="teleost" label="teleost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920243" start="1458" end="1482" title="Atlantic goliath grouper" label="Atlantic goliath grouper"/>
<link wikidata="Q174778" start="1784" end="1791" title="pharynx" label="pharynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="1813" end="1817" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q40152" start="1819" end="1826" title="octopus" label="octopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="1834" end="1844" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q445478" start="1870" end="1887" title="Ambush predator" label="ambush their prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q847747" start="1995" end="2008" title="giant grouper" label="giant grouper"/>
<link wikidata="Q132390" start="2083" end="2087" title="gill" label="gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112294" start="2294" end="2313" title="roving coralgrouper" label="roving coralgrouper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515957" start="2380" end="2391" title="giant moray" label="giant moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q824672" start="2465" end="2477" title="red lionfish" label="red lionfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="2556" end="2566" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q847747" start="2778" end="2796" title="Queensland grouper" label="Queensland grouper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929094" start="2965" end="2971" title="hapuka" label="hapuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="2988" end="3002" title="Māori language" label="Māori language"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="3013" end="3024" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="3083" end="3088" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q211436" start="3103" end="3110" title="Visayas" label="Visayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q124873" start="3115" end="3123" title="Mindanao" label="Mindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="3204" end="3214" title="Indonesian language" label="Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="3219" end="3224" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="3233" end="3244" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092437" start="3273" end="3280" title="hamour" label="hammour"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="3327" end="3339" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3393" end="3397" title=":es:Epinephelinae" label="mero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542103" start="3510" end="3520" title="grammistin" label="grammistin"/>
<link wikidata="Q757293" start="3972" end="3991" title="Fishes of the World" label="Fishes of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q227936" start="4034" end="4040" title="Tribe (biology)" label="tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559352" start="4101" end="4114" title="Epinephelinae" label="Epinephelinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q227936" start="4127" end="4132" title="Tribe (biology)" label="Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045570" start="4133" end="4142" title="Niphonini" label="Niphonini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045570" start="4153" end="4159" title="Niphon (Serranidae)" label="Niphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055764" start="4174" end="4186" title="Epinephelini" label="Epinephelini"/>
<link wikidata="Q338003" start="4197" end="4209" title="Aethaloperca" label="Aethaloperca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605830" start="4226" end="4235" title="Alphestes" label="Alphestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306626" start="4252" end="4262" title="Anyperodon" label="Anyperodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q135533" start="4279" end="4292" title="Cephalopholis" label="Cephalopholis"/>
<link wikidata="Q664133" start="4309" end="4321" title="Chromileptes" label="Chromileptes"/>
<link wikidata="Q975436" start="4338" end="4350" title="Dermatolepis" label="Dermatolepis"/>
<link wikidata="Q284420" start="4367" end="4378" title="Epinephelus" label="Epinephelus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075469" start="4395" end="4408" title="Gonioplectrus" label="Gonioplectrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774087" start="4425" end="4432" title="Gracila" label="Gracila"/>
<link wikidata="Q10530428" start="4449" end="4460" title="Hyporthodus" label="Hyporthodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286852" start="4477" end="4489" title="Mycteroperca" label="Mycteroperca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059248" start="4506" end="4516" title="Paranthias" label="Paranthias"/>
<link wikidata="Q135409" start="4533" end="4545" title="Plectropomus" label="Plectropomus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053444" start="4562" end="4570" title="Saloptia" label="Saloptia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115622" start="4587" end="4592" title="Triso" label="Triso"/>
<link wikidata="Q137222" start="4609" end="4616" title="Variola (fish)" label="Variola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029017" start="4631" end="4644" title="Diploprionini" label="Diploprionini"/>
<link wikidata="Q691213" start="4655" end="4669" title="Aulacocephalus" label="Aulacocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341714" start="4686" end="4697" title="Belonoperca" label="Belonoperca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138243" start="4714" end="4724" title="Diploprion" label="Diploprion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242085" start="4740" end="4752" title="Liopropomini" label="Liopropomini"/>
<link wikidata="Q965332" start="4763" end="4775" title="Bathyanthias" label="Bathyanthias"/>
<link wikidata="Q659025" start="4792" end="4802" title="Liopropoma" label="Liopropoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808343" start="4819" end="4829" title="Rainfordia" label="Rainfordia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680213" start="4844" end="4855" title="Grammistini" label="Grammistini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310626" start="4866" end="4873" title="Aporops" label="Aporops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378206" start="4890" end="4900" title="Grammistes" label="Grammistes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541245" start="4917" end="4928" title="Grammistops" label="Grammistops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927342" start="4945" end="4955" title="Jeboehlkia" label="Jeboehlkia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829492" start="4972" end="4983" title="Pogonoperca" label="Pogonoperca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753782" start="5000" end="5012" title="Pseudogramma" label="Pseudogramma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970835" start="5029" end="5037" title="Rypticus" label="Rypticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101280" start="5054" end="5062" title="Suttonia" label="Suttonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209454" start="5120" end="5145" title="protogynous hermaphrodite" label="protogynous hermaphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110580" start="5800" end="5813" title="gonochoristic" label="gonochoristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384" start="6300" end="6308" title="testicle" label="testicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="6653" end="6661" title="parasite" label="parasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q132650" start="6674" end="6681" title="digenea" label="digenea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185" start="6685" end="6693" title="nematode" label="nematode"/>
<link wikidata="Q159715" start="6696" end="6703" title="cestode" label="cestode"/>
<link wikidata="Q575927" start="6706" end="6715" title="monogenea" label="monogenea"/>
<link wikidata="Q206338" start="6719" end="6725" title="isopod" label="isopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q189973" start="6732" end="6739" title="copepod" label="copepod"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="6763" end="6776" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="6792" end="6802" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q18580720" start="6894" end="6914" title="Pseudorhabdosynochus" label="Pseudorhabdosynochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017475" start="6948" end="6961" title="Diplectanidae" label="Diplectanidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q209894" start="7084" end="7090" title="fish farming" label="farmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555979" start="7222" end="7231" title="game fish" label="game fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512148" start="7236" end="7247" title="big-game fishing" label="sea-angling"/>
<link wikidata="Q45782" start="7293" end="7300" title="aquarium" label="aquaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181831" start="7410" end="7419" title="ciguatera" label="ciguatera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154642" start="7436" end="7449" title="DNA barcoding" label="DNA barcoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522843" start="7632" end="7640" title="The Star (Malaysia)" label="The Star"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7699" end="7713" title="Pulau Sembilan" label="Pulau Sembilan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="7721" end="7738" title="Strait of Malacca" label="Strait of Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q695344" start="7815" end="7834" title="whitetip reef shark" label="whitetip reef shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q642644" start="7947" end="7952" title="Limón province" label="Limón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241513" start="8095" end="8103" title="Dongyuan County" label="Dongyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q892635" start="8132" end="8146" title="Bonita Springs" label="Bonita Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="8150" end="8157" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q192167" start="8256" end="8269" title="Dusky grouper" label="Dusky grouper"/>
</links>
</doc>
