<doc id="405856" wikidata="Q333080" url="?curid=405856" title="Selwyn Lloyd">
<text>John Selwyn Brooke Selwyn-Lloyd, Baron Selwyn-Lloyd (28 July 1904 – 17 May 1978), was a British politician who served as Speaker of the House of Commons from 1971 to 1976, having previously held various ministerial positions under Prime Ministers Winston Churchill, Anthony Eden, Harold Macmillan and Alec Douglas-Home between 1954 and 1964. A member of the Conservative Party, Lloyd served as Foreign Secretary from 1955 to 1960 and as Chancellor of the Exchequer from 1960 to 1962. He was the Member of Parliament (MP) for Wirral from 1945 to 1976.

Born and raised in Cheshire, Lloyd was an active Liberal as a young man in the 1920s. In the following decade, he practised as a barrister and served on Hoylake Urban District Council, by which time he had become a Conservative Party sympathiser. During the Second World War he rose to be Deputy Chief of Staff of Second Army, playing an important role in planning sea transport to the Normandy beachhead and reaching the acting rank of brigadier.

Elected to Parliament in 1945 as a Conservative, he held ministerial office from 1951, eventually rising to be Foreign Secretary under Prime Minister Anthony Eden from April 1955. His tenure coincided with the Suez Crisis, for which he at first attempted to negotiate a peaceful settlement, before reluctantly assisting with Eden&#x27;s wish to negotiate collusion with France and Israel as a prelude to military action. He continued as Foreign Secretary under the premiership of Harold Macmillan until July 1960, when he was moved to the job of Chancellor of the Exchequer. In this job he set up the NEDC, but became an increasingly unpopular figure because of the contractionary measures which he felt compelled to take, including the &quot;Pay Pause&quot; of July 1961, culminating in the sensational Liberal victory at the Orpington by-election in March 1962. In July 1962 Macmillan dismissed him from the Cabinet, making him the highest-profile casualty in the reshuffle known as the &quot;Night of the Long Knives&quot;.

He returned to office under Prime Minister Alec Douglas-Home as Leader of the House of Commons (1963–64), and was elected Speaker of the House of Commons from 1971 until his retirement in 1976.

==Early life==
Lloyd was born on 28 July 1904 at Red Bank in West Kirby, Cheshire. His father, John Wesley Lloyd (1865–1954), was a dental surgeon and Methodist lay preacher of Welsh descent; his mother, Mary Rachel Warhurst (1872–1959), was distantly related to Field Marshal Sir John French. He had three sisters.

Lloyd was educated at the Leas School and as a boy was particularly interested in military history, to which he later attributed his successful military career. In 1918, aged thirteen, he won a scholarship to Fettes College. As a junior boy there, where he was nicknamed &quot;Jezebel&quot;, after his initials JSBL, he became embroiled in a homosexual scandal, but was deemed to be the innocent party, escaping punishment, while three older boys were expelled.

==Cambridge==
In October 1923, he went up, as a scholar, to Magdalene College, Cambridge, where A. C. Benson was Master. There he was a friend of the future Archbishop Michael Ramsey. Lloyd acquired the nickname &quot;Peter&quot; at this time. Lloyd played rugby and was disappointed not to get a Blue.

In October 1924, his sister Eileen sailed to India to marry and work as a doctor. She died there the following January, aged 25.

Lloyd was an active Liberal as a young man, and in March 1925 he entertained H. H. Asquith at Magdalene after a Liberal Party meeting at the Cambridge Guildhall. He became President of the Cambridge University Liberal Club. Lloyd was also an active debater in the Cambridge Union Society, where his sparring-partners included Rab Butler, Patrick Devlin, Hugh Foot, Alan King-Hamilton and Geoffrey Lloyd. Lloyd lost his scholarship in June 1925, after obtaining a Second in Classics. He then switched to study History, in which he also obtained a Second.

During the General Strike of May 1926, Lloyd, who earlier that year had begun eating dinners at Gray&#x27;s Inn with a view to qualifying as a barrister, volunteered as a Special Constable. He later became critical of the Conservative Government&#x27;s clampdown on trade unions, e.g. the Trades Disputes Act of 1927. The university authorities encouraged students who had worked for the government so close to their exams to extend their studies for an extra year, which meant that Lloyd was able to spend a very rare fifth year as an undergraduate. Lloyd George had become Liberal leader and was injecting money and ideas into the Liberal Party, and was keen to attract promising young candidates. Selwyn Lloyd was a frequent speaker for the Liberal Party from 1926 onwards. In 1926 he toyed, not entirely seriously, with the idea of joining the Labour Party.

In Michaelmas Term 1926, Lloyd and Devlin (then president of the Cambridge Union) persuaded Walter Citrine to join Lloyd in opposing the motion that &quot;The power of trade unions has increased, is increasing and ought to be diminished&quot; (an echo of Dunning&#x27;s famous motion on the power of the Crown in 1780). They had invited the miners&#x27; leader A. J. Cook, to the consternation of the town authorities, but in the event he was unable to attend. Lloyd won the debate by 378 votes to 237 and was elected secretary for Lent Term 1927, putting him on track to be vice-president for Easter (summer) Term 1927, then president in Michaelmas 1927. He took office as president in June 1927. At his retiring debate in November 1927, Samuel Hoare and Rab Butler (then being selected as Tory candidate for Saffron Walden) spoke.

Lloyd finally graduated with a third-class in Part II of the Law Tripos in June 1928.

==Early career==
===Bar and local government===
Lloyd was a Liberal Parliamentary candidate at Macclesfield in the 1929 general election, coming third. After this he concentrated on his legal career. He was called to the bar in 1930. As a barrister, he was an opponent of capital punishment and was not always deferential to the bench: when a judge suggested holding a special sitting on the morning of Good Friday, he withdrew his suggestion after Lloyd pointed out that the last judge to do so had been Pontius Pilate.

Like many young politicians, in 1930–1931 Lloyd was sympathetic to Oswald Mosley&#x27;s New Party and was disappointed that it made so little headway. He declined to stand again for Macclesfield as a Liberal in 1931 over tariffs, and thought the rump National Liberal Party not worth joining. Lloyd voted Conservative for the first time at the 1931 election, although in that year he declined an invitation to join the Conservative Party candidates&#x27; list.

He joined Hoylake Urban District Council on 19 April 1932, as a councillor for Grange Ward. For three years he was chairman of the Estates Finance Committee, managing a budget in excess of £250,000, . At the age of 32 he became the youngest-ever chairman of the council. As chairman, in 1937, he was in charge of the local Coronation festivities, an event which he used to strengthen his links with the Territorial Army. He continued to serve on the council until 1940. In the early 1960s he was often mocked as &quot;Mr Hoylake UDC&quot;, implying him to be a small-town lawyer and local councillor who had been promoted onto the national stage above his abilities.

Lloyd considered himself a Conservative from the mid-1930s, but did not formally join the Conservative Party until he was selected as a Parliamentary candidate in 1945; he later wrote that he would have taken a more active role in Conservative politics had it not been for the war.

===Army service===

====Early Second World War service====
Lloyd became a reserve officer in 1937. In January 1939 he helped to raise a second line unit of the Royal Horse Artillery in the North-West. He was commissioned as a regular second lieutenant on 27 June 1939, and by August, with war seeming ever more likely, he was an acting captain and acting brigade major to Brigadier Cherry, CRA (Commander, Royal Artillery) of the 55th (West Lancashire) Infantry Division, a first-line Territorial Army formation. His obituary in &quot;The Times&quot; later stated wrongly that he had begun the war as a private.

On the outbreak of war Lloyd&#x27;s patron Brigadier Cherry sponsored him for the Staff College, Camberley. Many of those sent to the Staff College in 1939 were barristers, businessmen, school and university teachers thought likely to have an aptitude for staff work; Brian Horrocks was one of his instructors. Out of 110 officers in his intake, he was one of 22 passed as fit for immediate staff duty. He was appointed BMRA (Brigade major, Royal Artillery) to Brigadier Cherry, despite &quot;not knowing anything about guns etc&quot;. By the spring of 1940 the 55th Division was on duty defending the Suffolk Coast against possible invasion.

In February 1941, by now an acting major, he was a General Staff Officer Grade 2 (GSO2) at the headquarters of Major General Charles Allfrey&#x27;s 43rd (Wessex) Infantry Division, another first-line TA formation. The division was part of XII Corps, commanded by Lieutenant General Andrew Thorne, but he was replaced in April 1941 by Lieutenant General Bernard Montgomery, who soon noted Lloyd as a promising officer. Montgomery was promoted to command South-Eastern Command at Reigate (he soon renamed it &quot;South Eastern Army&quot;) and on 18 December 1941 Lloyd was posted to join him. By 1942, Lloyd was a lieutenant colonel (GSO1) on the staff. He wanted to see fighting, and was disappointed not to be posted to Egypt with Montgomery when the latter took command of the Eighth Army in August 1942. Montgomery told him that temporary officers lacked the aptitude of regulars for fighting, but were often better at staff work. On 6 November, Lloyd was promoted to temporary lieutenant-colonel (war-substantive major).

====Second Army====
In the spring of 1943 Lloyd was posted to the staff of the Second Army, whose General Officer Commanding (GOC) was Lieutenant General Sir Kenneth Anderson, which was then being formed for participation in Operation Overlord. He was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in June 1943. Between June and August 1943 Lloyd was sent on a fact-finding trip to Algiers, Malta and Sicily, to examine German beach defences and to learn lessons from the recent Operation Torch and Operation Husky landings, and on his return had to make presentations to senior officers. On 14 December 1943, he was promoted to acting colonel, and by February 1944 was Deputy Chief of Staff of the Second Army, now commanded by Lieutenant General Sir Miles Dempsey. He later recalled that the work preparing for the Normandy landings was more intense than at any other time in his life. By March 1944 Montgomery, who, after commanding the Eighth Army in North Africa, Sicily and Italy, had returned to England in late December 1943 to take command of the 21st Army Group, knew him well enough to call him &quot;Selwyn&quot;. Lloyd grew particularly close to Dempsey, with whom he crossed over to Normandy on D-Day and who remained a personal friend for the rest for their lives.

Lloyd&#x27;s particular responsibility was preparation of the &quot;loading tables&quot;, allocating priceless shipping space to men, weapons, equipment and other supplies. As a result of Lloyd&#x27;s work, the deployment to the bridgehead went almost entirely according to plan. The only unforeseen problem was an outbreak of malaria caused by an infestation of mosquitoes around a flooded ditch in I Corps sector, for which Lloyd had to arrange the transfer of malaria vaccines from Burma.

In October 1944, although not yet a member of the Conservative Party, he accepted an invitation to apply for the Conservative candidacy for the Wirral, where the sitting MP was retiring. He was selected in preference to a VC bearing rival, who refused to pledge to live in the constituency; when asked Lloyd replied that he had &quot;never lived anywhere else&quot;. In January 1945, he was unanimously adopted as the Conservative candidate whilst home on leave.

Lloyd was promoted to Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in February 1945 and was promoted to acting brigadier on 8 March 1945. He was twice mentioned in despatches, the second of these being amongst a list of soldiers honoured for the 1944-5 campaign.

Lloyd was with the Allied forces which liberated Bergen-Belsen concentration camp. He seldom spoke about Belsen, but later recalled seeing inmates living like animals, defecating in public view, and that there was no smell from the 10,000 corpses lying unburied (another 17,000 died after liberation) as they were emaciated, with no flesh to putrefy. Lloyd was also sent by Dempsey to identify Heinrich Himmler&#x27;s body after his suicide. Lloyd ended his active army service with the honorary rank of colonel. Apart from his CBE, he was also decorated with the U.S. Legion of Merit in the degree of Commander.

====Post-war====
On 18 July 1947, Lloyd was appointed the honorary Colonel of 349 37th (Tyne Electrical Engineers) Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment, Royal Artillery. He was awarded the Territorial Decoration (TD) in August 1951. He retired from the Territorial Army Reserve on 2 March 1955 with the honorary rank of colonel.

===Early Parliamentary career===
Lloyd was elected to the House of Commons to represent Wirral in the 1945 general election by a majority of 16,625.

His maiden speech on 12 February 1946 was not on an anodyne constituency matter as is usual for new MPs, but instead on the Trades Disputes and Trades Unions Bill, reflecting his interest in the subject going back to his student days. Lloyd&#x27;s entry to Parliament gave him a headstart over other rising Conservative politicians who did not enter Parliament until 1950. He became a member of the &quot;Young Turks&quot; faction of the Conservative Party. He was able to stand out amongst the small contingent of Conservative MPs in the 1945–50 Parliament, and worked closely with both Anthony Eden and Rab Butler.

Lloyd continued his legal career, taking silk in 1947. He was the Recorder of Wigan between 1948 and 1951. In 1946-7 his annual earnings including his salary as an MP were £4,485, of which the bar made up £3,231 (around £150,000 and £110,000 at 2016 prices). In 1947-8 his earnings dropped to £3,140, of which £1,888 was at the bar (around £100,000 and £60,000 at 2016 prices). Thereafter his earnings continued to decline, as he was busy in Parliament and with his recordership, and he did not have time to carve out a new niche for himself as a King&#x27;s Counsel either on the North-West Circuit or in London.

Lloyd expressed his opposition to capital punishment during the passage of the Criminal Justice Act 1948, and built relationships with other abolitionist MPs including Sidney Silverman. Lloyd gave a dissenting voice on the Beveridge Broadcasting Committee, and was sometimes known as &quot;The Father of Commercial Television&quot; after his minority report of 1949 helped inspire the setting-up of ITV in 1955. Lloyd believed that competition would help to raise standards, although in later life he came to be disappointed at how much of television time was given over to entertainment.

==Ministerial offices==

===Minister of State for Foreign Affairs===
When the Conservatives returned to power under Churchill in 1951, Lloyd served under Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden as Minister of State for Foreign Affairs from 1951 to 1954. Lloyd later claimed (his biographer D.R. Thorpe writes that the story had clearly grown in the telling) that on his appointment he protested: &#x27;But, sir, there must be some mistake. I do not speak any foreign language. Except in war, I have never visited any foreign country. I do not like foreigners. I have never spoken in any foreign-affairs debate in the House. I have never listened to one.&#x27; &#x27;Young man, these all seem to me to be positive advantages,&#x27; growled Churchill in return. Churchill initially thought Selwyn Lloyd &quot;that most dangerous of men, the clever fool&quot; after he signed an agreement at the UN after misunderstanding his brief, when the order was to be noncommittal. Churchill later revised his opinion upwards.
In June 1952 Lloyd and Field Marshal Lord Alexander (Minister of Defence) visited Korea, first calling on Alexander&#x27;s old subordinate General Mark Clark, now UN Supreme Commander in the Region, then the South Korean leader Syngman Rhee, then the Korean battlefield. They returned via Ottawa (where Alexander had recently been Governor-General) and Washington, where they visited President Truman.

While attending the United Nations and related international diplomatic gatherings, became closer to India&#x27;s Krishna Menon, ultimately being accused by Dean Acheson of being a card-carrying member of the &quot;Menon cabal&quot; alongside Canada&#x27;s Lester Pearson and Australia&#x27;s R. C. Casey.

In Egypt, which had been a British client state since 1883, the pro-British King Farouk was overthrown in July 1952. Lloyd helped to negotiate the treaty (12 February 1953) which gave Sudan (in theory jointly administered by Britain and Egypt) self-government for three years as a stepping-stone to a decision on full independence. Lloyd visited Cairo in March 1953, where he met the new Egyptian leader General Neguib, and his right-hand man Colonel Nasser. In February 1954 Lloyd met Neguib again in Khartoum. His visit to the Sudan saw riots in Khartoum and worries that he might meet the same fate as General Gordon in 1885. He wrote of the Sudan: &quot;It is futile to try and outstay one&#x27;s welcome&quot;. Later in February 1954 Neguib was ousted by Nasser. The Suez Base Agreement, whereby Britain agreed to withdraw her troops from Egypt by 1956, was on 27 July 1954. Lloyd would have preferred a slower withdrawal.

Lloyd attended over a hundred Cabinet meetings, many of them whilst covering for Eden during his serious illness in 1953.

===Minister of Supply and Minister of Defence===
Lloyd was promoted to Minister of Supply, responsible for supplying the Armed Forces, in October 1954.

Lloyd entered the Cabinet as Minister of Defence on Eden&#x27;s accession to the premiership in April 1955. Just after the 1955 election, along with Rab Butler, Lord Salisbury and Harold Macmillan, he was put on the committee to advise Eden about the upcoming summit, the first since the war.

He was Minister of Defence, a very prestigious post in Conservative eyes, for less than a year and the dates of his tenure meant that he was not in office during the annual defence white paper and defence debate; however, he made important innovations in long-term expenditure planning. The Chiefs of Staff of the three services still had direct right of access to the Prime Minister. Lloyd began a gradual process of consolidation of control of the Armed Forces which would finally come to fruition a decade or so later, with the three service ministries consolidated into a single Ministry of Defence and the three service chiefs reporting to a powerful Chief of Defence Staff.

===Foreign Secretary under Eden===
====Appointment and early months====
Lloyd was promoted to Foreign Secretary in December 1955, in place of Harold Macmillan who was seen as too strong and independent a figure for Eden&#x27;s tastes. In his early days at the Foreign Office Lloyd was known to irritate his subordinates with bad puns, such as &quot;Good for Nutting&quot; and &quot;You&#x27;re a deb, Sir Gladwyn Jebb&quot;. The Foreign Office mandarin Sir Evelyn Shuckburgh complained in his diary (9 December 1955) that they were to &quot;be landed with that bloody Selwyn Lloyd&quot;.

Eden and Lloyd visited Washington for talks with his American counterpart, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, on 30 January 1956, and wondered how long Britain could continue to cooperate with Colonel Nasser. Dulles was only willing to offer Britain &quot;moral&quot; support against Nasser. On 31 January Lloyd and Dulles had a private meeting about SEATO. Dulles took the lead in private, but would not lead or support Britain in public, although the two men got on well when Dulles realised that Lloyd could not be browbeaten.

On 21 March Lloyd obtained Cabinet approval for a policy of hostility to Nasser, who was seen as a threat to British interests in the Middle East, and of building new British alliances with Jordan and Iraq. Part of this policy was the withdrawal of American and British financial aid for the Aswan High Dam, which would trigger Nasser&#x27;s nationalisation of the Canal.

====Suez crisis ====

The Suez Crisis began in earnest on 26 July 1956 when Nasser nationalised the Suez Canal. Eden straightaway included Lloyd on the Egypt Committee, which met for the first time on 27 July, and would meet 42 times between then and 9 November. Lloyd preferred negotiations to force and, with his experience of military logistics, was sceptical as to whether a successful invasion could even be mounted. British reservists were called up on 2 August, and on that day Macmillan raised with the Egypt Committee the prospect of Israel attacking Egypt. On 10 August Lloyd had a difficult meeting with the directors of the Suez Canal Company. On 14 August Eden and Lloyd met with the Labour leaders, who were opposed to the use of force without UN authorisation. On 14 August Lloyd broadcast about the crisis to the public, and his talk was published in &quot;The Listener&quot;.

The first London Conference of nations with an interest in using the canal met from 16 to 23 August, and Lloyd was elected chairman. Lloyd helped to negotiate a formula for a new convention, in which Egypt would receive increased canal revenues and would have a place on the board of a new operating company. On 5 September Lloyd flew to Paris for talks with Spaak about the NATO upcoming meeting. On 7 September Lloyd was warned by his Canadian counterpart Lester Pearson that neither the US nor Canada would allow the UN to be used as a cover for war. On 9 September Nasser rejected the proposals offered by the 18 powers at the London Conference. On 10 September the Cabinet agreed the Egypt Committee Plan to deprive Nasser of Suez Canal revenues, provided the US agreed. At Cabinet on 11 September 1956 (where Lloyd reported that the Menzies Mission had failed) Eden gave what Lloyd later called the &quot;clearest possible indication of intention to use force&quot;.

Lloyd chaired the Second London Conference (19 – 21 September), working on Dulles&#x27; SCUA (Suez Canal Users&#x27; Association) proposal, a plan with which he was willing to cooperate. He wanted an immediate appeal to the UN to enforce rights of passage. On 24 September Lloyd was interviewed on &quot;Panorama&quot;, and stated that force would only be used as a last resort. On 26 September Lloyd informed the Cabinet about the failure of the Second London Conference. Eden and Lloyd flew to Paris for talks with Guy Mollet (French Prime Minister) and Christian Pineau (French Foreign Minister). At dinner, Harold Macmillan rang from the IMF meeting in New York. On the morning of 27 September there were further Anglo-French talks before Eden and Lloyd returned to London. The Third London Conference opened at 11am on 1 October, but Lloyd flew to New York at 8.30pm that day, and would be out of the country until 16 October. At the UN talks, Britain and France felt that Dulles was &quot;not&quot; ruling out the use of force as a last resort.

In New York Lloyd attended the United Nations Security Council meeting, where he met Christian Pineau and Dr Fawzi, the French and Egyptian foreign ministers. On 10 and 11 October Lloyd had various talks with Fawzi. By 13 October the Seven Points were agreed, which would become the &quot;Six Principles&quot;. Lloyd later wrote that agreement had been reached on the Six Principles, but not on &quot;how&quot; to implement them, although he conceded that Nasser had never accepted the principle that the Canal could not be under the control of any one country. Fawzi had been sympathetic to Lloyd&#x27;s Six Principles, but with Soviet encouragement Egypt soon opposed the idea that the Canal not be controlled by any one country. Some of the Cabinet, including Lord Home, thought that Lloyd&#x27;s &quot;Six Principles&quot; might have avoided armed conflict, while Lloyd himself thought that he had negotiated &quot;a good-natured preamble to a missing treaty&quot;.

With Lloyd still in New York, Albert Gazier (acting French Foreign Minister while Pineau was in New York) and General Challe (Deputy Chief of French Air Staff) visited Eden for a secret meeting at Chequers on 14 October. Before the meeting Gladwyn Jebb, who was not invited, sent Eden a personal telegram to dissuade him, but the meeting merely impressed Eden with French resolve. Concerned that if war broke out in the Middle East Britain might have to take the side of her ally Jordan against France&#x27;s ally Israel, the French leaders outlined &quot;The Plan&quot; to Eden and Nutting: in the event of Israel attacking Egypt, Britain and France would intervene jointly to protect the canal, as Britain was entitled to do under the 1954 Treaty, and enforce international law. Eden recalled Lloyd from New York after Nutting had suggested that no decision could be taken without the Foreign Secretary.

Lloyd arrived late and jet-lagged for the 16 October meeting of the Egypt Committee in London; Anthony Nutting, junior Foreign Office minister, had stood in for him for the first part of the meeting. Nutting later claimed that on arrival Lloyd told him he&#x27;d &quot;clinched it&quot;, i.e. achieved a deal in which the Canal would stay nationalised, and that he had replied &quot;we must have nothing to do with this&quot; when Nutting tipped him off about the French plan. When the meeting resumed, Eden did not mention Lloyd&#x27;s negotiations in New York but instead praised the French plan, which Lloyd later wrote of as &quot;the plan for which I did not care&quot;. After an indeterminate discussion, Eden had lunch with Lloyd, and persuaded him that his New York agreement with Fawzi would never hold up and persuaded him to come to Paris to meet the French. At 4pm Eden and Lloyd flew to Paris. In Paris Eden and Lloyd had talks with their French counterparts Prime Minister Guy Mollet and Foreign Minister Christian Pineau.

Nutting later told the author Hugh Thomas that Lloyd had been &quot;brainwashed&quot; by Eden; Thomas toned this down in his 1967 book to &quot;swept along&quot;. On 16 October Sir Gladwyn Jebb met Eden and Lloyd at Paris airport. In the car he asked Eden if he&#x27;d received his telegram about the French sending Mystere jets to Israel. Over Jebb&#x27;s protests, the ambassadors were not invited to the Anglo-French talks. Lloyd continued to press his doubts, but to no avail. He urged international control over toll increases, with disputes referred to an independent body. The French insisted that Dulles was double-crossing the British and that SCUA was simply intended to play for time so that the British would not formally appeal to the Security Council. Mollet also said that the Egyptians had made so many threats to exterminate Israel that Israel could legitimately attack Egypt and plead self-defence. Eden was worried that the UK might have to come to Jordan&#x27;s defence in the event of a Middle Eastern War (Palestinian guerrillas were operating against Israel from the West Bank, which would be under Jordanian control until 1967).

Lloyd later described 18 October as &quot;an important day&quot;. Jebb had protested to Ivone Kirkpatrick at the exclusion of the ambassadors from the Anglo-French talks and had sent Lloyd a handwritten threat of resignation. Before the Cabinet meeting at 10 Downing Street that morning, Lloyd buttonholed Rab Butler outside the Cabinet Room. Butler later recorded (and Lloyd&#x27;s account is similar) that Lloyd had gripped him by the arm, telling him that he had been &quot;wafted&quot; to Paris and warning him confidentially that there might be a preemptive strike by Israel against Jordan, Egypt and Syria. Butler&#x27;s biographer Michael Jago thinks that Lloyd&#x27;s behaviour was evidence that he was out of his depth. Lloyd reported to the Cabinet on the Security Council vote to keep the Canal insulated from the politics of any one country, despite Soviet veto of the second part of the resolution. There was to be another meeting in Geneva, with Egyptian participation. The Cabinet approved, but then moved on to Eden&#x27;s disingenuous warnings that negotiations might be overtaken by hostilities between Israel and Egypt. Eden informed ministers that a plan (Operation &quot;Musketeer Revise&quot;) was being drawn up to retake the Canal by force. &quot;Musketeer Revise&quot; was practicable only until the end of October, although in the event a slightly amended version was used for military operations in November. Afterwards Eden circulated a minute that he&#x27;d told the French that every effort must be made to stop Israel attacking Jordan, but that he had told Israel that Britain would &quot;not&quot; come to Egypt&#x27;s aid in the event of an Israeli attack. Sir Humphrey Trevelyan, British Ambassador to Egypt, telegraphed to warn that Nasser was not willing to compromise on Egyptian control of the Canal. This marked the apparent failure of Lloyd&#x27;s attempt to negotiate a peaceful settlement and was, in the view of his biographer, the moment which he should perhaps have used an excuse to resign.

Lloyd went to Chequers on Sunday 21 October (having been summoned by Eden on the phone the previous day). The press were told that Lloyd had a cold so that he could go to Paris in secret to meet the Israelis. Lloyd, accompanied by his Private Secretary Donald Logan, then went to Sevres, just outside Paris, on 22 October. Eden insisted that British action &quot;not&quot; be in response to Israeli demands. Logan drove Lloyd to the airport in his own car to maintain secrecy, although he was not told the destination until they were underway. David Carlton argued that this tied Lloyd into the conspiracy by getting him to meet Ben Gurion. Lloyd met Pineau, who said that the Israelis would attack Egypt but only with Anglo-French air support. Lloyd then, at 7pm, met the Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion, who like Pineau was disappointed by his obvious lack of enthusiasm for military action. Lloyd warned that the UN, the Commonwealth and Scandinavian countries were opposed to the use of force. Israel demanded that British Canberra bombers bomb Egypt from their bases in Cyprus; Lloyd merely promised to seek the Cabinet&#x27;s opinion on the matter. Lloyd demanded that British airstrikes be delayed for 48 hours after the outbreak of hostilities, so that collusion would not be too obvious, but in the end compromised on 36 hours. Lloyd was still worried about an Israeli attack on Jordan. Dayan later recalled that &quot;[Lloyd]&#x27;s manner could not have been more antagonistic. His whole demeanour expressed distaste – for the place, the company, and the topic … His opening remarks suggested the tactics of a customer bargaining with extortionate merchants.&quot; Lloyd left towards midnight.
The next morning, 23 October, Lloyd reported to a group of senior ministers (not the whole Egypt Committee), then to the Cabinet. Eden told the Cabinet that there had been secret talks with Israel in Paris. Lloyd told the Cabinet that he was still hoping for a peaceful settlement, but that the French were not interested in a peaceful settlement and that Nasser would retain his interest in the Middle East. Eden told that Cabinet that, based on what Lloyd said, and contrary to Eden&#x27;s comments of 18 October, an Israeli attack on Egypt now seemed less likely. Lloyd was in the House of Commons on 24 October, so was not present when the secret Protocol of Sèvres was signed. He refused to return to Sevres as he could hardly pretend to be ill again after having just appeared in public. In his instructions to Patrick Dean, who went in his place, Lloyd stressed that Britain had not &quot;asked&quot; Israel to intervene. Later that morning Eden informed the Cabinet about the consultation with Pineau the previous evening. The objective of any Anglo-French action would be to control the Canal and secondly to topple Nasser.

The Cabinet further considered the use of force on 24 October. After Cabinet, Lloyd recorded his UN Day Broadcast for the BBC, for transmission that evening. He then had a tense meeting with Ivone Kirkpatrick and Gladwyn Jebb, who was still angry at being kept in the dark. At 11pm Lloyd went to 10 Downing Street to hear Dean&#x27;s report on the second Sevres meeting. Mountbatten (First Sea Lord) also attended. The French had produced three copies of a typed document, the Protocol of Sèvres. Eden later tried in vain to retrieve the French and Israeli copies to destroy the evidence of collusion. On the morning of 25 October Eden told the Cabinet that Israel would attack Egypt after all, but did not tell them about the secret Sevres Protocol. The Plan for an Anglo-French invasion was revealed to the Cabinet.

Israel attacked Egypt in the Sinai on 29 October; Eden was informed that night and informed the Cabinet the next day. At Cabinet on the morning of 30 October Lloyd reported that the US was ready to move a motion at the UN condemning Israel as an aggressor, and proposed a delay in order to bring the Americans on board. This suggestion was not adopted. At 4.30pm on 30 October Eden announced the Anglo-French ultimatum to the House of Commons. The House became so rowdy that it had to be suspended for the first time since 1924. Britain and France began bombing Egypt on 31 October, despite hostility from the Opposition, the US and most of the Commonwealth. The US Sixth Fleet harassed the Anglo-French taskforce as it made its way to the Eastern Mediterranean. William Yates, a Conservative MP, commented in the House of Commons that he had heard talk of a secret conspiracy; Lloyd stated in the Commons that &quot;It is quite wrong to state that Israel was incited to this action by Her Majesty&#x27;s Government. There was no prior agreement between us about it.&quot; This passage is underlined in Lloyd&#x27;s personal copy of Hansard (now in the library at Fettes School). He regarded it as a lawyerishly careful statement although it has been portrayed by some writers as an outright lie to the House of Commons.

Nasser proclaimed martial law and mobilisation in Egypt. In an emergency session of the UN, Dulles&#x27; motion for a ceasefire was vetoed by Britain. Nutting resigned because of the breach of the 1954 Treaty, the Tripartite Treaty and the UN Charter. Lloyd resisted the temptation to join him and continued to ask questions about military logistics at Cabinet. The US sidestepped the Anglo-French veto on the UN Security Council by obtaining an overwhelming vote for a ceasefire in the General Assembly. The Cabinet agreed that even in the event of a ceasefire between Egypt and Israel, Anglo-French forces should still seize the Canal in a policing role until UN forces were able to take up the baton. At the 4.30pm Cabinet, records for which were closed until 2007, Lloyd was concerned about the effect on Britain&#x27;s Arab client states of being seen to be too closely linked to Israel. Eden spoke about the conditions which would be necessary for the UN to take over the peacekeeping job at the canal. At the 9.30pm Cabinet Lloyd reported on the problem of arms exports to Israel, and reported that he had been asked by BP whether or not to divert a cargo of aviation fuel currently intended for Israel. At Cabinet on Friday 2 November Lloyd suggested that in the event of oil sanctions Britain might have to occupy Kuwait and Qatar. On Saturday 3 November Lloyd was shouted down in the House of Commons, in a debate so rowdy that the Speaker had to suspend the session.

By the weekend of 3–4 November, fighting between Israel and Egypt had largely ceased. Lloyd called Sunday 4 November &quot;one of the most dramatic days in the whole of the Suez Crisis&quot;. He spent the whole day at 10 Downing Street, first in private talks with Eden, during which he advised that to call off the operation at this late stage would lead to &quot;dreadful consequences&quot;. Afterwards Lloyd rang Gladwyn Jebb in Paris and asked him to arrange a further meeting with Pineau, Bourges-Manoury and Jebb himself. There was then a meeting of the Egypt Committee at 12.30pm. Lloyd reported that the US had not pushed for a vote on her UN General Assembly resolution, but that resolutions calling for a UN peacekeeping force had been proposed by Canada and by a group of African and Asian countries. Lloyd advised that Britain should respond to the Canadian but not to the Afro-Asian ultimatum, but warned of the threat of oil sanctions. There was a second meeting of the Egypt Committee at 3.30pm, at which Lloyd passed on the warning of the British Ambassador to Iraq that Britain had to condemn Israeli aggression in order to preserve her status in Arab eyes. He also raised the question of what would happen if both Israel and Egypt agreed to a ceasefire before British and French troops had gone in. There was then a meeting of the full Cabinet at 6.30pm, at which the decision to invade Egypt was taken. Butler, Kilmuir and Heathcoat Amory wanted to postpone the paratroop landings for 48 hours, while Salisbury, Buchan-Hepburn and Monckton (the latter of whom hinted that he might resign) wanted to postpone indefinitely. Lloyd was among the majority of the 18 present who wanted to push ahead with the invasion. Throughout the meetings that day the Trafalgar Square demonstration had been audible outside.
British and French paratroops landed at dawn on 5 November. Lloyd was given a rough ride in the House of Commons when he announced the Soviet crushing of the Hungarian uprising. The news of Nutting&#x27;s resignation came through at 6.30pm while Lloyd was attending a sherry party at 10 Downing Street ahead of the State Opening of Parliament. However, Gladwyn Jebb sent a message that Douglas Dillon, US Ambassador in Paris, had no issue with the landings and thought Dulles&#x27; policy &quot;lamentable&quot;. On the morning of 6 November Macmillan, who had been told by Humphrey (US Treasury Secretary) that there would be no more financial assistance until there was a ceasefire, saw Lloyd before Cabinet and told him that Britain had to stop in view of the drain of foreign exchange reserves. Macmillan had also been lobbying other ministers. Cabinet met at 9.45am; Lloyd was one of three ministers (along with Antony Head and James Stuart) to support Eden in his wish to carry on fighting. The Cabinet agreed that there was no choice but to agree a ceasefire. Royal Marines had been landing by sea and helicopter on 6 November, and British and French forces had Port Said and had advanced 23 miles to El Cap by the time a ceasefire was announced at 5pm.

On 7 November the United Nations General Assembly passed a resolution calling for withdrawal of British, French and Israeli forces. Lloyd&#x27;s initial position was that Britain was not prepared to withdraw her forces until they had been replaced by a peacekeeping force acceptable to Britain. The Americans met this idea with extreme hostility, insisting on total British withdrawal. Lloyd flew to New York on Sunday 11 November and stayed until the evening of Monday 27 November. Whilst Lloyd was away, on 13 November Macmillan, who was busily ingratiating himself with the Americans, told Aldrich (US Ambassador to London) that Selwyn Lloyd was &quot;too young and inexperienced&quot; for his position. On 20 November 1956 the question of collusion was raised in Cabinet, with Eden and Lloyd both absent; it was agreed to stick to Lloyd&#x27;s formula that Britain had not &quot;incited&quot; the Israeli attack. In Washington Lloyd managed to speak to Eisenhower&#x27;s adviser Walter Bedell Smith, and addressed the UN General Assembly on Friday 23 November, the day Eden left for Jamaica. In a speech which was essentially an acceptance of an Argentinian motion, Lloyd offered to hand over to a UN peacekeeping force and claimed that Britain had prevented a small war growing into a larger one. Despite a hostile attack by Krishna Menon, the resolution was carried.

Lloyd addressed a Cabinet meeting (chaired by Butler, with Eden away in Jamaica) at 4.30pm on Wednesday 28 November. He said that the UN would continue to debate the matter and that although Britain could hold on for another three or four weeks there was nothing to be gained in antagonising world opinion any further. He offered his resignation (not mentioned in the minutes) but his colleagues refused to accept it, and was later deeply hurt when Lord Hinchingbrooke, a member of the Suez group (a group of Conservative backbenchers who had opposed Britain&#x27;s original agreement to withdraw from Egypt in 1954), said that he should have resigned. Lloyd&#x27;s impending divorce was given as the ostensible reason for his offer of resignation. Throughout November and into early December Lloyd was strongly attacked in the House of Commons both by Labour as a scapegoat for the original invasion and by Conservative backbenchers for the enforced withdrawal. On 3 December Lloyd made a statement announcing British withdrawal to a very hostile House, followed by an angry scene, then Butler made a similar announcement, leading many Conservative MPs feeling that Butler should have made the statement himself. The House of Commons held a No Confidence debate on Suez on 5 December. Aneurin Bevan commented that Lloyd gave the impression of never having warned Israel &quot;not&quot; to attack Egypt. Bevan congratulated Lloyd on &quot;having survived so far&quot;. The government won the confidence vote on 6 December by 327 votes to 260. In early December Lloyd again offered his resignation to the Cabinet, citing his impending divorce as the excuse.

===Foreign Secretary under Macmillan===

====Reappointment====
When Eden resigned in January 1957, Lord Salisbury interviewed the Cabinet one by one, asking each whether he preferred Butler (believed to be the favourite by most outsiders) or Macmillan (the overwhelming choice of the Cabinet) for the succession. Salisbury listed Lloyd as the only minister to abstain, shocking Lord Chancellor Kilmuir, who acted as official witness to the &quot;soundings&quot;. Lloyd later confirmed to Butler in September 1962 that he had expressed no preference.

Macmillan retained Lloyd as Foreign Secretary, declaring that &quot;one head on a charger is enough&quot; (i.e. that Eden&#x27;s resignation was enough of a sacrifice to appease the government&#x27;s critics). Another reason was Macmillan&#x27;s wish to keep Butler out of the Foreign Office. Lloyd was paradoxically a beneficiary of Suez, as Eden might well have reshuffled him away from the Foreign Office. Macmillan delegated a lot more than Eden, and allowed Lloyd to come into his own. Lloyd was allowed to use Chequers, normally the Prime Minister&#x27;s country residence, although Macmillan did not formally renounce the use of the place as by law he would not have been allowed to claim it back in the space of that Parliament (Macmillan had a country home of his own, Birch Grove, and so had no need of the place). Although Lloyd was not particularly interested in the job, Macmillan tried to encourage him to think of himself as a potential prime minister, as a rival to Butler. Lloyd&#x27;s reappointment was met, in the words of a contemporary observer, with a &quot;long, cold arch of raised eyebrows&quot;, whilst Aneurin Bevan likened Lloyd to a monkey to Macmillan&#x27;s organgrinder.

====1957====
As Foreign Secretary, Lloyd had to accompany the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh on their State Visit to Portugal in February 1957.

Lloyd accompanied Macmillan to Bermuda (21-4 March), where Anglo-American relations were repaired, although private discussions were more frank than the press releases might have suggested. Over dinner Lloyd launched a strong attack on Nasser; Dulles replied that the USA would not defend Nasser&#x27;s regime but were not actively going to try to overthrow him. Whilst in Bermuda Macmillan, after consultation with Lloyd, agreed to release Archbishop Makarios, who had been exiled to the Seychelles in March 1956, after being advised that this might calm EOKA down. This prompted the resignation of Lord Salisbury from the Cabinet.

Lloyd&#x27;s divorce was in progress between March and June 1957. He tried to resign in May 1957, citing as the reason the unfavourable publicity which his divorce might attract. In May 1957 Randolph Churchill speculated that he might be about to be removed from office. At one point that year Beaverbrook&#x27;s &quot;Daily Express&quot; ran a picture of Lloyd with a lady on holiday in Spain, asking &quot;Who is the senorita?&quot; In fact the lady and her husband – who was doctored out of the photograph – were long-standing friends of Lloyd and were sharing a holiday with him.

In October 1957 he likened himself to a &quot;human Sputnik&quot; because of the amount of flying he was doing.

====1958====
Lloyd again offered his resignation after a poor performance in the two-day Foreign Affairs debate in February 1958, but Macmillan refused to accept it as he had recently had his entire Treasury team (Peter Thorneycroft, Nigel Birch and Enoch Powell) resign.

In May 1958 Lebanese President Camille Chamoun appealed for help against the United Arab Republic (Egypt and Syria, both ruled by Nasser). Lloyd coordinated with Dulles and US troops were sent to Lebanon in accordance with the &quot;Eisenhower Doctrine&quot;. Two British paratroop battalions were sent to Jordan after a request by King Hussein.

Lloyd wanted to go to the Anglo-American Washington talks in June 1958 but Dulles vetoed this, claiming that if he went it would be necessary to invite the French as well. On Monday 14 July 1958 Macmillan was at Birch Grove, and recorded that Lloyd &quot;almost shouted down the line&quot; about the revolution in Iraq, warning that Jordan and Syria might also fall to Nasser. Macmillan sent him to Washington to sound out Dulles. By August 1958 Lloyd publicly supported the US over Formosa whilst privately urging restraint. He also had private talks with Churchill that summer to seek his advice.

Lloyd had been very sceptical that Macmillan would be able to negotiate a Greek-Turkish agreement over Cyprus. In December 1958 at a NATO Ministerial Council Lloyd negotiated the concept of &quot;sovereign bases&quot; in Cyprus, where the Governor was his old Cambridge contemporary Hugh Foot, with the Greek and Turkish foreign ministers.

Macmillan wrote of Lloyd in his diary (31 December 1958) that &quot;he really is an extraordinary (sic) capable and efficient man – as well as a wonderfully agreeable man to work with. He feels a great sense of gratitude and loyalty to me personally, for I have been able (by moral support both in private and in public) to help him through a bad time&quot; [i.e. his divorce]. D. R. Thorpe describes Lloyd as &quot;Sancho Panza to Macmillan&#x27;s mercurial Quixote&quot;.

====1959====
In November 1958 Khrushchev had demanded that the western powers pull out of West Berlin within six months. This was a prime reason for Macmillan and Lloyd&#x27;s trip to Moscow early in 1959, besides the desire to grandstand ahead of the impending general election. Lloyd accompanied Macmillan to Moscow in February–March 1959. Much of the planning for the summit had had to take place at the Middlesex Hospital, where Lloyd was having his tonsils out. Lloyd also attended planning meetings at Chequers in late February.

At Moscow Ambassador Sir Patrick Reilly wrote that he was &quot;quite first class and they make an admirable team&quot; and &quot;the ideal second&quot;, keeping his boss supplied with facts and figures and willingly undertaking tedious detailed negotiations. Macmillan thanked Lloyd for having come up with the idea of a diplomatic cold in response to Khrushchev&#x27;s diplomatic toothache. Afterwards Lloyd reported on the summit to Charles de Gaulle and Konrad Adenauer. Lloyd also accompanied Macmillan to Ottawa, where they met John Diefenbaker and Washington, DC in March 1959, where they met Eisenhower and visited the dying Dulles.

Lloyd was the leader at the Foreign Ministers&#x27; conference in Geneva in June 1959 (with Christian Herter, Maurice Couve de Murville and Andrei Gromyko) and kept it going, allowing Eisenhower to issue his invitation to Khrushchev to visit Washington in August. Whilst the conference had been in progress a false story had appeared in &quot;The Times&quot;, fanned by Randolph Churchill and to Macmillan&#x27;s apparent annoyance, that Lloyd was to be moved from the Foreign Office. The conference ended on 11 August.

During the victorious 1959 election campaign Lloyd made a national broadcast on 19 September.

====1959–60====
Lloyd kept a detailed diary between 1 November 1959 and his sacking from the Exchequer in July 1962. Many of the press still saw Lloyd as an insignificant Foreign Secretary, although this was no longer the opinion of many of those who knew him. Lloyd also accompanied Macmillan to a meeting in Paris in December 1959. He approved of Macmillan&#x27;s &quot;Winds of Change&quot; speech in February 1960, which predicted the end of rule by Europeans in Africa.
In February 1960 Lloyd urged Macmillan, having rebuilt bridges with the Americans, to build bridges with France by accepting de Gaulle&#x27;s invitation to visit him for a longer stay, a turn of events which Macmillan would use to try to persuade de Gaulle to support British membership of the EEC.

In March 1960 Lloyd noted that his one unfulfilled ambition was to be Lord Chancellor, but he did not consider himself a distinguished enough lawyer for the post – he was later to change his mind when Lord Dilhorne was appointed. In mid-May 1960 he accompanied Macmillan to the Four Power Summit in Paris, which broke up in disarray after the U2 had been shot down whilst flying over the USSR. Some see the failure of this summit as the moment when Macmillan&#x27;s premiership went into decline.

Agreement was finally reached over Cyprus on 1 July 1960, just before the end of Lloyd&#x27;s time at the Foreign Office.

===Chancellor of the Exchequer===
====Appointment and economic backdrop====
In July 1960 Macmillan moved Lloyd to the job of Chancellor of the Exchequer. He was Macmillan&#x27;s third chancellor and asked for, and was given, an assurance that he would remain in place until the next General Election. Lloyd was permitted to remain at Chequers and was also allowed to keep 1, Carlton Gardens, normally the Foreign Secretary&#x27;s London residence (the chancellor&#x27;s usual London residence of 11 Downing Street was not available, as Downing Street was being reconstructed at the time, requiring Macmillan to live at Admiralty House for most of his premiership).

Macmillan, with bitter memories of his time as MP for Stockton in the 1930s, wanted to be free of what he saw as the economic orthodoxy of the Treasury and Bank of England, and to generate economic growth, a view which he shared with many economic thinkers at the time. He also wanted growth to increase exports, so as to improve the balance of payments without deflation or devaluing the currency. He declined to appoint David Eccles, Iain Macleod or Reginald Maudling, any of whom might have been better qualified to be chancellor, as he wanted a loyal &quot;staff officer&quot;. Lloyd, however, warned Macmillan that he wanted to be an orthodox chancellor.

The economy had been booming as a result of the expansionary measures taken in the run-up to the 1959 General Election, with consequent risk to inflation. Furthermore, the balance of payments was moving into deficit, with Britain&#x27;s share of world manufacturing falling dramatically as continental Europe, now grouped into the EEC, recovered from the effects of the war. In 1960 Britain suffered the worst balance of payments crisis since 1950, masked a little by the inflow of foreign money into London. The Treasury was already somewhat discredited. Bank Rate had already been raised to 6% by Lloyd&#x27;s predecessor Heathcote Amory in June. Soon after his appointment, Lloyd asked Treasury economic advisor Robert Hall (29 July 1960) &quot;how soon we were going bust&quot;. On 16 March 1961 Lloyd wrote to Macmillan complaining that No 10 was briefing the press than Macmillan was in real charge of economic policy, and indeed policy in other areas. Also the German Deutschmark was revalued by 5% in March 1961, leading to worries that the pound sterling might crash in the summer of 1961.

====1961: Budget and July measures====
Lloyd arranged government funding for the National Theatre on the South Bank. His first Budget (17 April 1961) began by saying that during the 1960-1 fiscal year there had been a deficit of £394m, £76m more than Amory had forecast in the 1960 budget. Lloyd was concerned at rising inflation and public spending. The Budget was intended to be deflationary, and to reduce the government borrowing requirement to £69m for 1961-2 (in the event it was £211m), but increased taxes by less than the Treasury wanted. The budget introduced &quot;the Regulator&quot;, which allowed the Chancellor of the day to vary the rate of most indirect taxes by up to 10% of the existing rate (&quot;not&quot; ten percentage points) without the need for prior Parliamentary approval, although Parliament had to approve within three weeks. Another measure, effectively a second Regulator (brought in over the objections of John Boyd-Carpenter, Minister of Pensions and National Insurance) allowed the Chancellor to increase Employers&#x27; NICs by up to 4 shillings per week. Lloyd also raised the threshold for surtax on earned income, which had been unchanged since Lloyd George had introduced it in 1909, from £2,000 per annum to £5,000. This measure had actually been Macmillan&#x27;s idea.

By the summer a run on the pound was threatened. Continental banks, who had been buying pounds, now announced that they had enough of a stockpile (£300m) and the Treasury demanded cuts of £300m in demand and a cancellation of the raising of the surtax threshold – the latter was a politically impossible demand. Some ministers suggested floating the pound, an option which Macmillan discussed in his diary on 23 July, although he rejected it as it would have irritated the Americans and would have had to be accompanied by deflation. In fact the balance of payments was already moving back into surplus, but based on out-of-date Treasury figures (&quot;last year&#x27;s Bradshaw&quot; as Macmillan once famously quipped) Lloyd announced a package of measures on 25 July: bank rate was raised to 7%, public spending was cut, and $1.5bn was borrowed from the IMF, along with conditions, although not as strict as the IMF would have liked. Macmillan wrote to ministers on 28 July ordering public spending restraint. Lloyd refused to use his power to increase Employers&#x27; NICs in the July measures, saying it was &quot;a dead rat&quot;. Cairncross, who had succeeded Robert Hall as the government&#x27;s economic advisor, believed that Lloyd might have given some kind of private promise not to actually use it.

Lloyd also announced a Pay Pause on 25 July, until 31 March 1962. Labour moved into a 5-point lead in the opinion polls. The Pay Pause (effectively an incomes policy) made Lloyd a focus of public unpopularity. It mainly affected public sector employees such as nurses and teachers as many private companies had contractual arrangements for automatic pay rises or arbitration.

====1961: NEDC====
Lloyd had announced that there would be a new economic planning body as part of his 25 July measures. On 8 August Lloyd suggested inviting Industry and Trade Union leaders. There was a stormy meeting of the Cabinet on 21 September, at which only John Hare and Lord Hailsham supported him, but covert support for the proposal from Macmillan swung other ministers behind the scheme. On 23 September, after a period of consultation, formal invitations were issued to the TUC, the Federation of British Industry, the British Employers&#x27; Confederation, the National Union of Manufacturers and the Association of British Chambers of Commerce. He told them of his plans to set up the National Economic Development Council (NEDC) in imitation of the French &quot;Commissariat du Plan&quot;, chaired by the Chancellor, and containing a few other ministers, as well as other appointed members who would include leading trade unionists and business leaders, as well perhaps as other economic thinkers. He also proposed setting up a National Economic Development Organisation (NEDO), whose chair would be drawn from outside the civil service, to advise NEDC. Lloyd did not get on with trade unionists. The TUC, which disliked the Pay Pause, agreed to cooperate only on condition that they were not expected to preach wage restraint. Thorpe writes that Lloyd had Macmillan&#x27;s backing against a sceptical Cabinet, but Williams writes that Lloyd was lukewarm about the NEDC, which was Macmillan&#x27;s project.

Henry Brooke was appointed to the new position of Chief Secretary to the Treasury in October 1961 so Lloyd did not have to spend all his time arguing with Cabinet colleagues about their planned level of expenditure. The NEDC was unlikely to reap any benefits by the time of the next general election, nor to help in reining pay in. There was a big pay increase in the electricity industry in November 1961, because of the strength of the unions and the weakness of the minister Richard Wood. The Pay Pause had brought short term benefits but anomalies had made it unpopular, something it shared with later incomes policies. There was even a threat to strike by the 120 workers who made cricket balls.

====1962: second budget and Orpington====
On 29 January 1962 John Hare, Minister of Labour, confirmed that the Pay Pause would end on 31 March. Lloyd presented a White Paper on Incomes Policies, urging an official &quot;Guiding Light&quot; of 2.5%, a rate which the government expected pay to be increased by companies and tribunals. The White Paper also condemned automatic wage increases because of cost of living increases and comparability between different types of work. In presenting his White Paper on Incomes Policy Lloyd was seen as &quot;stubborn&quot; &quot;wooden&quot; &quot;inarticulate&quot; and &quot;unimaginative&quot; (Harold Evans &quot;Downing Street Diary&quot;). He also performed poorly in putting across government policy on television.

On 14 February 1962, over whisky at 10 Downing Street, Macmillan persuaded the railway union bosses to call off their planned strike, an achievement trumpeted by the press as &quot;Mac&#x27;s Triumph&quot;. The NEDC first met on 7 March 1962. The Liberals did very well at a by-election at Conservative-held Blackpool North on 13 March 1962, and took Orpington off the Conservatives at another by-election on 14 March, a sensational victory in a seat adjacent to Macmillan&#x27;s own seat at Bromley. Party Chairman Iain Macleod&#x27;s report blamed the Pay Pause for the defeat at Orpington.

In April 1962, on the eve of Lloyd&#x27;s second and final budget, he faced a Cabinet rebellion over Schedule A tax (a tax on the theoretical rental value of a house, paid by the homeowner). The Conference Party Conference at Scarborough in October 1960 had voted for the abolition of Schedule A and the Cabinet now insisted on it. Lloyd promised to end Schedule A the following year, at a cost of £50m to the Exchequer. In his 9 April 1962 Budget Lloyd announced an agreed growth target of 4% per annum (he would have preferred 5%). This was in line with current rates of growth in continental Europe, but the Treasury were sceptical that the UK could achieve it, rightly as it turned out. The question of the growth in public spending was left unresolved. In the 1962 Budget Lloyd also increased profits tax by 2.5% and brought in a speculative gains tax, although he stopped short of introducing a capital gains tax, which he thought would discourage saving and enterprise. The budget, on 9 April 1962, reduced purchase tax on cars, TVs and washing machines but increased it on sweets, soft drinks and ice cream, leading to claims that Lloyd was &quot;taxing children&#x27;s pocket money.&quot; The tax on confectionery was expected to raise £30m that year and £50m in a full year. Rumours were already circulating that Lloyd&#x27;s days in the job were numbered: the journalist William Rees-Mogg wrote that it was &quot;Mr Lloyd&#x27;s last Budget&quot;.

Macmillan appears to have agreed that the 1962 budget could not be a popular one, but the Cabinet revolt, which Lloyd lacked the eloquence to counter, was an embarrassment to Macmillan as well, which added to Macmillan&#x27;s irritation with Lloyd. Lloyd also argued that confidence had been restored – a run on the pound had been averted, £225m of the $1.5bn (£535m) borrowed the previous year had been repaid to the IMF, and the balance of payments was improving.

Many industrialists also felt that Britain&#x27;s economic problems, especially her balance of payments deficit, should be solved by expansion, not by contraction, a view shared by Labour Leader Hugh Gaitskell, and by Roy Jenkins, who in the budget debate quoted the &quot;Financial Times&quot; to the effect that the budget had done nothing for exports or for investment.

====1962: Macmillan&#x27;s wish for an incomes policy====
Macmillan, disingenuously, as he had already decided to sack him, wrote to Lloyd on 11 April congratulating him and asking him to begin preparing an expansionary budget for 1963 to help the Conservatives win re-election. During 1962 Lloyd&#x27;s credibility and that of the Treasury was further damaged when it became clear that the Treasury had overestimated the strength of the economy, meaning that the July 1961 measures had been excessively severe. Bank Rate was cut to 4.5% on 26 April, and £70m of Special Deposits were released on 31 May.

Macmillan was pushing for a full-on incomes policy, led by the NEDC, in the hope that his growth policy would not lead to inflation. He addressed the Cabinet about economic policy on 28 May 1962, stressing that he wanted Britain to achieve low unemployment, low inflation, high growth and a strong pound, and that this could best be achieved by an incomes policy to boost productivity. Lloyd was sceptical. The Liberals did very well at another by-election at West Derbyshire on 6 June.

On 19 June Macmillan presented his ideas on incomes policy to three or four colleagues at Chequers. Macmillan urged a &quot;guiding light&quot; (a target for wage increases as had been agreed at the beginning of the year), a Standing Commission on Pay (but with power only to give advice, not to coerce wage settlements), abolition of Resale Price Maintenance (in the end this would be done by Edward Heath in 1964) and creation of a Consumers Council; Lloyd was sceptical but the other ministers seemed in favour.

Macmillan had lunch with Butler on 21 June to discuss the impending reshuffle. Macleod, Lord Home, Martin Redmayne (Chief Whip) and Sir Norman Brook (Cabinet Secretary and Joint Permanent Secretary to the Treasury) were all urging Macmillan to change his chancellor, in Brook&#x27;s case for reasons of civil service management rather than politics. Macmillan also suspected that Lloyd, Butler and/or Eccles might be plotting against him. 22 June saw ministerial discussion of Macmillan&#x27;s incomes paper; 6 July saw another ministerial discussion.

====Dismissal====
Macmillan would have liked to appoint Lloyd Home Secretary, as he was moving Rab Butler from this post, but Lloyd had made clear when Macmillan became prime minister in January 1957 that as an opponent of capital punishment it would not be proper for him to accept that position (because a person sentenced to hang was entitled to appeal to the Monarch for mercy, which in practice meant that the Home Secretary, to whom the task was delegated, had the final say on whether any execution should proceed).

Macmillan planned to break the news of his impending dismissal to Lloyd, but Butler leaked it to the press first – the news appeared in the &quot;Daily Mail&quot; on the morning of 12 July. 12 July was also the day of the Leicester North East by-election, and Cabinet were due to discuss incomes policy. At the by election the Conservative share of the vote dropped from 48.1% in 1959 to 24.2%. That evening Lloyd was sacked from the government and returned to the backbenches, after a 45-minute meeting which Macmillan described as &quot;a terribly difficult and emotional scene&quot;. Next morning, 13 July, Macmillan carried out the rest of his changes after hearing, from Lord Home, that Lloyd had tried in vain to get John Hare, Minister of Labour, to resign in protest. He sacked a third of his Cabinet in a brutal reshuffle which came to be known as the &quot;Night of the Long Knives&quot;. Macmillan later claimed that he had intended to postpone the full reshuffle until the autumn.

Unless one counts Butler&#x27;s removal in December 1955, Lloyd was the only Chancellor of the postwar era to be sacked outright until Norman Lamont in May 1993. He was replaced by Reginald Maudling, then seen as a potential future Leader of the Conservative Party, and whose remit was to reflate the economy going into the next General Election due by the end of 1964. Lloyd privately thought Macmillan too obsessed with unemployment, risking higher inflation. Lloyd was seen to have been badly treated. He was cheered to the echo when he reentered the Commons Chamber after his sacking, whereas Macmillan entered in silence from his own party and jeers from the Opposition, and was subjected to public criticism (then almost unprecedented) from his predecessor Lord Avon. Nigel Birch, who had resigned along with Chancellor Thorneycroft in 1958, wrote to the newspapers on 14 July 1962: &quot;For the second time the Prime Minister has got rid of a Chancellor of the Exchequer who tried to get expenditure under control. Once is more than enough.&quot;

Having refused the offer of a peerage from Macmillan, on 20 July 1962 Lloyd was appointed a Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour. His name had been added to the list at the last minute; he would have preferred to decline, thinking it an honour more suited to alumni of the Arts, but was persuaded by friends to accept. In his unpublished memoirs he would later write that he had tried to avoid &quot;a bitter resentment against Macmillan&quot; for the sake of his peace of mind.

Lloyd left his black Labrador, &quot;Sambo&quot;, for whom there was no room in his London flat, behind at Chequers, where he had been living since his divorce. At a meeting of the new Cabinet later that summer, Sambo came sniffing amongst the ministers searching for his master. Macmillan ignored the animal, which was likened by one observer to Banquo&#x27;s ghost.

===Out of office===
Lloyd did not regard his political career as over, and declined the chairmanship of Martins Bank and other City posts. Macmillan, shaken by the hostile reaction to his moves, arranged a meeting with Lloyd on 1 August. He told him that sacking him had been a mistake and that he was looking for a way to bring him back. Lloyd attributed this to Macmillan&#x27;s ruthlessness and survival instinct.

Lloyd became a popular figure with Conservative Party members after travelling the country in the bitter winter of 1962–3 (the worst since 1946-7) to write his report on party organisation. Ferdinand Mount writes that northerners recognised Selwyn as &quot;one of their own, someone who had gone to London but had not become in the least stuck up and who never pretended to be someone he wasn&#x27;t&quot;. Macmillan later compared Lloyd to Augustine Birrell for his links to the nonconformist vote of North West England. At Huddersfield he had to give a non-committal reply when Andrew Alexander, then City Editor of &quot;The Yorkshire Post&quot;, attacked Macmillan&#x27;s profligate economic policy. His report, urging the proper provision of paid agents in marginal seats, was published in June 1963 so was overshadowed by the Profumo scandal. Lloyd asked John Profumo whether he had had an affair with Christine Keeler, and passed on his denial to Macmillan, adding his own opinion that he did not see how &quot;Jack&quot; could have had the time.

After Macmillan&#x27;s impending resignation was announced in October 1963, Lloyd was one of those who pressed Alec Douglas-Home to stand for the party leadership. He was a pivotal figure in whipping up support for Home as a potential successor at the Blackpool Conference. He was also an influential figure with the Chief Whip Martin Redmayne. On a walk on the seafront at Blackpool (11 October) Lloyd and Redmayne were accosted by a socialist old age pensioner who told them that Home would make the best prime minister. He helped to dissuade Hailsham, who was initially a candidate for the leadership, from openly opposing Home. &quot;Home was just about the only front-line politician [Lloyd] spoke of without a tinge of contempt.&quot; Lloyd visited Macmillan in hospital on Wednesday 16 October, and advised against appointing Rab Butler, who, he said, was disliked in the constituency associations.

===Return to the front bench===
Lloyd was called back to the government in 1963 by Alec Douglas-Home. He refused the Home Office. He also refused the Chairmanship of the Party, as he felt he had done what he could and did not want to spend &quot;another winter traipsing around the country&quot;. In the end he was appointed Leader of the House of Commons, a job which had already been promised to John Boyd-Carpenter. He was also appointed Lord Privy Seal. On returning to office he likened himself to a man who had won a lawsuit for wrongful dismissal. As Leader of the House he was popular and well-respected across parties, paving the way for his Speakership nearly a decade later. However, Lloyd&#x27;s policies as chancellor were blamed to some extent for Conservative defeat in the general election of 1964.

Lloyd helped to discourage Thorneycroft from standing for the Conservative leadership in 1965. He supported Maudling, who was defeated by Edward Heath. As Shadow Commonwealth Secretary under Heath, Lloyd visited Australia and New Zealand in late 1965. He also visited Rhodesia, whose white minority regime had recently declared unilateral independence from the UK, in February 1966. There he met 300 people, including 60 Africans, and impressed on Prime Minister Ian Smith that white minority rule could not last. On his return to the UK (in time for the general election campaign in March), Lloyd was attacked both by the left for having seemed to condone the Smith regime and from the right for not having supported it. He returned to the backbenches in 1966, at his own request.

==Speaker of the House of Commons==
In 1969 Lloyd was captain of the Royal Liverpool Golf Club in its centenary year.

Lloyd continued to serve on many committees and to campaign for the Conservative Party in North-West England. In the 1970 General Election organisational reforms made in response to Lloyd&#x27;s report of 1963 bore fruit, especially in the North-West, and specifically the provision of more paid agents. The reforms were thought to have resulted in the gain of 10 seats, contributing to Heath&#x27;s narrow victory. Lloyd was sounded out for, but declined, the Washington Embassy.

In 1971, after the Conservatives had returned to power, Lloyd became Speaker. He was elected Speaker by 294 votes to 55, the opposition coming from those who thought the election was a stitch-up between the leadership of the two main parties. Mindful that the long hours required as Speaker had broken the health of several of his predecessors, he increased the number of deputy speakers to three to ease the burden. His preference was to let as many members as possible be heard, rather than err on the side of firmness, and he also practised what Thorpe describes as &quot;selective deafness&quot; rather than punish every unparliamentary outburst. During tedious debates he would keep alert by constructing mental anagrams of the names of those speaking.

In the Parliamentary debate on Bloody Sunday, Lloyd refused to allow the MP for Mid-Ulster Bernadette Devlin to give her account or to ask questions of the Secretary of State, despite Devlin having been an eyewitness to events.

While he was Speaker, he became Deputy High Steward of Cambridge University in 1971, and was appointed to be a Deputy Lieutenant of Merseyside in 1974. In a break with convention, both the Labour and Liberal Parties contested his seat in both the February 1974 and October 1974 general elections, but he retained it. He retired as Speaker on 3 February 1976, when he was raised to the peerage and appointed to be the Steward of the Manor of Northstead.

==Peerage and later life==
On 8 March 1976 Lloyd was created a life peer as &quot;Baron Selwyn-Lloyd, of Wirral in the County of Merseyside&quot;, with a corresponding change of his surname to &quot;Selwyn-Lloyd&quot;. He sat in the House of Lords as a crossbencher.

He became an honorary fellow of his old college, Magdalene. In retirement he lived at Preston Crowmarsh, Oxfordshire. He did a great deal of charity work and was an active patron and generous host to the nearby Oxford University Conservative Association. He died at home of a brain tumour on 17 May 1978. His will was valued at £154,169 for probate (around £750,000 at 2016 prices).

==Books==
Lloyd remained on very friendly terms with Eden, and the two men cooperated throughout the 1960s and 1970s, over Eden&#x27;s memoirs and information which they gave, often anonymously, to historians about Suez. In public they maintained the pretence that there had been no collusion with Israel.

Lloyd cooperated in secret with Terence Robinson&#x27;s 1965 book on Suez and with Hugh Thomas&#x27; &quot;The Suez Affair&quot; (1967). Lloyd insisted to Hugh Thomas (1967) that Britain&#x27;s priority had always been a peaceful resolution, especially as Britain had only just pulled out of Egypt prior to Suez. Richard Crossman told Hugh Thomas that any attempt to impeach Lloyd would come to nothing because Lloyd was personally popular. Thomas, who was married to Gladwyn Jebb&#x27;s daughter, began with little sympathy for Eden and Lloyd and came to feel more so, especially as Lloyd told him that Suez was an issue that was simply not black and white.

Nutting (&quot;No End of a Lesson&quot;: 1967) and Harold Macmillan (whose relevant volume came out in 1971) were also publishing memoirs. Nutting accused Lloyd not of lying but of not telling the whole truth to the House of Commons. Lloyd insisted that this was perfectly legitimate and that this had been the view of Edward Grey and Ernest Bevin. Nutting&#x27;s book made Lloyd more determined to release his own memoirs in due course.

Lloyd wrote two books, &quot;Mr Speaker, sir&quot; (1976) and &quot;Suez 1956: a Personal View&quot; (1978). &quot;Suez 1956&quot; was the first British admission that the Sevres meeting had taken place (it had already been disclosed by Dayan and Pineau). Sir Donald Logan had to help finish the research as Lloyd by then was ill and could not concentrate for longer than ten or fifteen minutes at a time. He insisted that there had been no &quot;collusion&quot; as Britain had acted in good faith, and had not &quot;instigated&quot; the Israeli attack. Nigel Nicolson thought the book &quot;pathetic&quot;.

Lloyd did not live to complete his memoirs, which he had planned to call &quot;A Middle-Class Lawyer from Liverpool&quot; after a famous sneer of Harold Macmillan&#x27;s at his expense.

==Personal life==
Lloyd was respected for his cool and shrewd judgement. In public he was &quot;a stiff-necked, prickly, rather off-putting figure&quot; and even in private, after his dismissal from the Exchequer &quot;he had a ruffled, sad look as though bad news had only just reached him.&quot; However, he could sometimes be a much more gregarious and charismatic man in private than his reserved public image would have suggested.

Sir Ferdinand Mount, 3rd Bt., wrote that he possessed &quot;an exact appreciation of himself&quot;. &quot;He was proud of the things he was patronised for&quot; (being called &quot;the Little Attorney&quot; by Macmillan, or &quot;Mr Hoylake UDC&quot; by Bernard Levin). In politics, he was loyal to his (self-proclaimed) social superiors who often did not display loyalty in return.

Lloyd married his secretary Elizabeth Marshall, known as Bae, daughter of Roland Marshall of West Kirby, a family friend. Lloyd, who still lived with his parents when in the Wirral, and who had never had a serious girlfriend, was uneasy with women. Pamela Berry claimed that Selwyn had told her that he did not much care for sex. He wrote to his parents (November 1950) that &quot;the fatal announcement&quot; of their engagement had been made and that he felt like somebody shivering before getting into a cold bath. The marriage took place on the Wirral on 29 March 1951. Lloyd was 46 whilst Bae, a solicitor by profession, was born in 1928, making her 24 years his junior. At the reception somebody told him that he had a beautiful bride, and he responded that he had a beautiful wedding cake too. Lloyd&#x27;s younger sister Rachel, and Bae&#x27;s mother, both had misgivings about the marriage.

Selwyn and Bae had a daughter, Joanna, but divorced in 1957. At the time of Suez, Bae had been in a bad car crash with her lover, whom she later married. Lloyd was awarded custody of his daughter. He remained on friendly terms with his wife after his divorce, but seldom spoke of her to others, so much so that Ferdinand Mount records that he had no idea how her name was pronounced. Rab Butler quipped that Selwyn&#x27;s wife had left him &quot;because he got into bed with his sweater on&quot;.

After his divorce he was a lonely man and was sometimes known to try to persuade less than keen civil servants to accompany him to the cinema on Saturday afternoons when the week&#x27;s work was done.

===Homosexuality===
After his divorce, rumour sometimes circulated that Lloyd had homosexual inclinations. He entertained young servicemen at Chequers. Sir Ferdinand Mount writes that he was clearly attracted to the young Jonathan Aitken (his godson, who also worked for him in the early 1960s) but showed no interest in Diana Leishman, an attractive young woman who also worked for him. Michael Bloch writes that he was &quot;infatuated with&quot; Aitken who &quot;had some difficulty parrying his advances&quot; and with the young Peter Walker.

The actor Anthony Booth (in his 1989 book &quot;Stroll On&quot;) claimed that he had been accosted on the Mall by a clearly drunk Selwyn Lloyd, who made a pass at him under the pretext of asking for a light for his cigarette, a recognised courtship ritual among gay men at the time, inviting him back to Admiralty House (which was Lloyd&#x27;s official residence in 1963-4). Ferdinand Mount comments that such behaviour as alleged by Booth would have been out of character, but adds carefully that &quot;It is not clear whether [Lloyd] was ever gay in the active sense&quot;. Charles Williams writes that Lloyd &quot;had a dubious private life&quot; and that his &quot;private life was the subject of much gossip&quot; but offers no further details.

==Assessment==
Lloyd&#x27;s obituaries concentrated on his role in Suez. He would have preferred to have been remembered for his minority report on the Beveridge Report on broadcasting, and for setting up the NEDC.

Nigel Nicolson thought him &quot;weak and mendacious&quot; over Suez and recorded that Dag Hammarskjöld regarded him with contempt. However, he acquired a higher reputation as Macmillan&#x27;s Foreign Secretary. Sir William Hayter, who worked with Lloyd in Ankara during the Baghdad Pact conference in January 1958, commented on how he had a higher regard for Lloyd after the latter had ceased to be Eden&#x27;s assistant. &quot;I liked him and even respected him and ... he was really a very able Minister&quot;. Thorpe argues that he was not quite in the same league as Bevin or Eden but very much in the next rung. He was happy to listen to expert advice in a way that Eden would not have been.

Edmund Dell describes Lloyd as &quot;not up to the job&quot; of chancellor. He was &quot;a man with limited intellectual horizons ... fortunate to occupy two of the highest offices in the state. He was less fortunate in the timing [Foreign Secretary during Suez then Chancellor at a time of relative economic decline] … there is no evidence that he understood economic arguments … he was a man tied to his brief, lacking the conviction or understanding to make an independent contribution&quot;.

However, the real problems with the British economy at this time were, in Dell&#x27;s view, short-termism (longer time was needed to get results) and an overvalued exchange rate. The immediate cause for Lloyd&#x27;s dismissal was that Macmillan saw the Treasury as obstructive in drawing up a workable incomes policy, but Dell argues that the real problem was lack of political will, by Macmillan and other ministers, to enforce compulsory wage control. Macmillan wanted the &quot;open air cure&quot; (i.e. public moral pressure to discourage inflationary wage rises), so it is hard to see how Lloyd could have urged anything stronger. A National Incomes Commission (&quot;Nicky&quot;) was eventually set up 26 July 1962, after Lloyd&#x27;s dismissal. It was boycotted by the TUC, who claimed to have been inadequately consulted. It had no compulsory powers, but only powers to demand papers and interview people, and make criticisms of wage settlements which were deemed not in the national interest. Only three cases were ever referred to it.

Ferdinand Mount argues that Lloyd&#x27;s obituary in &quot;The Times&quot; was wrong to call him unimaginative and that Lloyd was in fact an innovative chancellor. Macmillan, obsessed with economic expansion, constantly belittled Lloyd in his memoirs. In Mount&#x27;s view, just as Suez was a watershed in foreign policy, so Macmillan&#x27;s sacking of Lloyd was a watershed in economic policy, opening the way to the inflation of the 1970s.

Lloyd would sometimes later claim that he might have become prime minister if he had resigned as Foreign Secretary over Suez or if he had made more fuss over his sacking as Chancellor. His biographer D.R. Thorpe dismisses this as &quot;wishful thinking&quot;, arguing that Lloyd was not even in the same league as Joseph Chamberlain or Rab Butler, politicians who were – in different ways – of first-rank importance despite not becoming prime minister. Rather, he was &quot;more Exeter rather than Balliol&quot;, i.e. a respectable middle-ranking Oxford college, rather than a prestigious one.

==Arms==
== Notes ==
== References ==
==Further reading==
* 
* covers his term as Chancellor.
* (Mount worked for Lloyd as a young man in the early 1960s)
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* 
*The Papers of Selwyn Lloyd held at Churchill Archives Centre</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333080" start="0" end="51" title="Selwyn Lloyd" label="John Selwyn Brooke Selwyn-Lloyd, Baron Selwyn-Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q464103" start="121" end="152" title="Speaker of the House of Commons (United Kingdom)" label="Speaker of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="231" end="246" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="247" end="264" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="266" end="278" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="280" end="296" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128976" start="301" end="318" title="Alec Douglas-Home" label="Alec Douglas-Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="358" end="376" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="394" end="411" title="Foreign Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="437" end="464" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="495" end="515" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026981" start="525" end="531" title="Wirral (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Wirral"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="571" end="579" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="601" end="608" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="681" end="690" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024069" start="705" end="727" title="Hoylake Urban District" label="Hoylake Urban District"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="767" end="785" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q209514" start="866" end="877" title="Second Army (United Kingdom)" label="Second Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="938" end="956" title="Normandy landings" label="Normandy beachhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967182" start="989" end="998" title="Brigadier (United Kingdom)" label="brigadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="1026" end="1030" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722280" start="1082" end="1086" title="1951 United Kingdom general election" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="1112" end="1129" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="1151" end="1163" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="1211" end="1222" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="1481" end="1497" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="1547" end="1574" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972373" start="1602" end="1606" title="National Economic Development Council" label="NEDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104014" start="1828" end="1849" title="1962 Orpington by-election" label="Orpington by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6356796" start="1996" end="2020" title="Night of the Long Knives (1962)" label="Night of the Long Knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q128976" start="2072" end="2089" title="Alec Douglas-Home" label="Alec Douglas-Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636053" start="2093" end="2123" title="Leader of the House of Commons" label="Leader of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096530" start="2143" end="2150" title="1971 Speaker of the British House of Commons election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q464103" start="2151" end="2182" title="Speaker of the House of Commons (United Kingdom)" label="Speaker of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q633627" start="2285" end="2295" title="West Kirby" label="West Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="2297" end="2305" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q335059" start="2487" end="2516" title="John French, 1st Earl of Ypres" label="Field Marshal Sir John French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445986" start="2750" end="2764" title="Fettes College" label="Fettes College"/>
<link wikidata="Q721295" start="2818" end="2825" title="Jezebel" label="Jezebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q776807" start="3064" end="3092" title="Magdalene College, Cambridge" label="Magdalene College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q708934" start="3100" end="3112" title="A. C. Benson" label="A. C. Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589451" start="3117" end="3123" title="List of Masters of Magdalene College, Cambridge" label="Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q336569" start="3172" end="3186" title="Michael Ramsey" label="Michael Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928811" start="3301" end="3305" title="Blue (university sport)" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="3515" end="3528" title="H. H. Asquith" label="H. H. Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025431" start="3579" end="3598" title="Cambridge Guildhall" label="Cambridge Guildhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025544" start="3627" end="3660" title="Cambridge University Liberal Club" label="Cambridge University Liberal Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025566" start="3702" end="3725" title="Cambridge Union Society" label="Cambridge Union Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q182035" start="3764" end="3774" title="Rab Butler" label="Rab Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033286" start="3776" end="3790" title="Patrick Devlin, Baron Devlin" label="Patrick Devlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634339" start="3792" end="3801" title="Hugh Foot" label="Hugh Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707059" start="3803" end="3821" title="Alan King-Hamilton" label="Alan King-Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101091" start="3826" end="3840" title="Geoffrey Lloyd, Baron Geoffrey-Lloyd" label="Geoffrey Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="3901" end="3907" title="British undergraduate degree classification" label="Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745155" start="4004" end="4018" title="1926 United Kingdom general strike" label="General Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q157412" start="4089" end="4104" title="Gray&amp;#x27;s Inn" label="Gray&amp;#x27;s Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="4136" end="4145" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831940" start="4282" end="4309" title="Trade Disputes and Trade Unions Act 1927" label="Trades Disputes Act of 1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="4544" end="4556" title="Lloyd George" label="Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057068" start="4948" end="4962" title="Walter Citrine" label="Walter Citrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230488" start="5111" end="5118" title="John Dunning, 1st Baron Ashburton" label="Dunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647908" start="5217" end="5227" title="A. J. Cook (trade unionist)" label="A. J. Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q333429" start="5595" end="5607" title="Samuel Hoare, 1st Viscount Templewood" label="Samuel Hoare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031869" start="5666" end="5680" title="Saffron Walden (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Saffron Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374550" start="5755" end="5761" title="Tripos" label="Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336829" start="5872" end="5884" title="Macclesfield (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Macclesfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q517639" start="5892" end="5913" title="1929 United Kingdom general election" label="1929 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q40317" start="6180" end="6191" title="Good Friday" label="Good Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131" start="6282" end="6296" title="Pontius Pilate" label="Pontius Pilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q332400" start="6366" end="6379" title="Oswald Mosley" label="Oswald Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4322431" start="6387" end="6396" title="New Party (UK)" label="New Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354368" start="6550" end="6572" title="National Liberal Party (UK, 1931)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q918375" start="6643" end="6656" title="1931 United Kingdom general election" label="1931 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024069" start="6771" end="6778" title="Hoylake" label="Hoylake"/>
<link wikidata="Q374614" start="6779" end="6801" title="Urban District Council" label="Urban District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172236" start="7084" end="7106" title="Coronation of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth" label="Coronation festivities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="7164" end="7180" title="Territorial Army (UK)" label="Territorial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445962" start="7872" end="7893" title="Royal Horse Artillery" label="Royal Horse Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7946" end="7963" title="Second lieutenant#United Kingdom and Commonwealth" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="8048" end="8055" title="Captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967158" start="8067" end="8080" title="brigade major" label="brigade major"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152161" start="8107" end="8133" title="Commander, Royal Artillery" label="Commander, Royal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748736" start="8142" end="8182" title="55th (West Lancashire) Infantry Division" label="55th (West Lancashire) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="8197" end="8213" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="Territorial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596549" start="8407" end="8431" title="Staff College, Camberley" label="Staff College, Camberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q434110" start="8593" end="8607" title="Brian Horrocks" label="Brian Horrocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896145" start="9004" end="9009" title="Major (United Kingdom)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813432" start="9020" end="9049" title="Staff (military)" label="General Staff Officer Grade 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q287709" start="9080" end="9093" title="Major-general (United Kingdom)" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083329" start="9094" end="9109" title="Charles Allfrey" label="Charles Allfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q233782" start="9117" end="9148" title="43rd (Wessex) Infantry Division" label="43rd (Wessex) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353530" start="9208" end="9217" title="XII Corps (United Kingdom)" label="XII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544390" start="9232" end="9250" title="Lieutenant-general (United Kingdom)" label="Lieutenant General"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438209" start="9251" end="9264" title="Andrew Thorne" label="Andrew Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="9322" end="9340" title="Bernard Montgomery" label="Bernard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713726" start="9422" end="9443" title="Aldershot Command" label="South-Eastern Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q4368198" start="9582" end="9600" title="Lieutenant colonel (United Kingdom)" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q270202" start="9748" end="9759" title="Eighth Army (United Kingdom)" label="Eighth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q209514" start="10074" end="10085" title="Second Army (United Kingdom)" label="Second Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496240" start="10093" end="10119" title="General Officer Commanding" label="General Officer Commanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q259769" start="10149" end="10169" title="Kenneth Anderson (British Army officer)" label="Sir Kenneth Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="10220" end="10238" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="10260" end="10302" title="Officer of the Order of the British Empire" label="Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="10490" end="10505" title="Operation Torch" label="Operation Torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="10510" end="10525" title="Operation Husky" label="Operation Husky"/>
<link wikidata="Q540593" start="10759" end="10776" title="Sir Miles Dempsey" label="Sir Miles Dempsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="10828" end="10845" title="Normandy landings" label="Normandy landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="10966" end="10978" title="North African campaign" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="10991" end="10996" title="Italian campaign (World War II)" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q214026" start="11067" end="11082" title="21st Army Group" label="21st Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q519313" start="11692" end="11699" title="I Corps (United Kingdom)" label="I Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="12007" end="12009" title="Victoria Cross" label="VC"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="12271" end="12315" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967182" start="12366" end="12375" title="Brigadier (United Kingdom)" label="brigadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332" start="12568" end="12600" title="Bergen-Belsen concentration camp" label="Bergen-Belsen concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="12913" end="12929" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q724443" start="13088" end="13103" title="Legion of Merit" label="Legion of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19654645" start="13215" end="13293" title="37th (Tyne Electrical Engineers) Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment, Royal Artillery" label="37th (Tyne Electrical Engineers) Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment, Royal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617783" start="13314" end="13336" title="Territorial Decoration" label="Territorial Decoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="13513" end="13529" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026981" start="13543" end="13549" title="Wirral (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Wirral"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="13557" end="13578" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="1945 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831942" start="13729" end="13767" title="Trade Disputes and Trade Unions Act 1946" label="Trades Disputes and Trades Unions Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q748667" start="13972" end="13976" title="1950 United Kingdom general election" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533366" start="14257" end="14268" title="taking silk" label="taking silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135808" start="14289" end="14297" title="Recorder (judge)" label="Recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q208143" start="14301" end="14306" title="Wigan" label="Wigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185558" start="14917" end="14942" title="Criminal Justice Act 1948" label="Criminal Justice Act 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q283472" start="15006" end="15022" title="Sidney Silverman" label="Sidney Silverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="15237" end="15240" title="ITV (TV Network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="15544" end="15553" title="Churchill" label="Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="15582" end="15599" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="15600" end="15612" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q39168" start="16470" end="16484" title="Harold Alexander, 1st Earl Alexander of Tunis" label="Lord Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q34339" start="16580" end="16590" title="Mark W. Clark" label="Mark Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q482864" start="16596" end="16616" title="United Nations Command" label="UN Supreme Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q171684" start="16661" end="16673" title="Syngman Rhee" label="Syngman Rhee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="16684" end="16702" title="Korean War" label="Korean battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="16764" end="16780" title="Governor-General of Canada" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="16827" end="16833" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="16856" end="16870" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595860" start="16950" end="16963" title="Krishna Menon" label="Krishna Menon"/>
<link wikidata="Q214758" start="16993" end="17005" title="Dean Acheson" label="Dean Acheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q125186479" start="17051" end="17062" title="Menon cabal" label="Menon cabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q128604" start="17093" end="17107" title="Lester Pearson" label="Lester Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q335310" start="17129" end="17141" title="Richard Casey, Baron Casey" label="R. C. Casey."/>
<link wikidata="Q213001" start="17219" end="17230" title="King Farouk" label="King Farouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780431" start="17235" end="17258" title="Egyptian revolution of 1952" label="overthrown in July 1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q104392" start="17547" end="17561" title="Mohammed Naguib" label="General Neguib"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="17586" end="17600" title="Colonel Nasser" label="Colonel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q310035" start="17748" end="17762" title="Charles George Gordon" label="General Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866404" start="18266" end="18284" title="Minister of Supply" label="Minister of Supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q918412" start="18471" end="18484" title="1955 United Kingdom general election" label="1955 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q182035" start="18497" end="18507" title="Rab Butler" label="Rab Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q333205" start="18509" end="18523" title="Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 5th Marquess of Salisbury" label="Lord Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962001" start="19298" end="19320" title="Chief of the Defence Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of Defence Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="19417" end="19434" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="19465" end="19481" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526018" start="19681" end="19688" title="Anthony Nutting" label="Nutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275" start="19728" end="19740" title="Gladwyn Jebb" label="Gladwyn Jebb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416445" start="19780" end="19797" title="Evelyn Shuckburgh" label="Evelyn Shuckburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="19987" end="20005" title="United States Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="20006" end="20024" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="20109" end="20123" title="Colonel Nasser" label="Colonel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q277252" start="20267" end="20272" title="SEATO" label="SEATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q38891" start="20739" end="20753" title="Aswan High Dam" label="Aswan High Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747542" start="21693" end="21705" title="The Listener (magazine)" label="The Listener"/>
<link wikidata="Q155691" start="22073" end="22078" title="Paul-Henri Spaak" label="Spaak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="22089" end="22093" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q541355" start="22147" end="22171" title="Secretary of State for External Affairs (Canada)" label="his Canadian counterpart"/>
<link wikidata="Q128604" start="22172" end="22186" title="Lester Pearson" label="Lester Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247810" start="22992" end="23000" title="Panorama (TV series)" label="Panorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q314006" start="23205" end="23215" title="Guy Mollet" label="Guy Mollet"/>
<link wikidata="Q661825" start="23244" end="23260" title="Christian Pineau" label="Christian Pineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="23771" end="23802" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q699336" start="23846" end="23854" title="Mahmoud Fawzi" label="Dr Fawzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831194" start="24741" end="24754" title="Albert Gazier" label="Albert Gazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q377585" start="24821" end="24835" title="Maurice Challe" label="General Challe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070192" start="24908" end="24916" title="Chequers" label="Chequers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526018" start="25713" end="25728" title="Anthony Nutting" label="Anthony Nutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880647" start="27684" end="27706" title="Palestinian Fedayeen" label="Palestinian guerrillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="27746" end="27755" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893000" start="27778" end="27795" title="Jordanian annexation of the West Bank" label="Jordanian control"/>
<link wikidata="Q472936" start="29500" end="29522" title="Humphrey Trevelyan, Baron Trevelyan" label="Sir Humphrey Trevelyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018503" start="30101" end="30113" title="Donald Logan" label="Donald Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q206493" start="30128" end="30134" title="Sevres" label="Sevres"/>
<link wikidata="Q37610" start="30644" end="30660" title="David Ben-Gurion" label="David Ben-Gurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q520964" start="30883" end="30898" title="Canberra bomber" label="Canberra bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176586" start="32212" end="32230" title="Protocol of Sèvres" label="Protocol of Sèvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497211" start="32378" end="32390" title="Patrick Dean (diplomat)" label="Patrick Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="33066" end="33077" title="Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma" label="Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362267" start="33079" end="33093" title="First Sea Lord" label="First Sea Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381805" start="34177" end="34191" title="US Sixth Fleet" label="US Sixth Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284634" start="34277" end="34290" title="William Yates (politician)" label="William Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="35963" end="35965" title="BP" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q129143" start="38084" end="38100" title="Trafalgar Square" label="Trafalgar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550193" start="38456" end="38483" title="State Opening of Parliament" label="State Opening of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q333766" start="39058" end="39069" title="Antony Head" label="Antony Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143784" start="39074" end="39086" title="James Stuart, 1st Viscount Stuart of Findhorn" label="James Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q333365" start="40386" end="40405" title="Walter Bedell Smith" label="Walter Bedell Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595860" start="40733" end="40746" title="Krishna Menon" label="Krishna Menon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926168" start="41226" end="41245" title="Victor Montagu" label="Lord Hinchingbrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q325403" start="42063" end="42076" title="Aneurin Bevan" label="Aneurin Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q333205" start="42534" end="42548" title="Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 5th Marquess of Salisbury" label="Lord Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="42813" end="42828" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q334337" start="42829" end="42836" title="David Maxwell Fyfe, 1st Earl of Kilmuir" label="Kilmuir"/>
<link wikidata="Q198976" start="43068" end="43075" title="Charger (table setting)" label="charger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070192" start="43502" end="43510" title="Chequers" label="Chequers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978899" start="43764" end="43775" title="Birch Grove" label="Birch Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q325403" start="44115" end="44128" title="Aneurin Bevan" label="Aneurin Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256576" start="44175" end="44187" title="Street organ" label="organgrinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="44248" end="44257" title="Elizabeth II" label="the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="44266" end="44283" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q153509" start="44777" end="44796" title="Archbishop Makarios" label="Archbishop Makarios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="44825" end="44835" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q847314" start="44892" end="44896" title="EOKA" label="EOKA"/>
<link wikidata="Q183105" start="45161" end="45179" title="Randolph Churchill" label="Randolph Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q332454" start="45264" end="45275" title="Max Aitken, 1st Baron Beaverbrook" label="Beaverbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="45289" end="45302" title="Daily Express" label="Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="45607" end="45614" title="Sputnik" label="Sputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q334282" start="45882" end="45900" title="Peter Thorneycroft" label="Peter Thorneycroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032247" start="45902" end="45913" title="Nigel Birch" label="Nigel Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q333028" start="45918" end="45930" title="Enoch Powell" label="Enoch Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q365971" start="45972" end="45987" title="Camille Chamoun" label="Camille Chamoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q170468" start="46018" end="46038" title="United Arab Republic" label="United Arab Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q835539" start="46174" end="46193" title="Eisenhower Doctrine" label="Eisenhower Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q146906" start="46273" end="46285" title="King Hussein" label="King Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988530" start="46588" end="46606" title="1958 Iraqi coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="revolution in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634339" start="47171" end="47180" title="Hugh Foot" label="Hugh Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q630823" start="47645" end="47657" title="Sancho Panza" label="Sancho Panza"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="47688" end="47695" title="Quixote" label="Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="47794" end="47805" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431700" start="48111" end="48129" title="Middlesex Hospital" label="Middlesex Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q29972737" start="48250" end="48260" title="List of ambassadors of the United Kingdom to Russia" label="Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392618" start="48265" end="48279" title="Patrick Reilly" label="Patrick Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="48676" end="48693" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="48698" end="48713" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128614" start="48774" end="48790" title="John Diefenbaker" label="John Diefenbaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q240274" start="48974" end="48990" title="Christian Herter" label="Christian Herter"/>
<link wikidata="Q312034" start="48992" end="49017" title="Maurice Couve de Murville" label="Maurice Couve de Murville"/>
<link wikidata="Q184267" start="49022" end="49036" title="Andrei Gromyko" label="Andrei Gromyko"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="49225" end="49234" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q918420" start="49425" end="49447" title="1959 United Kingdom general election" label="1959 election campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="50098" end="50107" title="de Gaulle" label="de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="50267" end="50270" title="European Union" label="EEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="50343" end="50358" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271478" start="50474" end="50487" title="Reginald Manningham-Buller, 1st Viscount Dilhorne" label="Lord Dilhorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q748379" start="50616" end="50665" title="1960 U-2 Incident" label="U2 had been shot down whilst flying over the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="51019" end="51046" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070192" start="51228" end="51236" title="Chequers" label="Chequers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51269" end="51284" title="Carlton House Terrace#Carlton Gardens" label="Carlton Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403633" start="51390" end="51407" title="11 Downing Street" label="11 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q779754" start="51513" end="51528" title="Admiralty House, London" label="Admiralty House"/>
<link wikidata="Q332914" start="51982" end="51994" title="David Eccles, 1st Viscount Eccles" label="David Eccles"/>
<link wikidata="Q333182" start="51996" end="52008" title="Iain Macleod" label="Iain Macleod"/>
<link wikidata="Q333275" start="52012" end="52029" title="Reginald Maudling" label="Reginald Maudling"/>
<link wikidata="Q918420" start="52318" end="52339" title="1959 United Kingdom general election" label="1959 General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345170" start="52936" end="52947" title="Robert Hall, Baron Roberthall" label="Robert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q333334" start="54261" end="54280" title="John Boyd-Carpenter" label="John Boyd-Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q647883" start="54378" end="54381" title="National insurance contribution" label="NIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="54506" end="54518" title="Lloyd George" label="Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081871" start="55304" end="55312" title="Bradshaw&amp;#x27;s Guide" label="Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718496" start="55771" end="55781" title="Alexander Cairncross (economist)" label="Cairncross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972373" start="57024" end="57061" title="National Economic Development Council" label="National Economic Development Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q946520" start="57102" end="57122" title="Commissariat general du Plan (France)" label="Commissariat du Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q333889" start="57848" end="57860" title="Henry Brooke, Baron Brooke of Cumnor" label="Henry Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096927" start="57898" end="57929" title="Chief Secretary to the Treasury" label="Chief Secretary to the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330071" start="58326" end="58338" title="Richard Wood, Baron Holderness" label="Richard Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237766" start="58611" end="58620" title="John Hare, 1st Viscount Blakenham" label="John Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923260" start="59622" end="59637" title="1962 Blackpool North by-election" label="Blackpool North"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104014" start="59660" end="59719" title="1962 Orpington by-election" label="took Orpington off the Conservatives at another by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973674" start="59806" end="59813" title="Bromley (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122316" start="59815" end="59829" title="Chairman of the Conservative Party" label="Party Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q333182" start="59830" end="59842" title="Iain Macleod" label="Iain Macleod"/>
<link wikidata="Q194896" start="61290" end="61307" title="William Rees-Mogg" label="William Rees-Mogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q337380" start="62030" end="62044" title="Hugh Gaitskell" label="Hugh Gaitskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q323488" start="62053" end="62064" title="Roy Jenkins" label="Roy Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="62108" end="62123" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q18163104" start="63275" end="63290" title="1962 West Derbyshire by-election" label="West Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776445" start="63918" end="63933" title="Martin Redmayne" label="Martin Redmayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163029" start="63935" end="63945" title="Chief Whip of the Conservative Party" label="Chief Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052003" start="63951" end="63967" title="Norman Brook, 1st Baron Normanbrook" label="Sir Norman Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015472" start="63969" end="63986" title="Cabinet Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="Cabinet Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="64434" end="64448" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q182035" start="64467" end="64477" title="Rab Butler" label="Rab Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q20877150" start="65118" end="65150" title="1962 Leicester North East by-election" label="Leicester North East by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q918420" start="65276" end="65280" title="1959 United Kingdom general election" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237766" start="65619" end="65628" title="John Hare, 1st Viscount Blakenham" label="John Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6356796" start="65763" end="65787" title="Night of the Long Knives (1962)" label="Night of the Long Knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q332546" start="66025" end="66038" title="Norman Lamont" label="Norman Lamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q333275" start="66071" end="66088" title="Reginald Maudling" label="Reginald Maudling"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="66653" end="66662" title="Anthony Eden" label="Lord Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032247" start="66664" end="66675" title="Nigel Birch" label="Nigel Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q334282" start="66716" end="66728" title="Peter Thorneycroft" label="Thorneycroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137694" start="67038" end="67085" title="Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour" label="Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q38726" start="67458" end="67466" title="Labrador Retriever" label="Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409062" start="67474" end="67479" title="Sambo (racial term)" label="Sambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q806945" start="67784" end="67790" title="Banquo" label="Banquo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777191" start="67910" end="67922" title="Martins Bank" label="Martins Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q105450491" start="68322" end="68345" title="Winter of 1962–63 in the United Kingdom" label="bitter winter of 1962–3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137667" start="68363" end="68369" title="Winter of 1946–47 in the United Kingdom" label="1946-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q728497" start="68562" end="68570" title="snobbery" label="stuck up"/>
<link wikidata="Q333216" start="68665" end="68682" title="Augustine Birrell" label="Augustine Birrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18324513" start="68804" end="68820" title="Andrew Alexander (journalist)" label="Andrew Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571030" start="68848" end="68866" title="The Yorkshire Post" label="The Yorkshire Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401251" start="69056" end="69071" title="Profumo scandal" label="Profumo scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q332347" start="69085" end="69097" title="John Profumo" label="John Profumo"/>
<link wikidata="Q176222" start="69132" end="69148" title="Christine Keeler" label="Christine Keeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q128976" start="69390" end="69407" title="Alec Douglas-Home" label="Alec Douglas-Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163029" start="69596" end="69606" title="Chief Whip of the Conservative Party" label="Chief Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776445" start="69607" end="69622" title="Martin Redmayne" label="Martin Redmayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q175366" start="69824" end="69832" title="Quintin Hogg, Baron Hailsham of St Marylebone" label="Hailsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q128976" start="70269" end="70286" title="Alec Douglas-Home" label="Alec Douglas-Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636053" start="70511" end="70541" title="Leader of the House of Commons" label="Leader of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q333334" start="70584" end="70603" title="John Boyd-Carpenter" label="John Boyd-Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q910308" start="70627" end="70642" title="Lord Privy Seal" label="Lord Privy Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q220208" start="70975" end="70999" title="1964 United Kingdom general election" label="general election of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q334282" start="71029" end="71041" title="Peter Thorneycroft" label="Thorneycroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163061" start="71091" end="71095" title="1965 Conservative Party leadership election" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="71140" end="71152" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="71270" end="71278" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321053" start="71330" end="71353" title="Unilateral Declaration of Independence (Rhodesia)" label="unilateral independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q313424" start="71465" end="71474" title="Ian Smith" label="Ian Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q918430" start="71557" end="71591" title="1966 United Kingdom general election" label="general election campaign in March"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180101" start="71854" end="71879" title="Royal Liverpool Golf Club" label="Royal Liverpool Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q918442" start="72021" end="72042" title="1970 United Kingdom general election" label="1970 General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435978" start="72365" end="72383" title="List of ambassadors of the United Kingdom to the United States" label="Washington Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q464103" start="72455" end="72462" title="Speaker of the House of Commons (United Kingdom)" label="Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096530" start="72471" end="72505" title="1971 Speaker of the British House of Commons election" label="elected Speaker by 294 votes to 55"/>
<link wikidata="Q190819" start="73176" end="73189" title="Bloody Sunday (1972)" label="Bloody Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628635" start="73236" end="73253" title="Bernadette Devlin" label="Bernadette Devlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023512" start="73485" end="73502" title="Deputy Lieutenant" label="Deputy Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="73563" end="73569" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="73574" end="73589" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598455" start="73791" end="73825" title="Steward of the Manor of Northstead" label="Steward of the Manor of Northstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="73891" end="73900" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191558" start="73933" end="73939" title="Wirral Peninsula" label="Wirral"/>
<link wikidata="Q23100" start="73957" end="73967" title="Merseyside" label="Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="74061" end="74075" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q125047" start="74081" end="74093" title="crossbencher" label="crossbencher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241874" start="74182" end="74199" title="Preston Crowmarsh" label="Preston Crowmarsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="74201" end="74212" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115302" start="74307" end="74349" title="Oxford University Conservative Association" label="Oxford University Conservative Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="74372" end="74384" title="brain tumour" label="brain tumour"/>
<link wikidata="Q335150" start="74870" end="74881" title="Hugh Thomas, Baron Thomas of Swynnerton" label="Hugh Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q328681" start="75100" end="75116" title="Richard Crossman" label="Richard Crossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q335187" start="75766" end="75777" title="Edward Grey, 1st Viscount Grey of Fallodon" label="Edward Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q332365" start="75782" end="75794" title="Ernest Bevin" label="Ernest Bevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443884" start="77119" end="77138" title="Ferdinand Mount" label="Sir Ferdinand Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q282019" start="77144" end="77147" title="Baronet" label="Bt."/>
<link wikidata="Q835175" start="77373" end="77386" title="Bernard Levin" label="Bernard Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40403015" start="77752" end="77764" title="Lady Pamela Smith" label="Pamela Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027000" start="78048" end="78058" title="Wirral Urban District" label="the Wirral"/>
<link wikidata="Q182035" start="78788" end="78798" title="Rab Butler" label="Rab Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443884" start="79256" end="79275" title="Ferdinand Mount" label="Sir Ferdinand Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q332881" start="79326" end="79341" title="Jonathan Aitken" label="Jonathan Aitken"/>
<link wikidata="Q333858" start="79637" end="79649" title="Peter Walker, Baron Walker of Worcester" label="Peter Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852815" start="79662" end="79675" title="Anthony Booth" label="Anthony Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q842930" start="79754" end="79762" title="the Mall, London" label="the Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q779754" start="79956" end="79971" title="Admiralty House, London" label="Admiralty House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267" start="80706" end="80722" title="Dag Hammarskjöld" label="Dag Hammarskjöld"/>
<link wikidata="Q4497129" start="80831" end="80849" title="William Hayter (diplomat)" label="Sir William Hayter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443884" start="82861" end="82876" title="Ferdinand Mount" label="Ferdinand Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="82920" end="82929" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q315999" start="83618" end="83636" title="Joseph Chamberlain" label="Joseph Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q182035" start="83640" end="83650" title="Rab Butler" label="Rab Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q81173" start="83783" end="83789" title="Exeter College, Oxford" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="83802" end="83809" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118159" start="84124" end="84149" title="Churchill Archives Centre" label="Churchill Archives Centre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405860" wikidata="Q469721" url="?curid=405860" title="Gary Player">
<text>Gary James Player (born 1 November 1935) is a South African retired professional golfer who is widely considered to be one of the greatest golfers of all time. During his career, Player won nine major championships on the regular tour and nine major championships on the Champions Tour. At the age of 29, Player won the 1965 U.S. Open and became the only non-American to win all four majors in a career, known as the career Grand Slam. At the time, he was the youngest player to do this, though Jack Nicklaus (26) and Tiger Woods (24) subsequently broke this record. Player became only the third golfer in history to win the Career Grand Slam, following Ben Hogan and Gene Sarazen, and only Nicklaus and Woods have performed the feat since. He won over 160 professional tournaments on six continents over seven decades and was inducted into the World Golf Hall of Fame in 1974.

Nicknamed the Black Knight, Mr. Fitness, and the International Ambassador of Golf, he is also a renowned golf course architect with more than 400 design projects on five continents throughout the world. Player has also authored or co-written 36 books on golf instruction, design, philosophy, motivation and fitness. On 7 January 2021, Player was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by United States President Donald Trump.

The Player Group was established by Marc Player and operates The Player Foundation, which has a primary objective of promoting underprivileged education around the world. In 1983, The Player Foundation established the Blair Atholl Schools in Johannesburg, South Africa, which has educational facilities for more than 500 students from kindergarten through eighth grade. In 2013 it celebrated its 30th anniversary with charity golf events in London, Palm Beach, Shanghai and Cape Town, bringing its total of funds raised to over US$60 million.

==Background and family==
Player was born in Johannesburg, South Africa, the youngest of Harry and Muriel Player&#x27;s three children. When he was eight years old his mother died from cancer. Although his father was often away from home working in the gold mines, he did manage to take a loan in order to buy a set of clubs for Gary to begin playing golf. The Virginia Park golf course in Johannesburg is where Player first gained his love for golf. At the age of 14, Player played his first round of golf and parred the first three holes. At age 16, he announced that he would become number one in the world. At age 17, he became a professional golfer.

Player married wife Vivienne Verwey (sister of professional golfer Bobby Verwey) on 19 January 1957, four years after turning professional. Together they had six children: Jennifer, Marc, Wayne, Michele, Theresa, and Amanda. He also has 22 grandchildren and 2 great-grandchildren. During the early days of his career Player would travel from tournament to tournament with his wife, six children, their nanny and a tutor in tow. Vivienne died of cancer in August 2021.

Player&#x27;s eldest son, Marc, owns and operates The Player Group, which exclusively represents Player in all his commercial activities, including all endorsements, licensing, merchandising, golf course design, and real estate development.

Player is the brother of Ian Player, a South African environmental educator, activist and conservationist.

==Playing career==
Player is one of the most successful golfers in history, tied for fourth in major championship victories with nine. Along with Arnold Palmer and Jack Nicklaus he is often referred to as one of &quot;The Big Three&quot; golfers of his era – from the late 1950s through the late 1970s – when golf boomed in the United States and around the world and was greatly encouraged by expanded television coverage. Along with Gene Sarazen, Ben Hogan, Jack Nicklaus, and Tiger Woods, he is one of only five players to win golf&#x27;s &quot;career Grand Slam&quot;. He completed the Grand Slam in 1965 at the age of twenty-nine. Player was the second multiple majors winner from South Africa, following Bobby Locke, then was followed by Ernie Els, and Retief Goosen.

Player competed regularly on the U.S. based PGA Tour from the late 1950s. He led the Tour money list in 1961, and went on to accumulate 24 career Tour titles. He also played an exceptionally busy schedule all over the world, and he has been called the world&#x27;s most traveled athlete. Player has logged more than in air travel – in 2005 it was estimated that he had &quot;probably flown further… than any athlete in history&quot;.

Player has more victories than anyone else in the South African Open (13) and the Australian Open (7). He held the record for most victories in the World Match Play Championship, with five wins, from 1973 until 1991 when this feat was equalled by Seve Ballesteros, finally losing his share of the record in 2004, when Ernie Els won the event for the sixth time. Player was in the top ten of Mark McCormack&#x27;s world golf rankings from their inception in 1968 until 1981; he was ranked second in 1969, 1970 and 1972, each time to Jack Nicklaus.

Player was the only player in the 20th century to win the British Open in three different decades. His first win, as a 23-year-old in 1959 at Muirfield, came after he double-bogeyed the last hole. In 1974, he became one of the few golfers in history to win two major championships in the same season. Player last won the Masters in 1978, when he started seven strokes behind 54-hole leader Hubert Green entering the final round, and won by one shot with birdies at seven of the last 10 holes for a back nine 30 and a final round 64. One week later, Player again came from seven strokes back in the final round to win the Tournament of Champions. In 1984, at the age of 48 Player nearly became the oldest ever major champion, finishing in second place behind Lee Trevino at the PGA Championship. And in gusty winds at the 1998 Masters, he became the oldest golfer ever to make the cut, breaking the 25-year-old record set by Sam Snead. Player credited this feat to his dedication to the concept of diet, health, practice and golf fitness.

Player has occasionally been accused of cheating, particularly in the 1974 Open; he has strongly denied the accusations. Later, at a skins game in Arizona in 1983, Tom Watson accused him of cheating by moving a leaf from behind his ball.
Being South African, Player never played in the Ryder Cup in which American and European golfers compete against each other. Regarding the event, Player remarked, &quot;The things I have seen in the Ryder Cup have disappointed me. You are hearing about hatred and war.&quot; He was no longer an eligible player when the Presidents Cup was established to give international players the opportunity to compete in a similar event, but he was non-playing captain of the International Team for the Presidents Cup in 2003, which was held on a course he designed, The Links at Fancourt, in George, South Africa. After 2003 ended in a tie, he was reappointed as captain for the 2005 Presidents Cup, and his team lost to the Americans 15.5 to 18.5. Both Player and Jack Nicklaus were appointed to captain their respective teams again in 2007 in Canada; the United States won.

===Augusta National green jacket===
The green jacket is reserved for Augusta National members and golfers who win the Masters Tournament. Jackets are kept on club grounds, and taking them off the premises is forbidden. The exception is for the winner, who can take it home and return it to the club the following year. Player, who became the tournament&#x27;s first international winner in 1961, said he did not know that. After the victory he packed the jacket and took it to his home in South Africa. That led to a call from club Chairman Clifford Roberts, who was a stickler for rules. &quot;I didn&#x27;t know you were supposed to leave it there,&quot; Player said. &quot;Next thing you know, there was a call from Mr. Roberts.&quot;

==Legacy==
In 2000, Player was voted &quot;Sportsman of the Century&quot; in South Africa. In 1966, he was awarded the Bob Jones Award, the highest honour given by the United States Golf Association in recognition of distinguished sportsmanship in golf. He was inducted into the World Golf Hall of Fame in 1974. The &quot;Gary Player – A Global Journey&quot; exhibition was launched by the Hall of Fame as of March 2006.

In 2000, &quot;Golf Digest&quot; magazine ranked Player as the eighth greatest golfer of all time.

In 2002, Player was voted as the second greatest global golfer of all time by a panel of international media, golf magazines and fellow professionals conducted by the leading Golf Asia Magazine.

On 10 April 2009, he played for the last time in the Masters, where he was playing for his record 52nd time – every year since 1957 except for 1973, when he was recovering from surgery. After Nicklaus and Palmer, he was the last of the Big Three to retire from this tournament, which is a testament to his longevity.

At age 73 on 23 July 2009, Player competed in the Senior British Open Championship at Sunningdale Golf Club, 53 years after capturing his maiden European Tour victory at the Berkshire venue.

Augusta National Golf Club and the Masters announced on 5 July 2011 that Player had been invited to join Jack Nicklaus and Arnold Palmer as an honorary starter. The Big Three were reunited in this capacity starting with the 2012 tournament.

In July 2013, he became the oldest athlete ever to pose nude in &quot;ESPN The Magazine&quot;″s annual Body Issue to inspire people to keep looking after themselves throughout their lives whatever their age.

== Business and other interests ==
Gary Player&#x27;s business interests are exclusively represented by Black Knight International, which includes Gary Player Design, Player Real Estate, The Player Foundation, Gary Player Academies, and Black Knight Enterprises, aspects of which include licensing, events, publishing, wine, apparel and memorabilia. The Player Group, which operates The Player Foundation, is owned and managed by Marc Player.

===The Player Foundation===
The Player Foundation was established in 1983 by Marc Player and began as an effort to provide education, nutrition, medical care and athletic activities, for a small community of disadvantaged children living on the outskirts of Johannesburg, South Africa. The Player Foundation has since blossomed into an organisation that circles the globe bringing aid to underprivileged children and impoverished communities. Since its establishment, The Player Foundation has donated over $65 million to the support of children&#x27;s charities, the betterment of impoverished communities and the expansion of educational opportunities throughout the world.

The foundation is primarily funded by donations, grants and the four Gary Player Invitational events presented through Black Knight International and staged in the United States, China, Europe and South Africa annually. The Gary Player Invitational is a pro-am tournament that pairs celebrities and professional golfers from the PGA and Champions Tours with businessmen and other local participants. The proceeds of these tournaments and other special events provide funding for an ever-expanding number of institutions around the world, including the Blair Atholl Schools in South Africa, the Pleasant City Elementary School in Palm Beach and the Masizame Children&#x27;s Shelter in Plettenberg Bay, South Africa.

Proceeds from the Gary Player Invitational have also been donated to the Lord&#x27;s Taverners in the UK and the following organisations in South Africa; Wildlands Conservation Trust, Twilight Children and Bana Development Centre.

=== Golf course design ===
The Player Design firm have executed over 400 projects in 41 countries on five continents, including courses such as the Gary Player Country Club, Leopard Creek, Thracian Cliffs, Wentworth and The Links at Fancourt.The company offers three different design brands: Gary Player Design, Player Design, and Black Knight Design.

With golf accepted back into the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, Gary Player Design was selected among the finalists of an official RFP in early December 2011.

===Nelson Mandela Invitational===
Player hosted the Nelson Mandela Invitational golf tournament staged by Black Knight International from 2000. In October 2007, media attention arose about his involvement in the 2002 design of a golf course in Burma and as a result, the Nelson Mandela Children&#x27;s Fund withdrew its support. Both Nelson Mandela and Archbishop Desmond Tutu accepted Player&#x27;s position and statements on Burma. Player refused to withdraw as he and his son Marc personally built the golf event from scratch and issued a statement rebutting these claims via his website. The event continued to be staged annually at the Sun City Resort as the Gary Player Invitational until 2019.

==Views==
===Views on apartheid===
In 1966, Player espoused support for the apartheid policies of Hendrik Verwoerd in his book &quot;Grand Slam Golf&quot;, stating: &quot;I must say now, and clearly, that I am of the South Africa of Verwoerd and apartheid... a nation which... is the product of its instinct and ability to maintain civilised values and standards amongst the alien barbarians. The African may well believe in witchcraft and primitive magic, practise ritual murder and polygamy; his wealth is in cattle&quot;. Activists publicly demonstrated against Player&#x27;s espousal of apartheid, including protesting against Player at the 1969 PGA Championship. Australian activists also strongly protested against Player. In 1971 there were several threats to protest against Player at tournaments though they never came to fruition. Years later, in October 1974, Australian activists screamed at Player, &quot;Go home racist&quot;, as he was lining up a putt on the 72nd hole in a tournament he had a chance to win.

However, in a 1987 interview with &quot;The Los Angeles Times&quot;, Player disavowed the system of apartheid, stating, &quot;We have a terrible system in apartheid... it&#x27;s almost a cancerous disease. I&#x27;m happy to say it&#x27;s being eliminated. [...] We&#x27;ve got to get rid of this apartheid.&quot; In an interview with Graham Bensinger, Player discussed his early support for apartheid stating that the South African Government had &quot;pulled the wool over our eyes&quot; and that the people were &quot;brainwashed&quot; into supporting these policies.

===Views on golf===
In July 2007, Player made statements at the Open Championship golf tournament about the use of performance-enhancing drugs in golf. He alleged that at least ten players were &quot;taking something&quot;, citing human growth hormone, steroids and creatine as possible substances. Both the PGA Tour and European Tour were in the process of introducing random testing programmes at the time.

In June 2016, in an interview with bunkered.co.uk, Player branded as &quot;laughable&quot; a report released by the R&amp;A and USGA governing bodies which said that driving distance in golf was only increasing minimally. He warned of a &quot;tsunami coming&quot; due to the governing bodies&#x27; failure to address issues surrounding new golf technology. After the 2017 Alfred Dunhill Links Championship, Player reiterated these comments, taking to messaging service Twitter to say he was sad to see the Old Course at St Andrews &quot;brought to her knees&quot; after Ross Fisher broke the course record on a day of very low scoring during the final round.

==Distinctions and honours==
*On 8 June 1961, Player was the guest on NBC&#x27;s &quot;The Ford Show, Starring Tennessee Ernie Ford&quot;. In a comedy skit, he gives Tennessee Ernie Ford a golf lesson.
*Received the 1965 BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year Award.
*Received the 1966 Bob Jones Award from the United States Golf Association.
*Named Honorary Member of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St Andrews in 1994.
*Received Honorary Doctor of Laws Degree from University of St Andrews in 1995.
*Received Honorary Doctor of Science from the University of Ulster, Northern Ireland in 1997
*The WGC-Bridgestone Invitational trophy is named the Gary Player Cup.
*Named Honorary Member of Carnoustie in 1999
*Received Honorary Doctorate in Law, University of Dundee, Scotland in 1999
*South African Sportsman of the Century award in 2000
*Received the 2003 Laureus Lifetime Achievement Award at the Laureus World Sports Awards in Monte Carlo.
*Awarded the Order of Ikhamanga (in gold for exceptional achievement) in 2003 by President Mbeki of South Africa for excellence in golf and contribution to non-racial sport in South Africa.
*He was the world&#x27;s first golfer to be featured on any country&#x27;s postal stamp in South Africa.
*Has designed over 400 golf courses on six continents around the world.
*He currently plays on the U.S. Champions Tour and European Seniors Tour occasionally.
*He received the 2006 Payne Stewart Award from the PGA Tour.
*Played in his 52nd Masters Tournament at Augusta National in April 2009, extending his record of for most Masters appearances
*Inducted into the African American Sports Hall of Fame in May 2007, with Lifetime Achievement Award
*Has played in a record 46 consecutive British Open Championships, winning 3 times over 3 decades.
*Stars with Camilo Villegas in a MasterCard &quot;priceless foursome&quot; television commercial launched during the U.S. Open in June 2009
*In November 2009 he was awarded the inaugural Breeders Cup &quot;Sports and Racing Excellence Award&quot; at Santa Anita Park in California which honours owners and breeders of thoroughbred race horses.
*Was inducted into the Asian Pacific Golf Hall of Fame with Jack Nicklaus in 2011 at a ceremony in Pattaya, Thailand.
*In December 2011, Gary Player Design was selected amongst the finalists to design the golf course for the 2016 Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro
*He received the PGA Tour Lifetime Achievement Award at The Players Championship in May 2012. The first international person to receive this accolade.
*Received the 2020 GCSAA Old Tom Morris Award from the Golf Course Superintendents Association of America 
*Received the Presidential Medal of Freedom on 7 January 2021 from then President Donald Trump.
*With the death of Jack Burke Jr., Player becomes the oldest living Masters champion.

==Professional wins (159)==
===PGA Tour wins (24)===

PGA Tour playoff record (3–10)
===European Tour wins (4)===

European Tour playoff record (0–2)
===Southern Africa Tour wins (20)===

Southern Africa Tour playoff record (2–0)
===PGA Tour of Australia wins (2)===
PGA Tour of Australia playoff record (0–1)
===Safari Circuit wins (1)===
===South American Golf Circuit wins (1)===
===Other European wins (10)===

Sources:

===Japan wins (2)===
===Other South African wins (39)===
* 1955 East Rand Open
* 1956 East Rand Open, South African Open
* 1957 Western Province Open
* 1958 Natal Open
* 1959 East Rand Open, Natal Open, South African Professional Match Play Championship, Transvaal Open
* 1960 Natal Open, South African Masters, Transvaal Open, Western Province Open, South African Open
* 1961 Transvaal Open (Dec.)
* 1962 Transvaal Open
* 1963 Liquid Air Tournament, Richelieu Grand Prix (Cape Town), Richelieu Grand Prix (Johannesburg), Sponsored 5000
* 1964 South African Masters
* 1965 South African Open
* 1966 Natal Open, Transvaal Open, South African Open
* 1967 South African Masters, South African Open
* 1968 Natal Open, Western Province Open, South African Open
* 1969 South African PGA Championship, South African Open
* 1971 General Motors Open, South African Masters, Western Province Open
* 1974 Rand International Open
* 1986 Nissan Skins Game
* 1988 Nissan Skins Game
* 1991 Nissan Skins Game

===Other Australasian wins (17)===

Sources:

===Other South American wins (2)===
===Other wins (11)===
*1955 Egyptian Matchplay
*1965 World Series of Golf, NTL Challenge Cup (Canada), World Cup of Golf, World Cup of Golf Individual Trophy
*1968 World Series of Golf
*1972 World Series of Golf
*1977 World Cup of Golf Individual Trophy
*1979 PGA Grand Slam of Golf (shared title with Andy North)
*1983 Skins Game
*1986 Fred Meyer Challenge (with Greg Norman - team shared title with Peter Jacobsen and Curtis Strange)

===Senior PGA Tour wins (22)===


Senior PGA Tour playoff record (5–2)
===European Seniors Tour wins (3)===

European Seniors Tour playoff record (1–0)
===Other senior wins (6)===
*1987 Northville Invitational (United States), German PGA Team Championship 
*1997 Dai-ichi Seimei Cup (Japan)
*2000 Senior Skins Game (U.S. – unofficial event)
*2009 Liberty Mutual Legends of Golf – Demaret Division (with Bob Charles)
*2010 Liberty Mutual Legends of Golf – Demaret Division (with Bob Charles)

*The Senior British Open was retroactively recognised by the PGA Tour Champions as a senior major in 2018.

==Major championships==

===Wins (9)===

1Defeated Nagle in 18-hole playoff; Player 71 (+1), Nagle 74 (+4).

===Results timeline===




CUT = missed the halfway cut (3rd round cut in 1970, 1980, 1981 and 1985 Open Championships)
WD = withdrew
&quot;T&quot; indicates a tie for a place.

===Summary===

*Most consecutive cuts made – 37 (1970 PGA – 1980 Masters)
*Longest streak of top-10s – 6 (1962 PGA – 1964 Masters)

==Results in The Players Championship==

CUT = missed the halfway cut
&quot;T&quot; indicates a tie for a place

==Senior major championships==
===Wins (9)===

1Defeated Charles in 18-hole playoff; Player (68), Charles (70).&lt;br&gt;
2Defeated Bland with a birdie on the second hole of a sudden-death playoff.

===Results timeline===

1The Senior Open Championship was not a Champions Tour major until 2003, though it was on the European Seniors Tour. Player won the event three times prior to this recognition.


CUT = Missed the half-way cut
NYF = Tournament not yet founded
&quot;T&quot; = tied

==Team appearances==
*World Cup (representing South Africa): 1956, 1957, 1958, 1959, 1960, 1962, 1963, 1964, 1965 (winners, individual winner), 1966, 1967, 1968, 1971, 1972, 1973, 1977 (individual winner)
*Slazenger Trophy (representing British Commonwealth and Empire): 1956
*Chrysler Cup (representing the International team): 1986 (captain), 1987 (captain, winners), 1988 (captain), 1989 (captain), 1990 (captain), 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994 (winners)
*Dunhill Cup (representing South Africa): 1991
*Alfred Dunhill Challenge (representing Southern Africa): 1995 (non-playing captain, winners)
*UBS Cup (representing the Rest of the World): 2001 (captain), 2002 (captain), 2004 (captain)
*Insperity Invitational – Greats of Golf: 2012 (winners), 2014 (winners), 2015 (winners), 2017 (winners)

==See also==
*Career Grand Slam champions
*List of golfers with most Champions Tour major championship wins
*List of golfers with most Champions Tour wins
*List of golfers with most PGA Tour wins
*List of longest PGA Tour win streaks
*List of men&#x27;s major championships winning golfers

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*
*
*Gary Player Profile at Golf Legends
*Gary Player Golf Course Design
*Gary Player Foundation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q469721" start="0" end="17" title="Gary Player" label="Gary James Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q490253" start="68" end="87" title="professional golfer" label="professional golfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q268554" start="195" end="214" title="Men&amp;#x27;s major golf championships" label="major championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061312" start="271" end="285" title="Champions Tour" label="Champions Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572038" start="320" end="334" title="1965 U.S. Open (golf)" label="1965 U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="417" end="434" title="Grand Slam (golf)#Career Grand Slam" label="career Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9424" start="495" end="508" title="Jack Nicklaus" label="Jack Nicklaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993" start="518" end="529" title="Tiger Woods" label="Tiger Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q365626" start="654" end="663" title="Ben Hogan" label="Ben Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q723707" start="668" end="680" title="Gene Sarazen" label="Gene Sarazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q258851" start="845" end="868" title="World Golf Hall of Fame" label="World Golf Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048525" start="984" end="1005" title="golf course architect" label="golf course architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="1237" end="1266" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="1294" end="1306" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1750" end="1756" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q695411" start="1758" end="1768" title="Palm Beach, Florida" label="Palm Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="1770" end="1778" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="1783" end="1792" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="1898" end="1910" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437831" start="2576" end="2588" title="Bobby Verwey" label="Bobby Verwey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982598" start="3245" end="3255" title="Ian Player" label="Ian Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q268554" start="3423" end="3441" title="Men&amp;#x27;s major golf championships" label="major championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353769" start="3457" end="3461" title="List of men&amp;#x27;s major championships winning golfers" label="nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9434" start="3474" end="3487" title="Arnold Palmer" label="Arnold Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9424" start="3492" end="3505" title="Jack Nicklaus" label="Jack Nicklaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q723707" start="3762" end="3774" title="Gene Sarazen" label="Gene Sarazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q365626" start="3776" end="3785" title="Ben Hogan" label="Ben Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993" start="3806" end="3817" title="Tiger Woods" label="Tiger Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079367" start="3875" end="3892" title="Grand Slam (golf)" label="career Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q888613" start="4037" end="4048" title="Bobby Locke" label="Bobby Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q440171" start="4071" end="4080" title="Ernie Els" label="Ernie Els"/>
<link wikidata="Q707225" start="4086" end="4099" title="Retief Goosen" label="Retief Goosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="4146" end="4154" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858179" start="4587" end="4605" title="South African Open (golf)" label="South African Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q13583588" start="4619" end="4634" title="Australian Open (golf)" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870596" start="4685" end="4714" title="Volvo World Match Play Championship" label="World Match Play Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q272190" start="4784" end="4800" title="Seve Ballesteros" label="Seve Ballesteros"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768781" start="4928" end="4969" title="Mark McCormack&amp;#x27;s world golf rankings" label="Mark McCormack&amp;#x27;s world golf rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q9424" start="5069" end="5082" title="Jack Nicklaus" label="Jack Nicklaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951987" start="5227" end="5236" title="Muirfield" label="Muirfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q280275" start="5406" end="5413" title="Masters Tournament" label="Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205159" start="5475" end="5487" title="Hubert Green" label="Hubert Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290171" start="5706" end="5729" title="Tournament of Champions (golf)" label="Tournament of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q950128" start="5843" end="5854" title="Lee Trevino" label="Lee Trevino"/>
<link wikidata="Q532111" start="6288" end="6298" title="Tom Watson (golfer)" label="Tom Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q854376" start="6410" end="6419" title="Ryder Cup" label="Ryder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647788" start="6682" end="6696" title="Presidents Cup" label="Presidents Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647788" start="6855" end="6869" title="Presidents Cup" label="Presidents Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q280275" start="7348" end="7366" title="Masters Tournament" label="Masters Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q888019" start="8088" end="8103" title="Bob Jones Award" label="Bob Jones Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187243" start="8137" end="8167" title="United States Golf Association" label="United States Golf Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q258851" start="8248" end="8271" title="World Golf Hall of Fame" label="World Golf Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110173" start="8406" end="8417" title="Golf Digest" label="Golf Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583497" start="9055" end="9087" title="Senior British Open Championship" label="Senior British Open Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009612" start="9091" end="9112" title="Sunningdale Golf Club" label="Sunningdale Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q765780" start="9197" end="9223" title="Augusta National Golf Club" label="Augusta National Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q9424" start="9302" end="9315" title="Jack Nicklaus" label="Jack Nicklaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9434" start="9320" end="9333" title="Arnold Palmer" label="Arnold Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046164" start="9509" end="9526" title="ESPN The Magazine" label="ESPN The Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678864" start="11558" end="11579" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Taverners" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Taverners"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="12103" end="12123" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="12127" end="12141" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990624" start="12291" end="12318" title="Nelson Mandela Invitational" label="Nelson Mandela Invitational"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="12483" end="12488" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990622" start="12510" end="12545" title="Nelson Mandela Children&amp;#x27;s Fund" label="Nelson Mandela Children&amp;#x27;s Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="12573" end="12587" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q43033" start="12603" end="12615" title="Desmond Tutu" label="Desmond Tutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990624" start="12903" end="12927" title="Gary Player Invitational" label="Gary Player Invitational"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="13017" end="13026" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q297000" start="13039" end="13055" title="Hendrik Verwoerd" label="Hendrik Verwoerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573631" start="13586" end="13607" title="1969 PGA Championship" label="1969 PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="14006" end="14027" title="The Los Angeles Times" label="The Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q848797" start="14597" end="14618" title="the Open Championship" label="the Open Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q166376" start="14652" end="14679" title="Doping in sport" label="performance-enhancing drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="14768" end="14788" title="human growth hormone" label="human growth hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q177911" start="14790" end="14798" title="steroids" label="steroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q223600" start="14803" end="14811" title="creatine" label="creatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="14845" end="14853" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q121571" start="14858" end="14871" title="European Tour" label="European Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901447" start="15059" end="15070" title="the R&amp;amp;A" label="the R&amp;amp;A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187243" start="15075" end="15079" title="USGA" label="USGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q778692" start="15319" end="15352" title="Alfred Dunhill Links Championship" label="Alfred Dunhill Links Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q167245" start="15453" end="15477" title="Old Course at St Andrews" label="Old Course at St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037842" start="15517" end="15528" title="Ross Fisher" label="Ross Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="15677" end="15680" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734759" start="15694" end="15738" title="The Ford Show" label="The Ford Show, Starring Tennessee Ernie Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q963827" start="15773" end="15793" title="Tennessee Ernie Ford" label="Tennessee Ernie Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494048" start="15828" end="15871" title="BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year" label="BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q888019" start="15898" end="15913" title="Bob Jones Award" label="Bob Jones Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187243" start="15923" end="15953" title="United States Golf Association" label="United States Golf Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q937842" start="15981" end="16026" title="the Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St Andrews" label="the Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="16082" end="16106" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096524" start="16162" end="16182" title="University of Ulster" label="University of Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="16184" end="16200" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140388" start="16214" end="16242" title="WGC-Bridgestone Invitational" label="WGC-Bridgestone Invitational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012395" start="16306" end="16316" title="Carnoustie" label="Carnoustie"/>
<link wikidata="Q900341" start="16516" end="16543" title="Laureus World Sports Awards" label="Laureus World Sports Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="16547" end="16558" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100502" start="16573" end="16591" title="Order of Ikhamanga" label="Order of Ikhamanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q101547" start="16641" end="16656" title="Thabo Mbeki" label="President Mbeki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061312" start="16959" end="16973" title="Champions Tour" label="Champions Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276269" start="17036" end="17055" title="Payne Stewart Award" label="Payne Stewart Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029512" start="17414" end="17429" title="Camilo Villegas" label="Camilo Villegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q489921" start="17435" end="17445" title="MasterCard" label="MasterCard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119144" start="18025" end="18060" title="PGA Tour Lifetime Achievement Award" label="PGA Tour Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18178" end="18204" title="GCSAA Old Tom Morris Award" label="GCSAA Old Tom Morris Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="18280" end="18309" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="18348" end="18360" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348029" start="18381" end="18395" title="Jack Burke Jr." label="Jack Burke Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1858179" start="18976" end="18994" title="South African Open (golf)" label="South African Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000148" start="19002" end="19023" title="Western Province Open" label="Western Province Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982343" start="19031" end="19041" title="Natal Open" label="Natal Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186047" start="19077" end="19127" title="South African Professional Match Play Championship" label="South African Professional Match Play Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15876557" start="19129" end="19143" title="Transvaal Open" label="Transvaal Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186047" start="19163" end="19184" title="South African Masters" label="South African Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479655" start="19637" end="19667" title="South African PGA Championship" label="South African PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000145" start="19695" end="19714" title="General Motors Open" label="General Motors Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607594" start="20003" end="20023" title="World Series of Golf (PGA Tour)" label="World Series of Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q524624" start="20053" end="20070" title="World Cup (men&amp;#x27;s golf)" label="World Cup of Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q524624" start="20072" end="20107" title="World Cup of Golf" label="World Cup of Golf Individual Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607594" start="20114" end="20134" title="World Series of Golf (PGA Tour)" label="World Series of Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607594" start="20141" end="20161" title="World Series of Golf (PGA Tour)" label="World Series of Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q524624" start="20168" end="20203" title="World Cup of Golf" label="World Cup of Golf Individual Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001949" start="20210" end="20232" title="PGA Grand Slam of Golf" label="PGA Grand Slam of Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761102" start="20252" end="20262" title="Andy North" label="Andy North"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950029" start="20270" end="20280" title="Skins Game (PGA Tour)" label="Skins Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495934" start="20287" end="20307" title="Fred Meyer Challenge" label="Fred Meyer Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q381941" start="20314" end="20325" title="Greg Norman" label="Greg Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q588580" start="20351" end="20365" title="Peter Jacobsen" label="Peter Jacobsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145663" start="20370" end="20384" title="Curtis Strange" label="Curtis Strange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152414" start="20573" end="20596" title="Northville Invitational" label="Northville Invitational"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982567" start="20684" end="20701" title="Senior Skins Game" label="Senior Skins Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541892" start="20734" end="20764" title="Liberty Mutual Legends of Golf" label="Liberty Mutual Legends of Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q887843" start="20790" end="20801" title="Bob Charles (golfer)" label="Bob Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541892" start="20809" end="20839" title="Liberty Mutual Legends of Golf" label="Liberty Mutual Legends of Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q887843" start="20865" end="20876" title="Bob Charles (golfer)" label="Bob Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583497" start="20884" end="20903" title="Senior British Open" label="Senior British Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q524624" start="22028" end="22037" title="World Cup (men&amp;#x27;s golf)" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407126" start="22067" end="22071" title="1956 Canada Cup" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407210" start="22073" end="22077" title="1957 Canada Cup" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407299" start="22079" end="22083" title="1958 Canada Cup" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220454" start="22085" end="22089" title="1959 Canada Cup" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q28232954" start="22091" end="22095" title="1960 Canada Cup" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163066" start="22097" end="22101" title="1962 Canada Cup" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407548" start="22103" end="22107" title="1963 Canada Cup" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407606" start="22109" end="22113" title="1964 Canada Cup" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q28226408" start="22115" end="22119" title="1965 Canada Cup" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407757" start="22150" end="22154" title="1966 Canada Cup" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q85723834" start="22156" end="22160" title="1967 World Cup (men&amp;#x27;s golf)" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q85723875" start="22162" end="22166" title="1968 World Cup (men&amp;#x27;s golf)" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q85724100" start="22168" end="22172" title="1971 World Cup (men&amp;#x27;s golf)" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q85724195" start="22174" end="22178" title="1972 World Cup (men&amp;#x27;s golf)" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q85724325" start="22180" end="22184" title="1973 World Cup (men&amp;#x27;s golf)" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q85724756" start="22186" end="22190" title="1977 World Cup (men&amp;#x27;s golf)" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q25062206" start="22212" end="22228" title="Slazenger Trophy" label="Slazenger Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22283" end="22295" title="Chrysler Cup" label="Chrysler Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041702" start="22458" end="22469" title="Dunhill Cup" label="Dunhill Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586818" start="22499" end="22503" title="1991 Dunhill Cup" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223222" start="22505" end="22529" title="Alfred Dunhill Challenge" label="Alfred Dunhill Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822501" start="22599" end="22606" title="UBS Cup" label="UBS Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22812" end="22839" title="Grand Slam (golf)#Career Grand Slam" label="Career Grand Slam champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621747" start="22841" end="22905" title="List of golfers with most Champions Tour major championship wins" label="List of golfers with most Champions Tour major championship wins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621750" start="22907" end="22952" title="List of golfers with most Champions Tour wins" label="List of golfers with most Champions Tour wins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621761" start="22954" end="22993" title="List of golfers with most PGA Tour wins" label="List of golfers with most PGA Tour wins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626707" start="22995" end="23031" title="List of longest PGA Tour win streaks" label="List of longest PGA Tour win streaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353769" start="23033" end="23087" title="List of men&amp;#x27;s major championships winning golfers" label="List of men&amp;#x27;s major championships winning golfers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405862" wikidata="Q2051330" url="?curid=405862" title="Parade (ballet)">
<text>Parade is a ballet choreographed by Leonide Massine, with music by Erik Satie and a one-act scenario by Jean Cocteau. The ballet was composed in 1916–17 for Sergei Diaghilev&#x27;s Ballets Russes. The ballet premiered on Friday, May 18, 1917, at the Théâtre du Châtelet in Paris, with costumes and sets designed by Pablo Picasso, choreography by Léonide Massine (who danced), and the orchestra conducted by Ernest Ansermet.

==Overview==
The idea of the ballet seems to have come from Jean Cocteau. He had heard Satie&#x27;s &quot;Trois morceaux en forme de poire&quot; (&quot;Three Pieces in the Shape of a Pear&quot;) in a concert and thought of writing a ballet scenario to such music. Satie welcomed the idea of composing ballet music (which he had never done before) but refused to allow any of his previous compositions to be used for the occasion, so Cocteau started writing a scenario (the theme being a publicity parade in which three groups of circus artists try to attract an audience to an indoor performance), to which Satie composed the music (with some additions to the orchestral score by Cocteau).

Work on the production started in the middle of the First World War, with Cocteau traveling back and forth to the war front in Belgium during planning and pre-production. The most difficult part of the creative process, however, seems to have been to convince Misia Edwards to support the idea of having this ballet performed by the Ballets Russes. She was easily offended but was trusted completely by Sergei Diaghilev for advice on his productions. A first version of the music (for piano) was dedicated to Misia and performed in 1916.

Eventually, after aborting some other plans (and some more intrigue), Diaghilev&#x27;s support was won, and the choreography was entrusted to Léonide Massine, who had recently become the principal dancer of the Ballets Russes and lover of Diaghilev, replacing Vaslav Nijinsky who had left Paris shortly before the outbreak of the war. The set and costume design was entrusted to the then-Cubist painter Pablo Picasso. In addition to the costume designs, Picasso also designed a curtain which illustrated a group of performers at a fair consuming dinner before a performance. The Italian futurist artist Giacomo Balla aided Picasso in his creating the curtain and other designs for &quot;Parade&quot;. In February 1917, all the collaborators, excluding Satie, met in Rome to begin working on &quot;Parade&quot;, scheduled to premiere in May.


The poet Guillaume Apollinaire described &quot;Parade&quot; as &quot;a kind of surrealism&quot; (&quot;une sorte de surréalisme&quot;) when he wrote the program note in 1917, thus coining the word three years before Surrealism emerged as an art movement in Paris. The English premiere of &quot;Parade&quot;, performed by the Ballets Russes, was performed at London&#x27;s Empire Theatre on November 14, 1919, and became a cultural event.

The ballet was remarkable for several reasons.
It was the first collaboration between Satie and Picasso, and also the first time either of them had worked on a ballet, thus making it the first time either collaborated with Diaghilev and the Ballets Russes.
The plot of &quot;Parade&quot; incorporated and was inspired by popular entertainments of the period, such as Parisian music-halls and American silent-films.
Much of the settings used in &quot;Parade&quot;&#x27;s plot occurred outside of the formal Parisian theater, depicting the streets of Paris.
The plot reproduces various elements of everyday life such as the music hall and fairground. Before &quot;Parade&quot;, the use of popular entertainment materials was considered unsuitable for the elite world of the ballet.
The plot of &quot;Parade&quot; composed by Cocteau includes the failed attempt of a troupe of performers to attract audience members to view their show.
Some of Picasso&#x27;s Cubist costumes were in solid cardboard, allowing the dancers only a minimum of movement.
The score contained several &quot;noise-making&quot; instruments (typewriter, foghorn, an assortment of milk bottles, pistol, and so on), which had been added by Cocteau (somewhat to the dismay of Satie). It is supposed that such additions by Cocteau showed his eagerness to create a &quot;succès de scandale&quot;, comparable to that of Igor Stravinsky&#x27;s &quot;Le Sacre du Printemps&quot; which had been premiered by the Ballets Russes some years before, and caused no less scandal. Although &quot;Parade&quot; was quite revolutionary, bringing common street entertainments to the elite, being scorned by audiences and being praised by critics, nonetheless many years later Stravinsky could still pride himself in never having been topped in the matter of &quot;succès de scandale&quot;.
The ragtime contained in &quot;Parade&quot; would later be adapted for piano solo and attained considerable success as a separate piano piece. The finale is &quot;a rapid ragtime dance in which the whole cast [makes] a last desperate attempt to lure the audience in to see their show&quot;.

The premiere of the ballet resulted in a number of scandals. One faction of the audience booed, hissed, and was very unruly, nearly causing a riot before they were drowned out by enthusiastic applause. Many of their objections were focused on Picasso&#x27;s cubist design, which was met with cries of &quot;sale boche.&quot;

According to the painter Gabriel Fournier, one of the most memorable scandals was an altercation between Cocteau, Satie, and music critic Jean Poueigh, who gave &quot;Parade&quot; an unfavorable review. Satie had written a postcard to the critic which read, &quot;Monsieur et cher ami – vous êtes un cul, un cul sans musique! Signé Erik Satie&quot; (&quot;Sir and dear friend – you are an arse, an arse without music! Signed, Erik Satie.&quot;). The critic sued Satie, and at the trial, Cocteau was arrested and beaten by police for repeatedly yelling &quot;arse&quot; in the courtroom. Satie was given a sentence of eight days in jail.

==Legacy==
In 2013, Dale Eisinger of &quot;Complex&quot; ranked &quot;Parade&quot; the 20th best work of performance art in history, writing, &quot;Though there had been collaboration on ballets and operas previously, none had broken free of traditional notions of the forms quite like this group of artists did in the early 20th century.&quot;

==See also==
* Picasso and the Ballets Russes
* Joffrey Ballet

==Notes==
==External links==

* Full score of this piece
* &quot;Réelle Présences: Des Éléments Décoratifs des Ballets Parades et Mercure Considérés en tant que Sculptures&quot;, by Olivier Berggruen, lecture delivered at the Musée Picasso&#x27;s colloquium on sculpture, March 24, 2016. (In French.)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41425" start="12" end="18" title="ballet" label="ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q359383" start="36" end="51" title="Leonide Massine" label="Leonide Massine"/>
<link wikidata="Q187192" start="67" end="77" title="Erik Satie" label="Erik Satie"/>
<link wikidata="Q83158" start="104" end="116" title="Jean Cocteau" label="Jean Cocteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q211513" start="157" end="173" title="Sergei Diaghilev" label="Sergei Diaghilev"/>
<link wikidata="Q214423" start="181" end="195" title="Ballets Russes" label="Ballets Russes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469315" start="250" end="269" title="Théâtre du Châtelet" label="Théâtre du Châtelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="315" end="328" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q359383" start="346" end="361" title="Léonide Massine" label="Léonide Massine"/>
<link wikidata="Q123603" start="407" end="422" title="Ernest Ansermet" label="Ernest Ansermet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540015" start="531" end="563" title="Trois morceaux en forme de poire" label="Trois morceaux en forme de poire"/>
<link wikidata="Q657449" start="922" end="928" title="parade" label="parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q842332" start="1230" end="1239" title="front (military)" label="war front"/>
<link wikidata="Q447487" start="1376" end="1389" title="Misia Edwards" label="Misia Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929552" start="1842" end="1858" title="principal dancer" label="principal dancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q194363" start="1915" end="1930" title="Vaslav Nijinsky" label="Vaslav Nijinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="2058" end="2071" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q368254" start="2258" end="2271" title="Giacomo Balla" label="Giacomo Balla"/>
<link wikidata="Q133855" start="2507" end="2528" title="Guillaume Apollinaire" label="Guillaume Apollinaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="2714" end="2724" title="Surrealism" label="Surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9053464" start="3900" end="3907" title="costume" label="costume"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="4049" end="4059" title="typewriter" label="typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320847" start="4061" end="4068" title="foghorn" label="foghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995020" start="4087" end="4098" title="milk bottle" label="milk bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632742" start="4273" end="4291" title="succès de scandale" label="succès de scandale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="4321" end="4336" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q206015" start="4350" end="4371" title="The Rite of Spring" label="Le Sacre du Printemps"/>
<link wikidata="Q185652" start="4781" end="4788" title="ragtime" label="ragtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174092" start="5533" end="5545" title="Jean Poueigh" label="Jean Poueigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156550" start="6070" end="6089" title="Complex (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Complex&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190536" start="6394" end="6424" title="Picasso and the Ballets Russes" label="Picasso and the Ballets Russes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180342" start="6427" end="6441" title="Joffrey Ballet" label="Joffrey Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16508858" start="6625" end="6642" title="Olivier Berggruen" label="Olivier Berggruen"/>
<link wikidata="Q743206" start="6669" end="6682" title="Musée Picasso" label="Musée Picasso"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405863" wikidata="Q139871" url="?curid=405863" title="Kinmon incident">
<text>The , also known as the , was a rebellion against the Tokugawa shogunate in Japan that took place on the 20th of August [lunar calendar: 19th day, 7th month], 1864, near the Imperial Palace in Kyoto.

==History==
Starting with the Convention of Kanagawa in 1854, within a few years foreign powers forced the shogun dynasty to abandon its isolationist policy &quot;sakoku&quot;. The rebellion reflected the widespread discontent felt among both pro-imperial/anti-shogunate and anti-foreigner groups, who rebelled under the &quot;sonnō jōi&quot; (&quot;revere the emperor, expel the barbarians&quot;) slogan. Emperor Kōmei had issued an &quot;Order to expel barbarians&quot;. Thus, in March 1863, the &quot;shishi&quot; rebels sought to take control of the Emperor to restore the Imperial household to its position of political supremacy.

During what was a bloody crushing of the rebellion, the leading Chōshū clan was held responsible for its instigation. To counter the rebels&#x27; kidnapping attempt, armies of the Aizu and Satsuma domains (the latter led by Saigo Takamori) led the defense of the Imperial palace. However, during the attempt, the rebels set Kyoto on fire, starting with the residence of the Takatsukasa family, and that of a Chōshū official. It is unknown if the rebels set fire to Kyoto as soon as they began to lose, or if their doing so was part of their original strategy, and done as a diversionary tactic. Among the &quot;shishi&quot; who died in the incident was Kusaka Genzui.

Various courtiers, including Nakayama Tadayasu, the Emperor&#x27;s Special Consultant for National Affairs, were banished from Court as a result of their involvement in this incident. Sanjō Sanetomi, due to his association with many of the &quot;shishi&quot; that were captured, executed or identified during the rebellion, was forced to flee. The shogunate followed the incident with a retaliatory armed expedition, the First Chōshū expedition, in September 1864.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="54" end="72" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202239" start="174" end="189" title="Kyoto Imperial Palace" label="Imperial Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="193" end="198" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q771451" start="231" end="253" title="Convention of Kanagawa" label="Convention of Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="308" end="314" title="shogun" label="shogun"/>
<link wikidata="Q309310" start="338" end="350" title="isolationist" label="isolationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q332075" start="364" end="370" title="sakoku" label="sakoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065356" start="528" end="537" title="sonnō jōi" label="sonnō jōi"/>
<link wikidata="Q299179" start="607" end="620" title="Emperor Kōmei" label="Emperor Kōmei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355504" start="641" end="666" title="Order to expel barbarians" label="Order to expel barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279517" start="705" end="711" title="Shishi (organization)" label="shishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q876267" start="902" end="908" title="Chōshū Domain" label="Chōshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205071" start="1018" end="1022" title="Aizu" label="Aizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q676187" start="1027" end="1034" title="Satsuma Domain" label="Satsuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q310462" start="1062" end="1076" title="Saigo Takamori" label="Saigo Takamori"/>
<link wikidata="Q846799" start="1212" end="1230" title="Takatsukasa family" label="Takatsukasa family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360999" start="1491" end="1504" title="Kusaka Genzui" label="Kusaka Genzui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963991" start="1536" end="1553" title="Nakayama Tadayasu" label="Nakayama Tadayasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q516646" start="1691" end="1705" title="Sanjō Sanetomi" label="Sanjō Sanetomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093787" start="1928" end="1951" title="First Chōshū expedition" label="First Chōshū expedition"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405864" wikidata="Q452498" url="?curid=405864" title="Booker">
<text>Booker may refer to:

==Places==
* Booker, Buckinghamshire, a hamlet in England
* Booker, Texas, a town in the United States
* RAF Booker, a Royal Air Force airfield from 1941 to 1963

==Arts and entertainment==
* &quot;Booker&quot; (TV series), a spin-off of &quot;21 Jump Street&quot;
* Booker (film), a 1984 American biographical short television film
* , a fictional character in &quot;Case Closed&quot;
* Booker Prize, presented annually for the best original full-length novel
* Booker, a character in the comic strip &quot;U.S. Acres&quot;
* Booker DeWitt, protagonist of the video game &quot;BioShock Infinite&quot;
* Booker Baxter-Carter, son of Raven Baxter in the television series &quot;Raven&#x27;s Home&quot;

==Brands and enterprises==
* Booker Group, the United Kingdom&#x27;s largest food wholesale operator
* Booker Software, a software company headquartered in New York City
* Booker&#x27;s, a bourbon produced by the Jim Beam distillery

==Roles==
* Booker, one who plans the order of and events within professional wrestling matches
* Booking agent, or talent agent, a person who helps to arrange appearances by entertainers

==Other uses==
* Booker (name), a list of people with the surname or given name
* M10 Booker, a armoured fighting vehicle of the United States Army
* &quot;United States v. Booker&quot;, a 2005 Supreme Court ruling permitting federal judges to depart from the United States Federal Sentencing Guidelines
* Booker (horse) Australian racehorse</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q452498" start="0" end="6" title="Booker" label="Booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943173" start="35" end="58" title="Booker, Buckinghamshire" label="Booker, Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q974450" start="82" end="95" title="Booker, Texas" label="Booker, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275187" start="127" end="137" title="RAF Booker" label="RAF Booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q752102" start="214" end="244" title="Booker (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Booker&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q83950906" start="289" end="302" title="Booker (film)" label="Booker (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="410" end="422" title="Booker Prize" label="Booker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q583673" start="530" end="540" title="U.S. Acres" label="U.S. Acres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074746" start="600" end="617" title="BioShock Infinite" label="BioShock Infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q29189276" start="699" end="716" title="Raven&amp;#x27;s Home" label="Raven&amp;#x27;s Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943180" start="753" end="765" title="Booker Group" label="Booker Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943193" start="827" end="842" title="Booker Software" label="Booker Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943172" start="896" end="909" title="Booker&amp;#x27;s" label="Booker&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1023" end="1053" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#book" label="professional wrestling matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344174" start="1074" end="1086" title="talent agent" label="talent agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q65620065" start="1164" end="1177" title="Booker (name)" label="Booker (name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q83565164" start="1229" end="1239" title="M10 Booker" label="M10 Booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893229" start="1303" end="1326" title="United States v. Booker" label="United States v. Booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q85748240" start="1453" end="1467" title="Booker (horse)" label="Booker (horse)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405865" wikidata="Q8018720" url="?curid=405865" title="William Stanhope, 1st Earl of Harrington">
<text>William Stanhope, 1st Earl of Harrington (c. 1683 – 8 December 1756), was a British statesman and diplomat.

==Life==

William Stanhope was born in 1683 at the family home in Elvaston, Derbyshire, third surviving son of John Stanhope and Dorothy Agard. His elder brother Charles Stanhope (1673–1760) was also a politician and deeply involved in the South Sea Company financial scandal, while his cousin James Stanhope (1673–1721) is considered an alternative candidate to Robert Walpole for the title of Britain&#x27;s first Prime Minister.

He married Anne Griffiths, who died in 1719 giving birth to twin sons, William, 2nd Earl of Harrington (1719–1779), and Thomas (1719–1743).

==Career==
Educated at Eton College, Stanhope was commissioned in 1703 as a lieutenant in the 2nd Foot Guards during the War of the Spanish Succession, before transferring to the 3rd Foot Guards in Spain. By 1710, he was a lieutenant-colonel and missed the December 1710 Battle of Brihuega, when the British rearguard under his cousin James Stanhope was cut off and forced to surrender. In March 1711, he became Colonel of the former Lepells Regiment, which was disbanded in November 1712 as the army was cut back in the run-up to the 1713 Peace of Utrecht.

Stanhope was serving as a diplomat in Spain when the War of the Quadruple Alliance began in 1719 and joined the French army under the Duke of Berwick as a volunteer. He accompanied Berwick&#x27;s army during its successful Siege of San Sebastian. When the war ended in 1720, Stanhope was appointed British ambassador to Spain and given the Colonelcy of the 13th Light Dragoons, later 13th Hussars; he retained this position until the Anglo-Spanish War began in March 1727, having built up his reputation as a diplomatist during a difficult period. 

As a reward for his part in negotiating the 1729 Treaty of Seville that ended the war, he was created Baron Harrington in January 1730. Later the same year, he replaced Lord Townshend as Secretary of State for the Northern Department under Robert Walpole. Despite policy differences over British involvement in the 1734–1735 war, he kept his position until Walpole&#x27;s fall in 1742, when he became Lord President of the Council and created Earl of Harrington and Viscount Petersham.

With the support of his political ally the Duke of Newcastle, he was restored as Secretary of State in 1744 but resigned in February 1746 over his preference for an immediate end to the 1740–1748 War of the Austrian Succession. He was made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland from 1747 to 1751 and while his active military career finished in 1720, he received a number of promotions, ending a full General in 1747. He died in London on 8 December 1756.

==References==
==Sources==
* 







|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8018720" start="0" end="40" title="William Stanhope, 1st Earl of Harrington" label="William Stanhope, 1st Earl of Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="76" end="83" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="84" end="93" title="Politician" label="statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q193391" start="98" end="106" title="diplomat" label="diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378831" start="175" end="195" title="Elvaston, Derbyshire" label="Elvaston, Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18821765" start="271" end="287" title="Charles Stanhope (1673–1760)" label="Charles Stanhope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210696" start="349" end="366" title="South Sea Company" label="South Sea Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q332603" start="403" end="417" title="James Stanhope, 1st Earl Stanhope" label="James Stanhope"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="472" end="486" title="Robert Walpole" label="Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="525" end="539" title="Prime Minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018722" start="613" end="644" title="William Stanhope, 2nd Earl of Harrington" label="William, 2nd Earl of Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="706" end="718" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="804" end="833" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328499" start="954" end="972" title="Battle of Brihuega" label="Battle of Brihuega"/>
<link wikidata="Q332603" start="1018" end="1032" title="James Stanhope, 1st Earl Stanhope" label="James Stanhope"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="1223" end="1239" title="Peace of Utrecht" label="Peace of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q221941" start="1295" end="1324" title="War of the Quadruple Alliance" label="War of the Quadruple Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q166023" start="1376" end="1391" title="James FitzJames, 1st Duke of Berwick" label="Duke of Berwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q107564535" start="1465" end="1487" title="Siege of San Sebastian (1719)" label="Siege of San Sebastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549457" start="1599" end="1638" title="13th Hussars" label="13th Light Dragoons, later 13th Hussars"/>
<link wikidata="Q604204" start="1676" end="1693" title="Anglo-Spanish War (1727–1729)" label="Anglo-Spanish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195251" start="1841" end="1858" title="Treaty of Seville (1729)" label="Treaty of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q336529" start="1961" end="1975" title="Charles Townshend, 2nd Viscount Townshend" label="Lord Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954358" start="1979" end="2025" title="Secretary of State for the Northern Department" label="Secretary of State for the Northern Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="2032" end="2046" title="Robert Walpole" label="Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q212658" start="2117" end="2120" title="War of the Polish Succession" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q943379" start="2193" end="2222" title="Lord President of the Council" label="Lord President of the Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326289" start="2235" end="2253" title="Earl of Harrington" label="Earl of Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q273809" start="2322" end="2339" title="Thomas Pelham-Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle" label="Duke of Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="2475" end="2505" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752225" start="2519" end="2545" title="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland" label="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="2669" end="2676" title="General officer" label="General"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405867" wikidata="Q5425734" url="?curid=405867" title="FIGHT Against War and Fascism">
<text>FIGHT Against War and Fascism was an anti-fascist monthly broadsheet published in the United States by the American League Against War and Fascism from November 1933 until July 1939. It was headquartered in New York City.

It was sponsored by socialists and communists. It apparently had Albert Einstein on its editorial committee.

Perhaps the most famous interview conducted by the paper occurred in 1936, when Grace Lumpkin interviewed the New York publisher and editor Seward Collins, whose literary journal &quot;The American Review&quot; published the work of T. S. Eliot and other notable writers. In that interview, Collins came out as a fascist and supporter of Benito Mussolini and Adolf Hitler and a harsh critic of European Jews. The fallout from the interview was immediate and &quot;The American Review&quot; ceased publication the following year.

==References==
==External links==
* The Fight Against War and Fascism (1933-1939) in the Tamiment Library &amp; Robert F. Wagner Labor Archives at New York University.
* &quot;Fight&quot; Archive at marxists.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="37" end="49" title="anti-fascism" label="anti-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q665319" start="58" end="68" title="broadsheet" label="broadsheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="86" end="99" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744316" start="107" end="146" title="American League Against War and Fascism" label="American League Against War and Fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="243" end="252" title="socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="258" end="268" title="communists" label="communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="288" end="303" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591269" start="413" end="426" title="Grace Lumpkin" label="Grace Lumpkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958553" start="473" end="487" title="Seward Collins" label="Seward Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870659" start="518" end="537" title="The American Review (literary journal)" label="The American Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="566" end="577" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="671" end="687" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="692" end="704" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918095" start="727" end="740" title="European Jews" label="European Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906210" start="1062" end="1074" title="marxists.org" label="marxists.org"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405871" wikidata="Q182092" url="?curid=405871" title="Tobruk">
<text>Tobruk or Tobruck (; , &quot;Antipyrgos&quot;; ; ; ; also transliterated as &quot;Tobruch&quot; and &quot;Tubruk&quot;) is a port city on Libya&#x27;s eastern Mediterranean coast, near the border with Egypt. It is the capital of the Butnan District (formerly Tobruk District) and has a population of 120,000 (2011 est.).
Tobruk was the site of an ancient Greek colony and, later, of a Roman fortress guarding the frontier of Cyrenaica. Over the centuries, Tobruk also served as a waystation along the coastal caravan route. By 1911, Tobruk had become an Italian military post. 

During World War II, Allied forces, mainly the Australian 6th Division, took Tobruk on 22 January 1941. The Australian 9th Division (&quot;The Rats of Tobruk&quot;) pulled back to Tobruk to avoid encirclement after actions at Er Regima and Mechili and reached Tobruk on 9 April 1941. There prolonged fighting followed, against a siege by German and Italian forces.

Although the siege was lifted by Operation Crusader in November 1941, a renewed offensive by Axis forces under Erwin Rommel the following year resulted in Tobruk being captured in June 1942. It was held by the Axis forces until November 1942, when it was recaptured by the Allies. 

Rebuilt after World War II, Tobruk was later expanded during the 1960s to include a port terminal linked by an oil pipeline to the Sarir oil field.

King Idris of Libya had his palace at Bab Zaytun. Tobruk was traditionally a stronghold of the Senussi royal dynasty and one of the first to rebel against Muammar Gaddafi in the Arab Spring.

==Geography==

Tobruk has a strong, naturally protected deep harbour. It is probably the best natural port in northern Africa, although due to the lack of important nearby land sites it is certainly not the most popular. The city is effectively surrounded by a desert lightly populated with nomadic herdsmen who travel from oasis to oasis.

There are many escarpments (cliffs) to the south of Tobruk, as is common across Cyrenaica, the eastern half of Libya. These escarpments generally have their high sides to the south and their low sides (dip slopes) to the north. This constitutes a substantial physical barrier between the north and south of Libya in the Tobruk area.

Previously, Tobruk was some from Benghazi through the Libyan Coastal Highway, but this distance was shortened to after the construction of the Charruba–Timimi Road between the years 1975 and 1985. Construction of the Tobruk–Ajdabiya Road reduced the distance between those two cities from to about .

Because it is approximately away from Egypt by land, Tobruk is also an important hub for merchants from both Egypt and Libya, and for travellers between the two countries as well as those from Bayda and Derna.

Tobruk suffers a serious saltwater intrusion problem. A factory for the desalination of sea water has been built there.

===Climate===
Tobruk features a hot desert climate (&quot;BWh&quot; according to the Köppen climate classification.) However, its maritime location allows it to receive significantly more precipitation than areas further inland in the Sahara desert.

==History==
===Ancient===

An Ancient Greek agricultural colony, &quot;Antipyrgus&quot; (, &quot;Antipyrgos&quot;) was once on the site of modern Tobruk, and the ancient name is still occasionally in use. The name roughly meant &quot;across from Pyrgos&quot;, referring to a location in Crete across the Mediterranean Sea from Antipyrgos. In the Roman era, the town became a Roman fortress guarding the Cyrenaican frontier. With the spread of Christianity, Antipyrgus became an episcopal see. Only one of its ancient bishops is known by name: Aemilianus, who took part in the Second Council of Constantinople in 553. No longer a residential bishopric, Antipyrgus is today listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see. Later the site became a way station on the caravan route that ran along the coast.

===World War II===
At the beginning of World War II, Libya was an Italian colony and Tobruk became the site of important battles between the Allies and Axis powers. Tobruk was strategically important to the conquest of Eastern Libya, then the province of Cyrenaica, for several reasons.

====Strategic importance====
Tobruk had a deep, natural, and protected harbour, which meant that even if the port were bombed, ships would still be able to anchor there and be safe from squalls, so the port could never be rendered wholly useless regardless of military bombardment. This was of critical importance, as it made Tobruk an excellent place to supply a desert warfare campaign. It was also heavily fortified by the Italians prior to their invasion of Egypt in November 1940.

In addition to these prepared fortifications, there were a number of escarpments and cliffs to the south of Tobruk, providing substantial physical barriers to any advance on the port over land. Tobruk was also on a peninsula, allowing it to be defended by a minimal number of troops, which the Allies used to their advantage when the port was under siege. An attacker could not simply bypass the defenders, for if they did, the besieged would sally forth and cut off the nearby supply lines of the attacker, spoiling their advance.

But Tobruk was also strategically significant, due to its location with regard to the remainder of Cyrenaica. Attackers from the east who had secured Tobruk could then advance through the desert to Benghazi, cutting off all enemy troops along the coast, such as those at Derna. This advance would be protected from counterattack, due to escarpments that were quite difficult for a military force to climb, running generally from Tobruk to Suluq. Due to the importance of maintaining supply in the desert, getting cut off in this area was disastrous. Therefore, whoever held both Suluq and Tobruk controlled the majority of Cyrenaica.

Finally, south of the port was the largest airfield in eastern Libya. This was significant due to the importance of air power in desert warfare.

====Italian advance====
Italian forces (and their native Libyan allies—about two divisions of the latter) invaded Egypt in early September 1940 but halted their advance after a week and dug in at Sidi Barrani. In early December, British Empire forces—an armoured division and two infantry divisions—launched a counterstrike codenamed Operation Compass. The Italians had previously invaded Albania and occupied part of the south of France, and had now made a military incursion into a British protectorate.

====British capture of Tobruk====

The counterstrike involved the British pocketing two of the Italian camps against the Mediterranean, forcing their surrender. This led to a general Italian retreat to El Agheila. Tobruk was captured by British, Australian and Indian forces on 22 January 1941.

Italy called on her German ally, which sent an army corps, under the name &quot;Deutsches Afrika Korps&quot; (DAK). Italy also sent several more divisions to Libya. These forces, under Lieutenant-General Erwin Rommel, drove the Allies back across Cyrenaica to the Egyptian border, leaving Tobruk isolated and under siege. The defenders of the fortress consisted of the Australian 9th Division, the Australian 18th Brigade and some British tanks and artillery. They were later reinforced and replaced by the British 70th Infantry Division, Polish Independent Carpathian Rifle Brigade, a Czechoslovak battalion and a British tank brigade. The siege lasted until December, when Operation Crusader pushed the DAK and Italians back out of Cyrenaica.

====German capture of Tobruk====

Rommel&#x27;s second offensive took place in May and June 1942. Tobruk was taken in an outflanking attack on 21 June 1942, capturing the largest number of British Commonwealth troops after the fall of Singapore earlier in the year, where over 80,000 were captured. Rommel was promoted to Generalfeldmarschall, shortly thereafter and was the youngest in the Wehrmacht Heer to achieve this rank. The following units were deployed in Tobruk on 20 June 1942, and most of them were captured by the Axis forces:
* 2nd South African Infantry Division
* 4th Royal Tank Regiment
* 7th Royal Tank Regiment
* 3rd Battalion, Coldstream Guards
* 1st Battalion, Sherwood Foresters
* 1st Battalion, Worcestershire Regiment
* 2nd Battalion, Queen&#x27;s Own Cameron Highlanders
* 2nd Battalion, 5th Mahratta Light Infantry
* 2nd Battalion, 7th Gurkha Rifles
* 67 Medium Regiment, Royal Artillery
* 68 Medium Regiment, Royal Artillery
* 25th Field Regiment, Royal Artillery

====British Commando raid====
A British raid on Tobruk on 13–14 September 1942, codenamed Operation Agreement, intended to destroy port facilities and stores being used to support the Axis forces further west. Special forces approached from across the desert while Commandos attacked from the sea. A preparatory air raid by RAF heavy bombers served only to alert the Italian and German defenders. The special forces were unable to silence the coastal artillery batteries and the seaborne assault had to be abandoned after some of the Commandos had been landed in the wrong place. The retiring vessels were then attacked from the air. The British sustained almost 800 casualties, together with a cruiser, two destroyers and several smaller ships and boats.

====British recapture====
Tobruk remained in Axis hands until 11 November 1942, when the Allies captured it after the Second Battle of El Alamein. It remained in Allied hands thereafter. Although not as much a reason for its strategic significance, the British built a rail line from El Alamein to Tobruk during the course of the war. This rail line was significant both for purposes of supply and as a sense of pride to the Allied troops, as the rail line was built through a little-populated, inhospitable desert.

===Libyan Civil Wars===
At the outset of the First Libyan Civil War, the city quickly came under the control of the NTC. In September 2014 the internationally recognized government of Libya relocated to a Greek car ferry in Tobruk harbor. A rival New General National Congress parliament continued to operate in Tripoli. In October 2014 they again re-located, to a hotel named &quot;Dar al-Salam&quot; also known as the Al Masira Hotel in Tobruk. In November 2014 that government was declared illegal by Libya&#x27;s highest court.

==Notable people==
Professor Omar El Barasi (b. 1951), who once managed the Libyan branch of Society of Petroleum Engineers, and later became a deputy of Libya PM Abdurrahim El-Keib is from Tobruk and gained his doctorate in petroleum engineering from Waseda University, Japan.

Eman al-Obeidi, a Libyan woman who was abused by the Gaddafi government during the First Libyan Civil War, is from Tobruk.

Omar Mukhtar was born in Zanjhur, near Tobruk.

==Transportation==
The city is served by Tobruk Airport, with two major domestic airlines serving it.

==See also==
* List of cities in Libya
* Railway stations in Libya
* Knightsbridge War Cemetery WW2 British Commonwealth Cemetery

==Notes==
* On 1 January 1934, Tripolitania, Cyrenaica, and Fezzan were united as the Italian colony of Libya. However, during World War II these names continued to be used.

==References==
==External links==

* Tobruk: Australian toughness beats Rommel
* Tobruk War cemetery - video</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q182092" start="0" end="6" title="Tobruk" label="Tobruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q182092" start="10" end="17" title="Tobruk" label="Tobruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q134550" start="58" end="72" title="Transliteration" label="transliterated"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="125" end="134" title="port city" label="port city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="138" end="143" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="159" end="178" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088824" start="189" end="206" title="Egypt–Libya border" label="border with Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25931" start="233" end="248" title="Butnan District" label="Butnan District"/>
<link wikidata="Q25931" start="259" end="274" title="Tobruk District" label="Tobruk District"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="347" end="360" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="385" end="390" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="425" end="434" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q203494" start="509" end="522" title="caravan (travellers)" label="caravan route"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="554" end="561" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="586" end="598" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879274" start="637" end="649" title="6th Division (Australia)" label="6th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759482" start="718" end="736" title="The Rats of Tobruk" label="The Rats of Tobruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931808" start="805" end="814" title="Ar Rajma" label="Er Regima"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119373" start="819" end="826" title="Mechili" label="Mechili"/>
<link wikidata="Q611089" start="869" end="887" title="Siege of Tobruk" label="prolonged fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q327085" start="978" end="996" title="Operation Crusader" label="Operation Crusader"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="1038" end="1042" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="1056" end="1068" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1242" end="1254" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648102" start="1312" end="1325" title="Port of Tobruk" label="port terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841394" start="1339" end="1351" title="oil pipeline" label="oil pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4417634" start="1359" end="1374" title="Sarir oil field" label="Sarir oil field"/>
<link wikidata="Q116430" start="1382" end="1396" title="Idris of Libya" label="Idris of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="1532" end="1547" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="1555" end="1566" title="Arab Spring" label="Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648102" start="1597" end="1637" title="Port of Tobruk" label="strong, naturally protected deep harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="1688" end="1694" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="1860" end="1865" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q43742" start="1893" end="1898" title="oasis" label="oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174791" start="1925" end="1935" title="escarpment" label="escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195438" start="2112" end="2121" title="dip slope" label="dip slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="2277" end="2285" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376543" start="2298" end="2320" title="Libyan Coastal Highway" label="Libyan Coastal Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086679" start="2387" end="2407" title="Charruba–Timimi Road" label="Charruba–Timimi Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401396" start="2461" end="2481" title="Tobruk–Ajdabiya Road" label="Tobruk–Ajdabiya Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="2583" end="2588" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="2654" end="2659" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="2664" end="2669" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35784" start="2738" end="2743" title="Bayda, Libya" label="Bayda"/>
<link wikidata="Q211866" start="2748" end="2753" title="Derna, Libya" label="Derna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002254" start="2781" end="2800" title="saltwater intrusion" label="saltwater intrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q190873" start="2828" end="2840" title="desalination" label="desalination"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="2909" end="2927" title="hot desert climate" label="hot desert climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="2962" end="2991" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="3158" end="3171" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707725" start="3374" end="3380" title="Tylissos" label="Pyrgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="3415" end="3420" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="3432" end="3449" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3474" end="3479" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="3509" end="3517" title="fortress" label="fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="3531" end="3540" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="3606" end="3619" title="episcopal see" label="episcopal see"/>
<link wikidata="Q205227" start="3704" end="3736" title="Second Council of Constantinople" label="Second Council of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3814" end="3829" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217609" start="3835" end="3846" title="titular see" label="titular see"/>
<link wikidata="Q4149527" start="3891" end="3898" title="Camel train" label="caravan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3971" end="3983" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="3985" end="4012" title="Italian Libya" label="Libya was an Italian colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q178561" start="4053" end="4059" title="battle" label="battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="4073" end="4079" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="4084" end="4095" title="Axis powers of World War II" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q853213" start="4406" end="4412" title="squall" label="squall"/>
<link wikidata="Q678146" start="4489" end="4500" title="bombardment" label="bombardment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182852" start="4584" end="4598" title="desert warfare" label="desert warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q926295" start="4642" end="4654" title="Italian Empire" label="the Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174791" start="4776" end="4786" title="escarpment" label="escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633520" start="5150" end="5161" title="sortie" label="sally forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q658035" start="5185" end="5196" title="supply line" label="supply line"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="5438" end="5446" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q211866" start="5511" end="5516" title="Derna, Libya" label="Derna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329143" start="5555" end="5568" title="counterattack" label="counterattack"/>
<link wikidata="Q36060" start="5679" end="5684" title="Suluq" label="Suluq"/>
<link wikidata="Q177777" start="5723" end="5729" title="logistics" label="supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698988" start="5991" end="6000" title="air power" label="air power"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="6102" end="6111" title="Division (military)" label="divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q698421" start="6127" end="6140" title="Italian invasion of Egypt" label="invaded Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018010" start="6217" end="6229" title="Sidi Barrani" label="Sidi Barrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="6250" end="6264" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q696018" start="6355" end="6372" title="Operation Compass" label="Operation Compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q714644" start="6402" end="6417" title="Italian invasion of Albania" label="invaded Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570590" start="6422" end="6458" title="Italian-occupied France" label="occupied part of the south of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="6513" end="6525" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41339" start="6730" end="6740" title="El Agheila" label="El Agheila"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="6876" end="6881" title="corps" label="corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q153113" start="6904" end="6926" title="Deutsches Afrika Korps" label="Deutsches Afrika Korps"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="7028" end="7040" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q611089" start="7133" end="7144" title="siege of Tobruk" label="under siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021969" start="7193" end="7216" title="9th Division (Australia)" label="Australian 9th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644009" start="7222" end="7245" title="7th Division (Australia)" label="Australian 18th Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715571" start="7331" end="7361" title="British 70th Infantry Division" label="British 70th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925304" start="7363" end="7406" title="Polish Independent Carpathian Rifle Brigade" label="Polish Independent Carpathian Rifle Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201848" start="7410" end="7432" title="Czechoslovak 11th Infantry Battalion" label="Czechoslovak battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q327085" start="7499" end="7517" title="Operation Crusader" label="Operation Crusader"/>
<link wikidata="Q327035" start="7675" end="7725" title="Battle of Gazala" label="was taken in an outflanking attack on 21 June 1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="7759" end="7779" title="British Commonwealth" label="British Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q296754" start="7797" end="7814" title="Battle of Singapore" label="fall of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820253" start="7892" end="7912" title="Generalfeldmarschall" label="Generalfeldmarschall"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="7961" end="7970" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="7971" end="7975" title="German Army (Wehrmacht)" label="Heer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633729" start="8112" end="8147" title="2nd Infantry Division (South Africa)" label="2nd South African Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639442" start="8150" end="8173" title="4th Royal Tank Regiment" label="4th Royal Tank Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818427" start="8176" end="8199" title="7th Royal Tank Regiment" label="7th Royal Tank Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107953" start="8217" end="8234" title="Coldstream Guards" label="Coldstream Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329335" start="8252" end="8270" title="Sherwood Foresters" label="Sherwood Foresters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455434" start="8288" end="8311" title="Worcestershire Regiment" label="Worcestershire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413987" start="8329" end="8365" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Cameron Highlanders" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Cameron Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633326" start="8387" end="8410" title="Mahratta Light Infantry" label="Mahratta Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644014" start="8428" end="8445" title="7th Gurkha Rifles" label="7th Gurkha Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587335" start="8468" end="8483" title="Royal Artillery" label="Royal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091132" start="8652" end="8671" title="Operation Agreement" label="Operation Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347548" start="8827" end="8836" title="Commandos (United Kingdom)" label="Commandos"/>
<link wikidata="Q153376" start="9437" end="9464" title="Second Battle of El Alamein" label="Second Battle of El Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q204439" start="9603" end="9613" title="El Alamein" label="El Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="9881" end="9903" title="Libyan Civil War (2011)" label="First Libyan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q32835" start="9952" end="9955" title="National Transitional Council" label="NTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17443556" start="9979" end="10016" title="House of Representatives (Libya)" label="internationally recognized government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="10020" end="10025" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414558" start="10083" end="10112" title="New General National Congress" label="New General National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249890" start="10462" end="10492" title="Society of Petroleum Engineers" label="Society of Petroleum Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q40579" start="10532" end="10550" title="Abdurrahim El-Keib" label="Abdurrahim El-Keib"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273174" start="10594" end="10615" title="petroleum engineering" label="petroleum engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q274486" start="10621" end="10638" title="Waseda University" label="Waseda University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="10640" end="10645" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q459803" start="10648" end="10662" title="Eman al-Obeidi" label="Eman al-Obeidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="10731" end="10753" title="2011 Libyan Civil War" label="First Libyan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q212388" start="10772" end="10784" title="Omar Mukhtar" label="Omar Mukhtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25783" start="10861" end="10875" title="Tobruk Airport" label="Tobruk Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q41303" start="10938" end="10961" title="List of cities in Libya" label="List of cities in Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q18209808" start="10964" end="10989" title="Railway stations in Libya" label="Railway stations in Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422556" start="10992" end="11018" title="Knightsbridge War Cemetery" label="Knightsbridge War Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11181" end="11193" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405873" wikidata="Q650912" url="?curid=405873" title="Bloodstream infection">
<text>Bloodstream infections (BSIs) are infections of blood caused by blood-borne pathogens. The detection of microbes in the blood (most commonly accomplished by blood cultures) is always abnormal. A bloodstream infection is different from sepsis, which is characterized by severe inflammatory or immune responses of the host organism to pathogens.

Bacteria can enter the bloodstream as a severe complication of infections (like pneumonia or meningitis), during surgery (especially when involving mucous membranes such as the gastrointestinal tract), or due to catheters and other foreign bodies entering the arteries or veins (including during intravenous drug abuse). Transient bacteremia can result after dental procedures or brushing of teeth.

Bacteremia can have several important health consequences. Immune responses to the bacteria can cause sepsis and septic shock, which, particularly if severe sepsis and then septic shock occurs, have high mortality rates, especially if not treated quickly (though, if treated early, currently mild sepsis can usually be dealt with successfully). Bacteria can also spread via the blood to other parts of the body (which is called hematogenous spread), causing infections away from the original site of infection, such as endocarditis or osteomyelitis. Treatment for bacteremia is with antibiotics, and prevention with antibiotic prophylaxis can be given in high risk situations.

==Signs and symptoms==
Bacteremia is typically transient and is quickly removed from the blood by the immune system.

Bacteremia frequently evokes a response from the immune system called sepsis, which consists of symptoms such as fever, chills, and hypotension. Severe immune responses to bacteremia may result in septic shock and &quot;multiple organ dysfunction syndrome&quot;, which are potentially fatal.

==Types==
Based on type of causative microbe, bloodstream infections are of many types:
==Causes==
Bacteria can enter the bloodstream in a number of different ways. However, for each major classification of bacteria (gram negative, gram positive, or anaerobic) there are characteristic sources or routes of entry into the bloodstream that lead to bacteremia. Causes of bacteremia can additionally be divided into healthcare-associated (acquired during the process of receiving care in a healthcare facility) or community-acquired (acquired outside of a health facility, often prior to hospitalization).

=== Gram positive bacteremia ===
Gram positive bacteria are an increasingly important cause of bacteremia. Staphylococcus, streptococcus, and enterococcus species are the most important and most common species of gram-positive bacteria that can enter the bloodstream. These bacteria are normally found on the skin or in the gastrointestinal tract.

&quot;Staphylococcus aureus&quot; is the most common cause of healthcare-associated bacteremia in North and South America and is also an important cause of community-acquired bacteremia. Skin ulceration or wounds, respiratory tract infections, and IV drug use are the most important causes of community-acquired staph aureus bacteremia. In healthcare settings, intravenous catheters, urinary tract catheters, and surgical procedures are the most common causes of staph aureus bacteremia.

There are many different types of streptococcal species that can cause bacteremia. &quot;Group A streptococcus&quot; (GAS) typically causes bacteremia from skin and soft tissue infections. &quot;Group B streptococcus&quot; is an important cause of bacteremia in neonates, often immediately following birth. &quot;Viridans streptococci&quot; species are normal bacterial flora of the mouth. Viridans strep can cause temporary bacteremia after eating, toothbrushing, or flossing. More severe bacteremia can occur following dental procedures or in patients receiving chemotherapy. Finally, &quot;Streptococcus bovis&quot; is a common cause of bacteremia in patients with colon cancer.

&quot;Enterococci&quot; are an important cause of healthcare-associated bacteremia. These bacteria commonly live in the gastrointestinal tract and female genital tract. Intravenous catheters, urinary tract infections and surgical wounds are all risk factors for developing bacteremia from enterococcal species. Resistant enterococcal species can cause bacteremia in patients who have had long hospital stays or frequent antibiotic use in the past (see antibiotic misuse).

=== Gram negative bacteremia ===
Gram negative bacterial species are responsible for approximately 24% of all cases of healthcare-associated bacteremia and 45% of all cases of community-acquired bacteremia. In general, gram negative bacteria enter the bloodstream from infections in the respiratory tract, genitourinary tract, gastrointestinal tract, or hepatobiliary system. Gram-negative bacteremia occurs more frequently in elderly populations (65 years or older) and is associated with higher morbidity and mortality in this population.&quot;E.coli&quot; is the most common cause of community-acquired bacteremia accounting for approximately 75% of cases. E.coli bacteremia is usually the result of a urinary tract infection. Other organisms that can cause community-acquired bacteremia include &quot;Pseudomonas aeruginosa&quot;, &quot;Klebsiella pneumoniae&quot;, and &quot;Proteus mirabilis&quot;. &quot;Salmonella&quot; infection, despite mainly only resulting in gastroenteritis in the developed world, is a common cause of bacteremia in Africa. It principally affects children who lack antibodies to Salmonella and HIV+ patients of all ages.

Among healthcare-associated cases of bacteremia, gram negative organisms are an important cause of bacteremia in the ICU. Catheters in the veins, arteries, or urinary tract can all create a way for gram negative bacteria to enter the bloodstream. Surgical procedures of the genitourinary tract, intestinal tract, or hepatobiliary tract can also lead to gram negative bacteremia. &quot;Pseudomonas&quot; and &quot;Enterobacter&quot; species are the most important causes of gram negative bacteremia in the ICU.

=== Bacteremia risk factors ===
There are several risk factors that increase the likelihood of developing bacteremia from any type of bacteria. These include:
* HIV infection
* Diabetes Mellitus
* Chronic hemodialysis
* Solid organ transplant
* Stem cell transplant
* Treatment with glucocorticoids
* Liver failure
* Asplenia

==Mechanism==
Bacteremia can travel through the blood stream to distant sites in the body and cause infection (hematogenous spread). Hematogenous spread of bacteria is part of the pathophysiology of certain infections of the heart (endocarditis), structures around the brain (meningitis), and tuberculosis of the spine (Pott&#x27;s disease). Hematogenous spread of bacteria is responsible for many bone infections (osteomyelitis).

Prosthetic cardiac implants (for example artificial heart valves) are especially vulnerable to infection from bacteremia. Prior to widespread use of vaccines, occult bacteremia was an important consideration in febrile children that appeared otherwise well.

==Diagnosis==
Bacteremia is most commonly diagnosed by blood culture, in which a sample of blood drawn from the vein by needle puncture is allowed to incubate with a medium that promotes bacterial growth. If bacteria are present in the bloodstream at the time the sample is obtained, the bacteria will multiply and can thereby be detected.

Any bacteria that incidentally find their way to the culture medium will also multiply. For example, if the skin is not adequately cleaned before needle puncture, contamination of the blood sample with normal bacteria that live on the surface of the skin can occur. For this reason, blood cultures must be drawn with great attention to sterile process. The presence of certain bacteria in the blood culture, such as S&quot;taphylococcus aureus&quot;, &quot;Streptococcus pneumoniae&quot;, and &quot;Escherichia coli&quot; almost never represent a contamination of the sample. On the other hand, contamination may be more highly suspected if organisms like &quot;Staphylococcus epidermidis&quot; or &quot;Cutibacterium acnes&quot; grow in the blood culture.

Two blood cultures drawn from separate sites of the body are often sufficient to diagnose bacteremia. Two out of two cultures growing the same type of bacteria usually represents a real bacteremia, particularly if the organism that grows is not a common contaminant. One out of two positive cultures will usually prompt a repeat set of blood cultures to be drawn to confirm whether a contaminant or a real bacteremia is present. The patient&#x27;s skin is typically cleaned with an alcohol-based product prior to drawing blood to prevent contamination. Blood cultures may be repeated at intervals to determine if persistent—rather than transient—bacteremia is present.

Prior to drawing blood cultures, a thorough patient history should be taken with particular regard to presence of both fevers and chills, other focal signs of infection such as in the skin or soft tissue, a state of immunosuppression, or any recent invasive procedures.

Ultrasound of the heart is recommended in all those with bacteremia due to &quot;Staphylococcus aureus&quot; to rule out infectious endocarditis.

===Definition===

Bacteremia is the presence of bacteria in the bloodstream that are alive and capable of reproducing. It is a type of bloodstream infection. Bacteremia is defined as either a primary or secondary process. In primary bacteremia, bacteria have been directly introduced into the bloodstream. Injection drug use may lead to primary bacteremia. In the hospital setting, use of blood vessel catheters contaminated with bacteria may also lead to primary bacteremia. Secondary bacteremia occurs when bacteria have entered the body at another site, such as the cuts in the skin, or the mucous membranes of the lungs (respiratory tract), mouth or intestines (gastrointestinal tract), bladder (urinary tract), or genitals. Bacteria that have infected the body at these sites may then spread into the lymphatic system and gain access to the bloodstream, where further spread can occur.

Bacteremia may also be defined by the timing of bacteria presence in the bloodstream: transient, intermittent, or persistent. In transient bacteremia, bacteria are present in the bloodstream for minutes to a few hours before being cleared from the body, and the result is typically harmless in healthy people. This can occur after manipulation of parts of the body normally colonized by bacteria, such as the mucosal surfaces of the mouth during tooth brushing, flossing, or dental procedures, or instrumentation of the bladder or colon. Intermittent bacteremia is characterized by periodic seeding of the same bacteria into the bloodstream by an existing infection elsewhere in the body, such as an abscess, pneumonia, or bone infection, followed by clearing of that bacteria from the bloodstream. This cycle will often repeat until the existing infection is successfully treated. Persistent bacteremia is characterized by the continuous presence of bacteria in the bloodstream. It is usually the result of an infected heart valve, a central line-associated bloodstream infection (CLABSI), an infected blood clot (suppurative thrombophlebitis), or an infected blood vessel graft. Persistent bacteremia can also occur as part of the infection process of typhoid fever, brucellosis, and bacterial meningitis. Left untreated, conditions causing persistent bacteremia can be potentially fatal.

Bacteremia is clinically distinct from sepsis, which is a condition where the blood stream infection is associated with an inflammatory response from the body, often causing abnormalities in body temperature, heart rate, breathing rate, blood pressure, and white blood cell count.

== Treatment ==
The presence of bacteria in the blood almost always requires treatment with antibiotics. This is because there are high mortality rates from progression to sepsis if antibiotics are delayed. This is especially the case if the sepsis gets worse, and even more if it becomes severe sepsis (where organ damage begins), septic shock (the organ damage continues, which lowers the blood pressure to the point where special drugs are needed to help keep it high enough), or multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (where organ damage can quickly become fatal, even with supportive devices).

The treatment of bacteremia should begin with empiric antibiotic coverage. Any patient presenting with signs or symptoms of bacteremia or a positive blood culture should be started on intravenous antibiotics. The choice of antibiotic is determined by the most likely source of infection and by the characteristic organisms that typically cause that infection. Other important considerations include the patient&#x27;s history of antibiotic use, the severity of the presenting symptoms, and any allergies to antibiotics. Empiric antibiotics should be narrowed, preferably to a single antibiotic, once the blood culture returns with a particular bacteria that has been isolated.

===Gram positive bacteremia===
The Infectious Disease Society of America (IDSA) recommends treating uncomplicated methicillin resistant staph aureus (MRSA) bacteremia with a 14-day course of intravenous vancomycin. Uncomplicated bacteremia is defined as having positive blood cultures for MRSA, but having no evidence of endocarditis, no implanted prostheses, negative blood cultures after 2–4 days of treatment, and signs of clinical improvement after 72 hrs.

The antibiotic treatment of choice for streptococcal and enteroccal infections differs by species. However, it is important to look at the antibiotic resistance pattern for each species from the blood culture to better treat infections caused by resistant organisms.

===Gram negative bacteremia===
The treatment of gram negative bacteremia is also highly dependent on the causative organism. Empiric antibiotic therapy should be guided by the most likely source of infection and the patient&#x27;s past exposure to healthcare facilities. In particular, a recent history of exposure to a healthcare setting may necessitate the need for antibiotics with &quot;pseudomonas aeruginosa&quot; coverage or broader coverage for resistant organisms. Extended generation cephalosporins such as ceftriaxone or beta lactam/beta lactamase inhibitor antibiotics such as piperacillin-tazobactam are frequently used for the treatment of gram negative bacteremia.

===Catheter-associated infections===
For healthcare-associated bacteremia due to intravenous catheters, the IDSA has published guidelines for catheter removal. Short term catheters (in place &lt;14 days) should be removed if bacteremia is caused by any gram negative bacteria, staph aureus, enterococci or mycobacteria. Long term catheters (&gt;14 days) should be removed if the patient is developing signs or symptoms of sepsis or endocarditis, or if blood cultures remain positive for more than 72 hours.

==See also==
* Antibiotic prophylaxis
* Dental antibiotic prophylaxis
* Fungemia
* Viremia

==References==
== External links ==

* Bacteremia at Medscape eMedicine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q650912" start="0" end="22" title="Bloodstream infection" label="Bloodstream infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q650912" start="24" end="28" title="Bloodstream infection" label="BSIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="48" end="53" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927522" start="64" end="85" title="blood-borne pathogens" label="blood-borne pathogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="104" end="111" title="microbe" label="microbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q886695" start="157" end="170" title="blood culture" label="blood culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="235" end="241" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="276" end="288" title="Inflammation" label="inflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612119" start="292" end="307" title="immune response" label="immune response"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="408" end="417" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="425" end="434" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="438" end="448" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219805" start="493" end="509" title="mucous membranes" label="mucous membranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="522" end="544" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="557" end="566" title="catheters" label="catheters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455142" start="577" end="591" title="foreign bodies" label="foreign bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9655" start="605" end="613" title="arteries" label="arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9609" start="617" end="622" title="veins" label="veins"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="641" end="652" title="intravenous" label="intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="653" end="663" title="drug abuse" label="drug abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="847" end="853" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765564" start="858" end="870" title="septic shock" label="septic shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="949" end="963" title="mortality rate" label="mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q82504" start="1264" end="1276" title="endocarditis" label="endocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q938983" start="1280" end="1293" title="osteomyelitis" label="osteomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="1328" end="1339" title="antibiotics" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774943" start="1361" end="1383" title="Antimicrobial prophylaxis" label="antibiotic prophylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="1525" end="1538" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="1611" end="1617" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="1654" end="1659" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q275419" start="1673" end="1684" title="hypotension" label="hypotension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765564" start="1738" end="1750" title="septic shock" label="septic shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193870" start="1761" end="1796" title="multiple organ dysfunction syndrome" label="multiple organ dysfunction syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q215509" start="2247" end="2268" title="Health Care-Associated Infection" label="healthcare-associated"/>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="2471" end="2493" title="Gram-positive bacteria" label="Gram positive bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="2762" end="2784" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q188121" start="2793" end="2814" title="Staphylococcus aureus" label="Staphylococcus aureus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190161" start="3310" end="3323" title="Streptococcus" label="streptococcal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131271" start="3359" end="3392" title="Streptococcus pyogenes" label="&amp;quot;Group A streptococcus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q132949" start="3465" end="3498" title="Streptococcus agalactiae" label="&amp;quot;Group B streptococcus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="3538" end="3546" title="Infant" label="neonates"/>
<link wikidata="Q751405" start="3589" end="3610" title="Viridans streptococci" label="Viridans streptococci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761388" start="3869" end="3888" title="Streptococcus bovis" label="Streptococcus bovis"/>
<link wikidata="Q517258" start="3959" end="3982" title="Enterococcus" label="&amp;quot;Enterococci&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q221668" start="4151" end="4174" title="urinary tract infection" label="urinary tract infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610066" start="4270" end="4292" title="Vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus" label="Resistant enterococcal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774542" start="4411" end="4428" title="antibiotic misuse" label="antibiotic misuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q632006" start="4465" end="4488" title="Gram-negative bacteria" label="Gram negative bacterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400765" start="4719" end="4736" title="respiratory tract" label="respiratory tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712977" start="4738" end="4757" title="Genitourinary system" label="genitourinary tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562150" start="4786" end="4806" title="Biliary tract" label="hepatobiliary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="4929" end="4938" title="morbidity" label="morbidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="4972" end="4990" title="Escherichia coli" label="&amp;quot;E.coli&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q31856" start="5237" end="5259" title="Pseudomonas aeruginosa" label="Pseudomonas aeruginosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q132592" start="5273" end="5294" title="Klebsiella pneumoniae" label="Klebsiella pneumoniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q311273" start="5312" end="5329" title="Proteus mirabilis" label="Proteus mirabilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q150839" start="5343" end="5353" title="Salmonella" label="Salmonella"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094647" start="5702" end="5705" title="Intensive care unit" label="ICU"/>
<link wikidata="Q134281" start="5992" end="6024" title="Enterobacter" label="&amp;quot;Enterobacter&amp;quot; species"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="6257" end="6270" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="6273" end="6290" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="Diabetes Mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q391744" start="6301" end="6313" title="hemodialysis" label="hemodialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q105196" start="6322" end="6338" title="Organ transplantation" label="organ transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128050" start="6341" end="6361" title="Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation" label="Stem cell transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q422549" start="6379" end="6393" title="glucocorticoid" label="glucocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q970208" start="6397" end="6410" title="Liver failure" label="Liver failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q737712" start="6413" end="6421" title="Asplenia" label="Asplenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82504" start="6655" end="6667" title="endocarditis" label="endocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="6699" end="6709" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723627" start="6743" end="6762" title="Pott&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Pott&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q938983" start="6838" end="6851" title="osteomyelitis" label="osteomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q282454" start="6896" end="6920" title="Artificial heart valve" label="artificial heart valves)"/>
<link wikidata="Q886695" start="7169" end="7182" title="blood culture" label="blood culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q900452" start="7264" end="7272" title="Incubator (microbiology)" label="incubate"/>
<link wikidata="Q575920" start="7280" end="7286" title="microbiological medium" label="medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q188121" start="7871" end="7904" title="Staphylococcus aureus" label="S&amp;quot;taphylococcus aureus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q221179" start="7912" end="7936" title="Streptococcus pneumoniae" label="Streptococcus pneumoniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="7954" end="7970" title="Escherichia coli" label="Escherichia coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q131915" start="8117" end="8143" title="Staphylococcus epidermidis" label="Staphylococcus epidermidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442109" start="8159" end="8178" title="Cutibacterium acnes" label="Cutibacterium acnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535374" start="9060" end="9086" title="Skin and soft tissue infection" label="in the skin or soft tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q188121" start="9235" end="9256" title="Staphylococcus aureus" label="Staphylococcus aureus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450598" start="9275" end="9298" title="infectious endocarditis" label="infectious endocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="9349" end="9357" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369403" start="9607" end="9625" title="Drug injection" label="Injection drug use"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="9703" end="9711" title="catheter" label="catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219805" start="9891" end="9911" title="Mucous membrane" label="the mucous membranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400765" start="9926" end="9937" title="Respiratory tract" label="respiratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="9967" end="9983" title="Gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q181100" start="9992" end="10015" title="Urinary system" label="bladder (urinary tract)"/>
<link wikidata="Q712604" start="10107" end="10123" title="lymphatic system" label="lymphatic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q246090" start="10690" end="10720" title="Cystoscopy" label="instrumentation of the bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q840387" start="10724" end="10729" title="Colonoscopy" label="colon"/>
<link wikidata="Q164655" start="10893" end="10900" title="abscess" label="abscess"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="10902" end="10911" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q938983" start="10916" end="10930" title="Osteomyelitis" label="bone infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450598" start="11204" end="11224" title="Infective endocarditis" label="infected heart valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q190404" start="11228" end="11282" title="Central venous catheter" label="central line-associated bloodstream infection (CLABSI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916459" start="11354" end="11372" title="Vascular bypass" label="blood vessel graft"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="11447" end="11460" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q156050" start="11462" end="11473" title="brucellosis" label="brucellosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="11479" end="11499" title="Meningitis" label="bacterial meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="11624" end="11630" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="11708" end="11720" title="inflammation" label="inflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="11776" end="11792" title="Fever" label="body temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q886518" start="11842" end="11864" title="Complete blood count" label="white blood cell count"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="11959" end="11970" title="antibiotics" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="12003" end="12017" title="mortality rate" label="mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="12039" end="12045" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374236" start="12510" end="12528" title="Empiric antibiotics" label="empiric antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029213" start="13177" end="13214" title="Infectious Diseases Society of America" label="Infectious Disease Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q595158" start="13256" end="13297" title="Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus" label="methicillin resistant staph aureus (MRSA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q181802" start="13490" end="13500" title="Prosthesis" label="prostheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q31856" start="14263" end="14285" title="pseudomonas aeruginosa" label="pseudomonas aeruginosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q271021" start="14366" end="14379" title="cephalosporin" label="cephalosporin"/>
<link wikidata="Q421713" start="14389" end="14400" title="ceftriaxone" label="ceftriaxone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41873" start="14404" end="14415" title="Beta-lactam" label="beta lactam"/>
<link wikidata="Q310286" start="14416" end="14440" title="Β-Lactamase inhibitor" label="beta lactamase inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197337" start="14461" end="14484" title="Piperacillin/tazobactam" label="piperacillin-tazobactam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774943" start="15076" end="15098" title="Antibiotic prophylaxis" label="Antibiotic prophylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259401" start="15101" end="15130" title="Dental antibiotic prophylaxis" label="Dental antibiotic prophylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491700" start="15133" end="15141" title="Fungemia" label="Fungemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425304" start="15144" end="15151" title="Viremia" label="Viremia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405874" wikidata="Q2025311" url="?curid=405874" title="Raymond A. Palmer">
<text>Raymond Alfred Palmer (August 1, 1910 – August 15, 1977) was an American author and magazine editor. Influential in the first wave of science fiction fandom, his first fiction stories were published in 1935.

Ziff Davis named him editor of the science fiction magazine &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; in 1938 and editor of its sister publication, &quot;Fantastic Stories&quot;, in 1939. He began promoting the &quot;Shaver Mystery&quot;, a series of stories about ancient aliens, lost civilizations, and underground inhabitants, in 1944. He claimed the stories were true, which caused a deep rift in science fiction fandom and readership. On the orders of the magazine&#x27;s owners, he ended the Shaver Mystery in 1948.

Palmer established his own publishing house in 1947. After leaving Ziff Davis in 1949, he began publishing the magazines &quot;Fate&quot;, &quot;Other Worlds Science Stories&quot;, &quot;Mystic&quot; (later renamed &quot;Search&quot;), and &quot;Flying Saucers&quot;, among others.

He wrote a short autobiography titled &quot;Martian Diary&quot;, co-wrote &quot;The Coming of the Saucers&quot; with Kenneth Arnold, edited Richard Sharpe Shaver &quot;The Hidden World&quot;, and republished the original edition of the spiritualist work, &quot;&quot;.

Palmer frequently pushed fringe beliefs and conspiracy theories, and was investigated by the FBI at least once. He was linked to an inquiry into the publication of pornographic paperback books, but his involvement was tangential at best.

Raymond Palmer&#x27;s editing of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; has a mixed legacy, primarily due to his promotion of the Shaver Mystery. His editing of &quot;Other Worlds Science Stories&quot; has been praised, and he is an important early figure in the history of the flying saucer and New Age movements.

==Early life==
Raymond Alfred Palmer was born August 1, 1910, in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. His parents were Roy and Helen ( Steber) Palmer. His father was of Irish ancestry who had held jobs as an electrician, machinist, and timekeeper at a marble company. He became a firefighter in 1911. The Palmer family were Ulster Protestants who emigrated from Northern Ireland. According to Palmer family lore, the Pricketts (as they were then known) were driven out of Northern Ireland by Catholics. Once in the United States, the family converted to Catholicism. His mother was from northern Wisconsin, the daughter of German Lutheran immigrants.

Roy Clarence Palmer was an alcoholic whose excessive drinking left the family impoverished. He also physically beat his wife.

The Palmers lived a peripatetic existence, moving to a new home almost every year from 1912 to 1921. Ray&#x27;s sister Evelyn was born in 1917, and his brother David in 1918. The family moved into the home of Ray&#x27;s paternal grandparents in 1920 after Helen Palmer&#x27;s health declined severely.

When Palmer was seven years old, he ran out into traffic. His leg was caught in the spokes of a passing truck, and he was spun around and beaten against the pavement until it came to a stop. The accident badly broke several of his vertebrae. Roy Palmer refused to have his son taken to a hospital, probably because the family could not pay. A social worker visited a few days later, and took Ray to a hospital. According to Ray&#x27;s friend, Frances Hamling, Ray became infected with Pott&#x27;s disease (tuberculosis of the spine), and by the age of nine could no longer stand or walk.
Palmer underwent a spinal column bone graft performed by Dr. Frederick J. Gaenslen. Pott&#x27;s disease is often accompanied by kyphosis (hunchback), and Gaenslen&#x27;s standard recuperative treatment required the patient to be in the prone position in a Bradford frame (a full-body metal rectangle with a canvas sleeve) for up to a year. Palmer&#x27;s graft became infected, and he was given morphine for the pain. Combination of illnesses and trauma stunted Ray&#x27;s growth, and as an adult he stood just slightly over tall. He spent most of the next five years prone in a Bradford frame.

Palmer&#x27;s mother died of peritonitis and pneumonia on January 26, 1923, and Palmer blamed his father for his disability. As he grew older, he became embittered, isolated, stubborn, and plagued by an inferiority complex. He was embarrassed by his hunchback, and worried that he would never lead a normal life.

Ray&#x27;s paternal grandparents moved in with the family to care for the children. Roy Palmer remarried in 1924. His new wife, Mathilda, was 14 years his junior. In 1928, Mathilda gave birth to Ray&#x27;s half-brother, Robert. Ray delivered newspaper to make money, and his father seized the income to make Ray pay for &quot;room and board&quot;.

During his convalescence, Ray was largely educated by a tutor provided by the Milwaukee public school system. He read on a wide range of topics, sometimes as many as 15 books a day. It was during this period that he became a fan of Ancient Egyptian history and science fiction. Palmer recovered enough to begin attending Washington High School in February 1924. He left in June 1925, most likely due to a relapse in health. He spent two more years bedridden. At the age of 16, Palmer enrolled at St. Anne&#x27;s School, a Catholic school in Milwaukee. After completing the ninth grade, he dropped out.

Palmer began reading &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; magazine after discovering its first issue in the spring of 1926. He wrote his first science fiction story, &quot;The Time Ray of Jandra&quot;, in high school. His English teacher was so impressed, she read it aloud to her class.

Roy Palmer moved his family once again in 1929.

===Fanzines and fandom===
Ray got a job as a bookkeeper at the P.J. Lavies sheet metal company after high school, and began writing short science fiction stories in his spare time. Palmer had several of his letters to the editor published in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;. To encourage science fiction fandom, the magazine published addresses of its letter-writers. Walter Dennis, a Chicago fan, traveled to Milwaukee to meet Ray.

Palmer and Dennis created a &quot;Science Correspondence Club&quot; in May 1930 to help fans connect with one another. This was, according to science fiction historian Mike Ashley, the first organized sci fi fandom group.

The two men also created and edited the first fanzine, &quot;The Comet&quot;, which first appeared in May 1930. Initially focused on spreading the word about new scientific discoveries and inventions, it refocused on science fiction writing in its second issue in July 1930. During Palmer&#x27;s second bout with TB, the magazine&#x27;s name was changed to &quot;Cosmology&quot;. Its publication became erratic due to lack of funds, and in January 1932 Palmer resigned as editor.

The Science Correspondence Club was reorganized as the International Scientific Association in January 1932. Although it disbanded the next month, by then it was the longest-lasting science fiction fandom club in the United States.

Palmer co-founded a second fanzine, &quot;The Time Traveller&quot;, with Forrest J Ackerman, Julius Schwartz, and Mort Weisinger. It began publication in December 1932 and lasted just over a year.

===Second illness===
In May 1930, Palmer was diagnosed with Pott&#x27;s disease again. It caused the bone graft and six of his vertebrae to disintegrate. In September 1930, Palmer went to Muirdale Tuberculosis Sanatorium. A physician told him he had six months to live until his spinal cord was exposed. The tuberculosis was already in remission, but Muirdale physicians did not want to operate and debride the bone for fear of reactivating the infection. Ray only received palliative care. For the next year, Palmer lay flat on his back, holding himself rigid and visualizing his body healing itself. When he did not die, doctors ordered new X-rays and discovered that the damaged area had become encased in a new mass of bone. Palmer was discharged in 1931.

Palmer biographer Richard Toronto suggests that Ray Palmer now showed many of the signs of a classic trauma victim. He sought out any way in which to build his resilience, a typical coping method. He also exhibited a strong urge to control the world around him. Palmer often spoke of &quot;knowing&quot; that he would survive Pott&#x27;s disease. Toronto notes that &quot;precognition of survival&quot; is not uncommon among victims of trauma. To show his resilience, Palmer temporarily left his job as a bookkeeper at P.J. Lavies and became a steeplejack, installing aluminum roofs and gutters. He also took up bowling, jogging, and softball. To control his world, Palmer came to believe that his dreams could show him visions of what was happening around the world at that moment, and could foretell the future. He had visualized his own healing, and now believed that goal-directed visualization and imagination had not only been critical to his own survival but was critical to humanity&#x27;s survival.

==Writing==

Throughout the 1930s, Palmer had his stories published in science fiction magazines of the era. Palmer&#x27;s first professionally published story was &quot;The Time Ray of Jandra&quot; in &quot;Wonder Stories&quot; in June 1930. Lester del Rey believed Palmer was the first fan to publish professionally.

About 1932, Palmer joined the Milwaukee Fictioneers, a group of about 20 or so working writers who met every other week to talk about their stories, discuss writing, and figure out ways to sell their work. Members included founder Lawrence A. Keating, Moritz &quot;Morry&quot; Zenoff, Larry Sternig, Leo A. Schmidt, Bernard Wirth, Dudley Brooks, Gus Marx, Al Nelson, Roger Sherman Hoar (who wrote under the pen name Ralph Milne Farley), Stanley G. Weinbaum, Robert Bloch, Jim Kjelgaard, and Arthur Tofte. The Fictioneers were the most significant influence on Palmer&#x27;s writing.

In 1936, the Fictioneers published &quot;Dawn of Flame&quot;, a fix-up of two of Stanley Weinbaum&#x27;s unpublished stories (&quot;Dawn of Flame&quot; and &quot;The Black Flame&quot;). It was the first anthology ever published featured the work of a science fiction author. Palmer wrote the foreword. Weinbaum&#x27;s wife felt it was far too personal, and asked that a new forward be written. Lawrence Keating wrote the replacement. Only six copies of the &quot;Palmer edition&quot; were sold, and only 250 copies sold of the &quot;Keating edition&quot; (many of them unbound).

In March 1936, Palmer began writing crime stories full-time for Shade Publishing Company&#x27;s Associated Authors subsidiary, which published racy detective magazines. His pay was $150 a month. Palmer wrote two entries for the &quot;Jim Grant&quot; character created by Hoar as well as stories for &quot;Murder Mysteries&quot;, &quot;True Gang Life&quot;, &quot;Scarlet Adventuress&quot;, &quot;Scarlet Gang Stories&quot;, &quot;Spicy Detective&quot;, and &quot;Thrilling Wonder Stories&quot;. Among the pen names Palmer used for his crime fiction were Alexander Blade, Henry Cade, G.H. Irwin, Joseph J. Millard, Frank Patton, Wallace Quitman, Rap, A.R. Steber, Morris J. Steele, Robert N. Webster, and Rae Winters.

From 1935 to 1938, Palmer also wrote science fiction for &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot;, &quot;Marvel Tales&quot;, and &quot;Wonder Stories&quot;. Palmer was a prolific writer. He later estimated that from December 1934 to March 1935 he wrote 150,000 words for pulp magazines.

Palmer&#x27;s personal life was going through a difficult period. Roy and Hilda separated in 1933, and moved out of Milwaukee in 1934. When Roy Palmer returned to Milwaukee in 1936, he was divorced. One day, Roy moved out, taking everything with him. Ray returned home to an empty apartment. Ray was now in charge of 19-year-old Evelyn, 18-year-old David, and eight-year-old Robert. Ray quit his job as a bookkeeper in March 1936 to write full-time. His father lost his job in June 1937 after a fire at his place of employment, and Palmer returned to work at the P.J. Lavies sheet metal firm in order to support his father. The firm shut down about February 1938 when the owner fell seriously ill.

==Ziff Davis magazines==
In August 1932, Palmer, Ackerman, Schwartz, Weisinger, Maurice Z. Ingher, and Conrad &quot;Conny&quot; Ruppert began publication of a professional magazine, &quot;Science Fiction Digest&quot;. The first issue was published in September. Retitled &quot;Fantasy Magazine&quot; in January 1934 and lasting until December 1934, its primary audience was fandom and it proved to be a watershed in the science fiction movement. It published original stories as well, its most famous being the serial novel &quot;Cosmos&quot;. The idea of a serial novel written in round-robin style was Palmer&#x27;s idea. The 17-chapter serial was written by some of the top names in science fiction, including Roger Sherman Hoar, David H. Keller, George Henry Weiss (using his pseudonym Francis Flagg), John W. Campbell, Otis Adelbert Kline, Abraham Merritt, Edward E. &quot;Doc&quot; Smith, P. Schuyler Miller, Lloyd Arthur Eshbach, and Edmond Hamilton. Palmer also wrote a column for the magazine, titled &quot;Spilling the Atoms&quot;, a mix of news about fandom and contests intended to boost the magazine&#x27;s readership—all written in a chatty, informal style. He used the byline &quot;RAP&quot;, a nickname bestowed on Palmer by Ackerman, Schwartz, and Aubrey Clements (a prominent member of science fiction fandom and, by 1930, president of the Science Correspondence Club).

===&quot;Amazing Stories&quot;===
In mid January 1938, magazine publisher Ziff Davis acquired &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;. Under 86-year-old editor, Dr. T. O&#x27;Conor Sloane, the magazine was failing and nearing bankruptcy. Readership had fallen from 100,000 readers in 1926 to just 40,000 in 1938. Sloane&#x27;s editorial tone was &quot;courtly and reserved&quot;. He favored science fiction stories that conveyed information about cutting-edge science and science writing that was Victorian (scientists were treated as unerring, highly respected individuals, while science writers translated their inevitably complex ideas into simple terms for an adoring, respectful readership). Ziff Davis fired Sloane.

Bernard G. Davis moved the &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; editorial office to Chicago, where Ziff Davis was headquartered. Davis sought out Roger Sherman Hoar, partly because he was an accomplished writer of science fiction and partly because he was from Milwaukee and would be willing to relocate to Chicago. Hoar declined the position, and suggested Raymond Palmer for the job.

Davis hired Palmer to edit &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; in February 1938. His first day on the job was February 14, 1938, and the pay was $75 a week.

Palmer was told to significantly boost circulation in the next issue, or the publication would be shuttered. Davis encouraged Palmer to target a young male audience, and Palmer did not want to &quot;aim too high&quot;. Palmer was in complete agreement: The competing magazine &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot; was for intellectuals, and &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; was not going to compete with them. His intent was to publish the kind of thrilling adventure-romance stories that had so excited him as a teenager.

Palmer described his editorial approach as focusing more on story than on science. He wanted dramatic action, fast narrative pacing, suspense, and snappy dialogue. His intended audience for &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; was the teenager on the street and military servicemen.

Palmer discovered the material purchased by his predecessor was quite poor, and he quickly asked his Fictioneer friends to supply new stories. At &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, Ray Palmer published the first science fiction stories by Robert Bloch and Isaac Asimov, and the first of the Adam Link stories by &quot;Eando Binder&quot; (the pen name of brothers Earl and Otto Binder). Palmer&#x27;s old friends, Julius Schwartz and Mort Weisinger, had founded Solar Sales Service, a literary talent agency for science fiction authors, and Palmer sourced stories frequently from Solar Sales clients. In time, Palmer established a coterie of writers who turned in a set quota of words per issue, in return for a steady paycheck.

Palmer also published his own work in &quot;Amazing&quot;, using a wide range of pen names. He often ran fake biographies of these pen names in the magazine, and in editorials attacked the &quot;author&quot; for various literary, scientific, and personal faults. Palmer took delight in fooling readers, but at times would signal the hoax by making ludicrous claims or humorous injections. Palmer was poor, isolated, and lonely in Chicago in his early months there. This changed over time as he initiated employee poker nights at his apartment and coffee klatsches in cafés, and hosted visiting writers in his home. He also played on various Ziff Davis sports teams. Privately, he remained lonely and angry, and his writing, in stories like &quot;Outlaw of Space&quot; and &quot;Lone Wolf of Space&quot;, reflected his emotional state.

Ray also revamped the magazine internally. He began running single-panel cartoons, the occasional humor article, quizzes about science, and short pieces on history. He greatly expanded the letters section, and published notices of fan events and fan publications. The tone of his new editor&#x27;s column, &quot;The Observatory&quot;, was &quot;brash, silly, and chummy&quot;.

Palmer also changed how the magazine looked. Cover art for the magazine was racy and lurid, supplied by artists such as Harold W. McCauley and Robert Gibson Jones. (In April 1941, &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; became the first science fiction pulp magazine to show a quasi-bare-breasted woman.) He replaced the advertisement on the back cover with relatively science-accurate scenes of planets, &quot;cars of the future&quot;, and cutting-edge devices like atomic power plants. Such prominently placed educational illustrations were innovative, and often painted by Frank R. Paul.

According to Palmer, &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; sold only 27,000 copies per issue when he took over. His first issue sold 45,000 copies, and his second 75,000. Circulation continued to rise. Palmer&#x27;s assistant editor, William Hamling pegged circulation at about 200,000 in 1940.

&quot;Amazing Stories&quot; began running war stories in 1940, many of them featuring German or Japanese villains.

Palmer turned almost all editing of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; over to William Hamling in 1948, although Palmer remained on the masthead as editor. Howard Browne took over editorship of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; with the January 1950 issue.

===&quot;Fantastic Adventures&quot;===

The rapid rise in readership for &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; prompted Palmer to successfully propose that Ziff Davis launch a sister &quot;weird stories&quot; magazine, &quot;Fantastic Adventures&quot;. The first issue appeared in May 1939. &quot;Fantastic Adventures&quot; was an immediate hit, with the first issue selling 45,000 to 75,000 copies.

The magazine, published in the large-size bedsheet format, focused on &quot;lost world&quot; fiction epitomized by the writing of Edgar Rice Burroughs. Palmer wanted to publish high-quality stories that retained &quot;the lusty appeal of the pulp&quot;. He told potential writers to &quot;Gimme bang-bang&quot; or &quot;When a story stops moving, that is the exact spot where the writer should drop a corpse through the roof&quot;. &quot;Swift, dramatic action, with plenty of suspense and the anticipation of the fearful&quot; was his charge to authors, and initially &quot;Fantastic Adventures&quot; published both fantasy and science fiction. But after the success of Nelson S. Bond &quot;The Amazing Invention of Wilberforce Weems&quot;, published in the September 1939 issue, Palmer pushed for whimsical fantasy.

Among the early fiction published by &quot;Fantastic Adventures&quot; was &quot;The Scientists Revolt&quot; by Edgar Rice Burroughs and &quot;The Golden Amazon&quot; by Thornton Ayre (pseudonym of John Russell Fearn). The four Golden Amazon stories published by &quot;Fantastic Adventures&quot;, which featured heroine Violet Ray, were among the most popular Golden Amazon stories published.

Bi-monthly at first, &quot;Fantastic Adventures&quot; went monthly from January to May 1940. Barely profitable, it went bi-monthly again and converted to digest size in June 1940. Ziff Davis intended to cancel the magazine in October 1940, but that issue saw the story &quot;Jongor of Lost Land&quot; by Robert Moore Williams. Sales doubled, and the magazine was given a reprieve. Palmer then convinced Burroughs to write a new Carson of Venus story. This work, &quot;Slaves of the Fish Men&quot;, ran in the March 1941 issue. Sales finally stabilized at a high level.

Palmer continued to feature a mixture of whimsy and &quot;lost land&quot; stories in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; through 1945. He became a believer in Richard Sharpe Shaver &quot;Hollow Earth&quot; conspiracy theory stories (which Shaver alleged were true, not fiction), publishing them frequently in &quot;Amazing&quot;. This gave the magazine a &quot;crackpot&quot; reputation.

Howard Browne resigned from Ziff Davis in the spring of 1947 to pursue a writing career in Hollywood. William Hamling was made managing editor of &quot;Fantastic Adventures&quot; as his replacement.

===Other Ziff Davis magazines===
In 1939, Ziff Davis launched the pulps &quot;South Sea Stories&quot; and &quot;Air Adventures&quot;, with Palmer editing both. &quot;Air Adventures&quot; lasted just two issues, and &quot;South Sea Stories&quot; ended publication in October 1940.

Palmer was also editing &quot;Mammoth Adventures&quot; and &quot;Mammoth Western&quot;.

==The Shaver controversy==

The Shaver Mystery was a series of fiction and (allegedly) non-fiction stories which appeared primarily in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; from March 1945 to May 1948. The stories, primarily written by Richard Sharpe Shaver, maintained that the world was ruled by insane descendants of aliens who lived in a Hollow Earth. The Shaver Mystery is the most prominent event in Palmer&#x27;s writing and editorial career, and a deeply influential event in science fiction literature and fandom.

From 1945 to 1949, Palmer published two dozen Shaver stories, most of them featured on the cover of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;.

===Beginning of Shaverism===

Richard Shaver was a schizophrenic who had spent nearly a decade in psychiatric hospitals. In October 1943, he sent a letter to &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; claiming secret knowledge of two underground races (the &quot;Deros&quot; and &quot;Teros&quot;) manipulating humanity. He had even deciphered &quot;Mantong&quot;, an ancient alien &quot;mother tongue&quot; from which all modern languages were descended (a barely-concealed version of the modern English alphabet). Palmer famously rescued the letter from a wastebasket, where assistant editor Harold Browne had tossed it. He sensed that Shaver&#x27;s ramblings could be turned into an excellent series of science fiction stories, and asked Shaver to send him a story.

Shaver sent Palmer a 10,000-word manuscript titled &quot;A Warning to Future Men&quot;. &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; purchased the manuscript on January 14, 1944. Palmer told Shaver that he wanted to publish the basic story as a fiction piece in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, but it would need some heavy editing. Shaver and Palmer agreed that Palmer should essentially ghostwrite it. For most of 1944, Shaver wrote nearly every day to Palmer, corresponding about the &quot;mystery&quot; and Palmer&#x27;s changes to the first story. Palmer began the rewrite in May 1944, transforming what Shaver believed to be truth into Palmer&#x27;s idea of a fiction story that could generate intense reader interest (and sales) as well as additional material. Just how much Palmer changed Shaver&#x27;s manuscripts is a matter of dispute. Palmer claimed he made significant changes, but Shaver said very few were made (most of them cuts, not edits).

Palmer published the letter &quot;An Ancient Language&quot; by Richard S. Shaver (writing as &quot;S. Shaver&quot;) in the January 1944 issue of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;. It contained Shaver&#x27;s &quot;discovery&quot; and explanation of the working of the Mantong alphabet. In a comment on the letter, Palmer claimed Shaver had tapped into a &quot;racial memory&quot; and that &quot;testing&quot; had found his Mantong alphabet to be &quot;90 percent true&quot;. (This changed. Shaver objected to the term &quot;racial memory&quot; and said his visions were &quot;thought records&quot;. In a June 1945 editorial, Palmer changed his terminology to &quot;thought record&quot;.)

In May and December 1944, Palmer discussed the upcoming Shaver story in his editorial column in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; to build reader anticipation. Palmer depicted the story as true. For his part, Palmer wrote that he believed Shaver was sincere.

The first Shaver story, the 31,000-word &quot;I Remember Lemuria&quot;, was published in the March 1945 issue of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;. In his &quot;The Observatory&quot; editorial in the March 1945 issue, Palmer announced that five more Shaver stories were coming. He claimed that fact had now outstripped fiction, and science fiction was dying. Therefore, &quot;science fiction&quot; was henceforth to be defined as speculative articles about mysteries from the past. According to Palmer biographer Fred Nadis, what Palmer was proposing was a blend of science fiction with the occult.

The Shaver stories were immediately and immensely popular. Palmer convinced executives at Ziff Davis to give him a load of scarce pulp paper intended for use by &quot;Mammoth Detective&quot; magazine. This was used to print an extra 50,000 copies of the March &quot;Amazing&quot;. Palmer&#x27;s instincts paid off: The March issue sold 185,000 copies and the May issue 200,000. Sales continued to rise significantly for the next two issues. Hundreds of letters poured in, although a good many of the pro-Shaver letters initially published in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; were written by Palmer himself. Over time, Palmer&#x27;s public opinion of Shaver&#x27;s writing rose, and once he even called it &quot;almost lyrical&quot;. Palmer increased Shaver&#x27;s pay from 1 to 2 cents a word in June 1945.

===Palmer-Shaver friendship===
Palmer traveled in March 1945 to Shaver&#x27;s home in Barto, Pennsylvania, to meet the author. While staying at Shaver&#x27;s home, Palmer claimed to have heard as many as five disembodied Dero and Tero voices during the night. Palmer claimed in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; that there was no possible way that Shaver had created these voices. Palmer later said the voices did, in fact, come from Shaver. But Shaver was in a trance, and &quot;possessed&quot; by Deros and Teros. Linda and Jennifer, Palmer&#x27;s daughters, witnessed Shaver speaking in voices one December in the early 1950s. Shaver replied that he never entered trances and made these voices. Palmer&#x27;s claim opened a rift in the Palmer-Shaver friendship which widened over time. In June 1947, Palmer admitted that he had &quot;self-hypnotized&quot; the night he heard voices in Shaver&#x27;s home.

Palmer and Shaver became friends, a friendship which deepened once Shaver moved next door to Palmer in Wisconsin in 1945.

William B. Ziff, co-owner of Ziff Davis, was worried by Palmer&#x27;s claims that the Shaver Mystery stories were true. He feared Palmer was making Ziff Davis into a laughingstock. When Palmer proposed that Ziff Davis publish a book of Shaver&#x27;s writings in 1945, Ziff personally nixed the effort.

At some point prior to 1945, Palmer read &quot;Oahspe: A New Bible&quot;, an 1882 spiritualist work by American dentist John Ballou Newbrough. &quot;Oahspe&quot; talked about &quot;Atmospheria&quot;, multiple layers of the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, each one a different plane of existence inhabited by spirits of the dead in various stages of enlightenment. Palmer shared &quot;Oahspe&quot; with Shaver. Shaver, a dedicated atheist and materialist, rejected &quot;Oahspe&quot; and thought it had confused Palmer&#x27;s thinking.

===Claims that Shaver stories are true===
Palmer&#x27;s editorial stance on the Shaver Mystery was that it was at least partly true. He first made this claim in an editorial in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; in September 1945, even going so far as to declare that he had evidence supporting the &quot;mystery&quot;. He editorialized in June 1946, &quot;For those of our readers (they are in the minority!) who are &#x27;certain&#x27; the Shaver Mystery is a hoax, let it be definitely placed on the record that your editor &#x27;believes&#x27; it is a legitimate mystery, and that he &#x27;knows&#x27; it is neither a hoax on his part nor on Mr. Shaver&#x27;s!&quot; In March 1947, he repeated his claim: &quot;Every word uttered editorially in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; is my &#x27;firm conviction&#x27;, not any attempt at a hoax&quot;, and in April attacked those who claimed he was hallucinating. However, in the May 1955 issue of &quot;Other Worlds Science Stories&quot;, Palmer claimed that the &quot;Shaver Mystery&quot; was his own creation.

Palmer&#x27;s personal beliefs are harder to pin down. Chester Geier claimed that, at a minimum Palmer saw deep meaning in the Shaver stories, and more likely Palmer believed that contained at least some truth. Howard Browne believed Palmer knew it was a hoax, and he pushed it solely to make money. The Shaver Mystery certainly fascinated Ray, says author Richard Toronto. In a private letter to Harlan Ellison, Palmer said the Shaver stores were tall tales, and intended merely to improve sales. Walter Dunkelberger, editor of the fanzine &quot;Fanews&quot;, met with Palmer and concluded that Palmer really believed Shaver. In private letters to Shaver, however, Palmer came across as a true believer. He wrote to Shaver in March 1944: &quot;I know the dero have failed with me, because my thinking has been greatly sharpened, and in two months I have been able to entirely revise my concept of the universe, and everything has fallen into order.&quot; In a 1957 letter to flying saucer believer Gary Barker, Palmer admitted that pushing the Shaver Mystery made good business sense, but he also pushed it because the stories resonated with him.

In June 1946, Palmer reported in his &quot;The Shaver Mystery&quot; column that a group of spiritualists had warned Palmer that &quot;Deros&quot; were after him for publishing &quot;the truth&quot; about Shaverism. Palmer scoffed at the source (as he did not believe in spiritualism), but did affirm that someone had attempted to kidnap him and his family and replace them with perfectly trained &quot;Dero&quot; doubles. Information about the kidnapping plot &quot;[came] to Mr. Shaver by means of telaug ray operated by tero in the caves...&quot;

In September 1945, Ray urged readers of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; who had experiences similar to Shaver&#x27;s to write in, and many did so. Palmer wrote that he believed many readers knew they were on Earth for a secret purpose, and he encouraged them to share &quot;things today unknown to science&quot; with &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;. More than 2,500 letters poured in. Palmer published letters from members of occult societies like the Brotherhood of the White Temple as well as readers who had simply had frightening experiences. A vocal minority of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; readers responded to these letters by calling Shaver supporters lunatics.

A few fans went so far as to prank Palmer by submitting letters that contained outlandish &quot;Shaverist experiences&quot;. Palmer was usually able to sense which letter-writers were honest and which were deceitful, but his enthusiasm for &quot;Shaverism&quot; led his instincts astray and many letters made it through. Palmer hoaxed his sceptics in turn. In 1946, he published a letter (allegedly from William Hamling) in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; which claimed that Ray Palmer had suffered a nervous breakdown. Palmer pranked his readers in order to find out who his enemies were. Those who gloated over Palmer&#x27;s &quot;breakdown&quot; were quickly ostracized by him.

As readers began to point out the scientific impossibility of Shaver&#x27;s claims, Palmer responded in an editorial in December 1945 that the Shaver Mystery could be neither proven nor disproven scientifically. Palmer also asserted that scientists were &quot;changing their minds&quot; all the time about what was scientifically possible. Therefore, he wrote, he was no longer going to take &quot;scientifically disproven&quot; claims seriously.

As circulation soared, Palmer began devoting more and more space in each issue of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; to the Shaver Mystery. He even dropped stories by Ray Bradbury and Henry Hasse to make room for more Shaverism. The long-running science quiz was dropped, and in September 1945 Palmer instituted the feature &quot;Report From the Forgotten Past?&quot;. It was a readers&#x27; forum, dedicated to discussion of the Shaver Mystery. A new feature, &quot;What Man Can Imagine&quot;, began running in February 1946 which encouraged readers to discuss new scientific theories, new belief systems, metaphysics, mythology, and conspiracy theories.

===Popularity of the Shaver Mystery===

New writers were brought in to write &quot;Shaver stories&quot;. The first of these was Roger Phillips Graham, who wrote under the pen name &quot;Rog Phillips&quot;. Graham claimed to be a Titan (one of Shaver&#x27;s alien races), firmly believed in the teaching of &quot;Oahspe&quot;, said he could see invisible beings, and told Palmer that he received mathematical equations from &quot;beyond his own mind&quot;. His first Shaver story, &quot;The Shaver Mystery&quot; appeared in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; in February 1946. Other new &quot;Shaver&quot; writers included Vincent Gaddis, L. Taylor Hansen, and John McCabe Moore. The husband and wife writing team of John and Dorothy de Courcy began to write Shaver stories as well, the first of which appeared in May 1946. In their letters to the editor and in editorials, they documented their fights against Shaver&#x27;s evil alien &quot;Deros&quot;.

By the middle of 1946, &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; sold between 240,000 and 320,000 copies per issue. Both Palmer and Hamling claimed that as many as 50,000 new readers picked up the magazine due to its Shaver stories. Shaverism was so popular that Palmer ran Shaver stories in &quot;Fantastic Stories&quot; and &quot;Mammoth Adventures&quot; to meet the demand.

===Backlash against Shaverism===
As &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; became less about science fiction and more about the Shaver Mystery, a backlash began.

The popularity of the Shaver Mystery and the divisive response to it drew the attention of the mainstream national news media. In September 1946, &quot;Harper&#x27;s Magazine&quot; ran an article by scholar and &quot;Time&quot; magazine creative director William S. Baring-Gould which excoriated Palmer for pushing a hoax on his readership. Baring-Gould also scoffed at the underlying premises of the Shaver Mystery. Baring-Gould also claimed Palmer&#x27;s stand on the truth of the &quot;mystery&quot; was calculated to be wishy-washy. This led to an exchange of letters in the magazine&#x27;s December 1946 issue. Palmer wrote, &quot;I believe in the &#x27;Mystery&#x27; for what it is. Every word uttered editorially in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; is my &quot;firm conviction&quot;, not any attempt at a hoax.&quot; Baring-Gould said he was glad to hear it.

The fan attacks on Palmer also worsened. Fan Don Wilson wrote a letter outlining the scientific criticisms of Shaverism, which was published in the December 1946 issue of the fanzine &quot;Vampire&quot;. Palmer lost his temper and wrote Wilson a scathing personal letter. Wilson gave it to &quot;Vampire&quot;, which published it, embarrassing Palmer. Forrest Ackerman circulated a petition asking that &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; stop running Shaver tales. &quot;Fantasy Times&quot;, a leading fanzine, demanded that Palmer quit, and the fanzine &quot;Fantasy Commentator&quot; accused Palmer of turning science fiction into &quot;a plaything for every semi-sane crackpot&quot;. The Queens Science Fiction League, a highly influential fan organization founded in 1937 by Sam Moskowitz and James V. Taurasi Sr., condemned the Shaver &quot;mystery&quot;.

Important people in the mainstream publishing industry privately began to criticize Ziff Davis for allowing Palmer to publish about the Shaver Mystery. Initially, William Ziff ignored the complaints, as &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; dominated the science fiction magazine market and was making a significant profit. In late autumn of 1946, Ziff received a letter signed by a large number of important science fiction fans and writers. The letter claimed Palmer was now pushing an essentially religious belief system to the exclusion of literature, and strongly criticized this editorial approach. Ziff became deeply worried. In late 1946, Ziff and Davis met to discuss the matter. The two owners decided that &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; could continue publishing Shaver stories, but only if Palmer explicitly labeled them as fiction. Palmer reluctantly agreed.

Palmer pushed back against the criticism. In the January 1947 issue of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, he ran a nonfiction article by Margaret Rogers titled &quot;I Have Been in the Caves&quot;.

In the February 1947 issue of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, Palmer wrote that the Shaver Mystery was about to solved. In a letter to the editor ostensibly written by Ziff Davis assistant editor Chester Geier (but in fact written by Palmer), the formation of the Shaver Mystery Club was announced. It was a group dedicated to collecting evidence that would corroborate Shaverism. Palmer had not informed Geier of his plan, but Geier agreed to take on the task because it was a paid position. Palmer had collected the names and addresses of readers who had written positive letters about Shaverism to &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;; Geier used this list to ask them to subscribe to the Shaver Mystery Club magazine for $1 an issue. He soon had 3,000 subscribers. Palmer did little to generate stories for the club magazine or cultivate interest in the club. The Shaver Mystery Club magazine was published quarterly. Reaction to the club was so poor that after a year, subscribership fell by half. Geier resigned as Shaver Mystery Club president in May 1948, and Palmer transferred club management to Richard Shaver. Shaver managed to put out a few mimeographed issues, and then closed the club.

===High point of Shaverism, and links to the UFO sightings craze===
1947 proved to be the high point of the Shaver Mystery. Palmer published 15 Shaver Mystery stories in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; in all of 1947. Most of these came in the June 1947 issue, which was devoted completely to Shaverism. This was fewer stories than the magazine had run in 1946, and Palmer initially blamed the lack of production on a printer&#x27;s strike. He also said the all-Shaver issue had been repeatedly attacked by &quot;Dero&quot; tamper rays, causing typographical problems and much more. He continued to make outlandish Shaverist claims, however. In June 1947, he said the United States was about to be invaded by a &quot;fifth column from hell&quot;, and that foreign governments had obtained &quot;cavern mech&quot; which they were going to use on America.

Palmer also linked the Shaver Mystery to the emerging flying saucer craze. A &quot;flying saucer craze&quot; erupted in June 1947, and more than 850 reports of flying saucers were made in American newspapers over the next few months. Palmer ran numerous stories about flying saucers in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; to take advantage of the trend. In &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; in October 1947, he claimed that UFO sightings were proof that Shaverism was real. Shaver had written about a Lemurian &quot;rollat&quot;, or anti-gravity machine, and Palmer claimed that this was a flying saucer. &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; first mentioned flying saucers in its June 1946 issue. Palmer, however, claimed that he&#x27;d known about them for years, but had declined to publish about them in order to avoid being pranked.

Palmer followed through on his pledge to Ziff and Davis. In his editorials and features, he began putting key Shaverist words in quotation marks, and added question marks after some words to emphasize that they might be fiction.

===Maury Island hoax and the end of Shaverism===
Palmer&#x27;s fast-growing interest in UFOs led to his involvement in the Maury Island hoax. Palmer had become friends with aviator Kenneth Arnold, who claimed that he saw nine flying saucers near Mount Rainier in the state of Washington on June 24, 1947. Palmer had heard rumors that two &quot;harbor patrol&quot; officers had seen a flying saucer dumping material in Puget Sound near Maury Island, a few miles north of Tacoma. Palmer paid Arnold to investigate. Fred Crisman, Harold Dahl, and two other men were interviewed by an overly credulous Arnold, and Crisman attempted to pass off common rocks as &quot;alien debris&quot;. The United States Air Force, then investigating UFO sightings, sent two officers to talk to the men. The two Air Force officers died on August 1, 1947, when the aircraft they were piloting crashed near Kelso, Washington.

Two Air Force officers visited the Ziff Davis officers in September 1947 and interviewed Palmer about his role in the Maury Island hoax. The Air Force contacted William Ziff and claimed that Palmer had instigated the hoax. Now a plane had been lost and two men were dead.

Palmer&#x27;s limited involvement in the Maury Island hoax proved too much for William Ziff, who told Palmer in the autumn of 1947 to stop publishing Shaver stories. Ziff also cancelled a planned special issue of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; dedicated to UFOs.

===&quot;Proof&quot; of the Shaver Mystery ends Shaverism===

In &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; in January 1948, Palmer again promised that proof of the veracity of the Shaver Mystery was coming. There were no Shaver stories in that issue. Instead, Palmer ran two essays by Richard Shaver in which he claimed &quot;Deros&quot; were taking over the world. Palmer also ran a severely critical analysis of the Shaver Mystery written by anti-Shaver fans, and a new column by &quot;Robert Paul Kidwell&quot; which highlighted debunking evidence. (The &quot;column&quot; ran only once, and &quot;Kidwell&quot; was one of Palmer&#x27;s pen names.)

The editorial tide turned against Shaverism. The letter columns in the January, February, and March issues of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; were dominated by anti-Shaver readers. No Shaver stories or essays ran in the February 1948 issue of &quot;Amazing&quot;. A major story by Shaver himself ran in March 1948, but Palmer explicitly called it fiction. In &quot;The Observatory&quot;, Palmer claimed that he had documents, objects, and photographs that &quot;proved&quot; the &quot;Shaver Hypothesis&quot; and that this story would run in the next issue. By this time, most of the essays in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; were about flying saucer sightings, anomalous phenomena, and mysticism, and there was very little discussion of science fiction.

When the April 1948 issue of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; was published, it contained no essays or features about the Shaver Mystery. Instead, Palmer claimed that another media outlet was going to break the story, and so he had decided to return &quot;Amazing&quot; to its science fiction roots. Shaverism no longer appeared in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, and no proof of the Shaver Mystery was ever published anywhere. In an attempt to win back anti-Shaver readers, Palmer organized a few feature in the magazine in March 1948. Called &quot;The Club House&quot;, it was a letters forum for those who opposed Shaverism. Palmer had long relied on Roger Phillips Graham to attend fan conventions and attempt to calm angry anti-Shaver readers. He had Graham edit &quot;The Club House&quot; and write its responses to readers. Graham turned the feature into a solid source of fan news.

The last major Shaver essay to appear in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; came in May 1948. It had no byline, but was likely written by Palmer. It offered three &quot;proofs&quot; of the mystery: 1) All matter has radioactivity, which causes aging; 2) Space is filled with the particles of disintegrated suns, and this causes gravity; and 3) Flying saucers visit Earth to contact the Deros and Teros.

Shaver stories continued to run throughout 1948 and 1949, but they were depicted as fiction. Palmer introduced Shaver&#x27;s &quot;Daughter of the Night&quot; (published in December 1948) as a &quot;terrific yarn&quot;, not as truth. None of the Shaver stories that ran in 1949 were said to be based on &quot;thought memories&quot;. Palmer asked readers to write in to determine support for running more Shaver Mystery tales. Only 138 bothered to do so, and even Palmer admitted in the spring of 1949 that Shaverism was ending.

==Relocation to Wisconsin, and third spinal injury==
On July 7, 1949, Palmer bought a farm located at County Trunk A and Clinton Road near Amherst, Wisconsin. The farm was quite near the home in Lanark, Wisconsin, to which Richard Shaver had moved earlier in the year.

In May or June 1950, Palmer fell on some stairs leading to his basement. His back was broken, and he was in critical condition. He was taken to Saint Francis Hospital in Evanston, Illinois, where he spent several months undergoing rehabilitation. He did not leave the hospital until about August 1950.

The accident left Palmer permanently, partially disabled, and for the rest of his life he found it difficult to walk. He was in constant pain, and his right leg was left weaker than his left.

Palmer moved his family to the Wisconsin farm in November 1950. The Palmer family lived in a partially renovated farmhouse while they built a modern stone home on the property. Palmer claimed that he was able to communicate with &quot;Teros&quot;, and asked them to help with his farm. The farm was the site of paranormal activity, according to Palmer: He saw dwarf-like hunchbacks on the roads at night, and claimed to have seen a UFO near the house in February 1952. He also claimed that his farm was on the site of an ancient lakebed, and that a Native American village formerly existed where the farmhouse stood.

Ray was quite active in the Amherst community. In 1963, he was a member of Tomorrow River District School Board, a vice president of the Portage County Fair Association, a director of the Amherst Development Corp., and a past president of the Amherst Lions Club.

==Clark Publishing==
The flying saucer craze and Shaver controversy convinced Palmer that there was substantial readership for magazines about the unexplained. In late 1947, he and Curtis Fuller established Clark Publishing and Palmer began laying plans to quit Ziff Davis. Palmer put up his own money, but Fuller financed his portion through a contribution from a wealthy uncle. Palmer needed the Ziff Davis income until Clark Publishing was up and running, so he ran the company and edited its magazines under the pseudonym &quot;Robert N. Webster&quot;. He did not reveal that he was &quot;Robert N. Webster&quot; until he attended the 7th World Science Fiction Convention (Cinvention) in early September 1949.

Clark Publishing initially operated out of a large wooden building at 806 Dempster Street in Evanston. Palmer operated a mail-order bookstore, Venture Bookstore, out of the same building. Established shortly after the first issue of &quot;Fate&quot;, it sold mystic, occult, psychic, and spiritual books and paraphernalia.

Palmer resigned from all his positions at Ziff Davis in December 1949.

At the 7th World Science Fiction Convention, Raymond Palmer met Bea Mahaffey, a science fiction fan from Cleveland, Ohio. He hired her as his secretary at Clark Publishing. Palmer&#x27;s 1949 accident made it painful for him to travel, and Mahaffey became his surrogate at fan events. Clark Publishing&#x27;s offices were still located in Evanston, and Mahaffey ran them. She initially cultivated high-quality writers for Palmer&#x27;s magazines like Isaac Asimov, Fredric Brown, and Theodore Sturgeon. They tended to publish their worst stories for Palmer Publishing, work they could not sell elsewhere, and eventually Mahaffey came around to Palmer&#x27;s view that low-brow adventure and romance stories made for high circulation. In time, Mahaffey co-edited &quot;Other Worlds&quot; with Palmer. Fred Nadis credits Mahaffey with turning &quot;Other Worlds&quot; into one of the more respected science fiction magazines of the 1950s.

In 1952, Palmer co-authored the book &quot;The Coming of the Saucers&quot; with Kenneth Arnold. It was issued by Clark Publishing.

Clark Publishing originally contracted out its printing needs. After the move to Amherst, Marjorie Palmer began keeping the company accounts, tracking mail, and managing subscriptions. Ray Palmer&#x27;s office was initially a room in the farmhouse he rented. Once the modern stone house was finished, he used a room in the house as well as a converted chicken coop. Clark Publishing purchased its own full-color printing presses and moved to a building on Main Street in Amherst next to a bakery. By 1963, the company had moved into the old Amherst Elementary School. The firm had seven employees.

===Amherst Press, Bell Publications, and Palmer Publications===
In 1951, Palmer established a book publisher, Amherst Press. Amherst Press specialized in flying saucer books and published George Hunt Williamson &quot;Other Tongues—Other Flesh&quot; in 1953. Williamson had fascist beliefs, and ties to William Dudley Pelley fascist Silver Legion of America, and the book contained elements of antisemitism.

Palmer entered a partnership with an unidentified Chicago businessman and created Bell Publications in 1953. Bell began publishing &quot;Universe Science Fiction&quot; in June 1953. It was in &quot;Universe&quot; in June 1953 that Palmer published the first science fiction story sympathetic to homosexuality, Theodore Sturgeon &quot;The World Well Lost&quot;. The success of that new magazine led Palmer to cease publication of &quot;Other Worlds&quot;. He launched a successor to &quot;Other Worlds&quot;, with essentially the same editorial policy, in October 1953, titling it &quot;Science Stories&quot;.

Palmer&#x27;s business partner pulled out of the partnership in 1955. Palmer founded a new company, Palmer Publications, and acquired &quot;Science Stories&quot; and &quot;Universe Science Fiction&quot;. Both publications ceased in 1955, and Palmer Publications began publishing &quot;Other Worlds&quot; again. The numbering of issues of &quot;Other Worlds&quot; took up where the original &quot;Other Worlds&quot; left off.

Over the years, Palmer Publications issued a number of books. Many were by authors writing about paranormal phenomena Palmer was interested in. Some were by readers of his magazines, and a number were works by local people. One of the most important books he published was William A. Hyman&#x27;s &quot;Space Law&quot;, an important legal treatise on the law of outer space. Palmer Publications also printed a number of magazines for other organizations, including one by the American Association of University Women.

In 1975, Palmer Publicans began publishing a local newspaper, the &quot;Tomorrow River Times&quot;. It was established in honor the American bicentennial. It ceased publication a few years after Palmer&#x27;s death.

===&quot;Fate&quot; magazine===
&quot;Fate&quot; was conceived of by Palmer and Fuller. It was first magazine published by Clark. Eight issues had already appeared by the time Palmer left Ziff Davis.

The first issue of the digest size magazine appeared in the spring of 1948. To build a subscription base, Palmer purchased a mailing list from Wing Anderson, an occult author and entrepreneur. In an ethically suspect move, Palmer plugged &quot;Fate&quot; in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;.

Palmer&#x27;s editorial approach to &quot;Fate&quot; made no attempt at respectability. The covers featured scantily-clad women, and advertisers included the Rosicrucians, Brotherhood of the White Temple, Shaver Mystery novellas, and various books for sale by spiritualist/occult bookseller Wing Anderson. Palmer used the same business model he had developed at &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;: editorial written in an overly friendly, informal style; a large amount of letters from readers, and short features.

Ray intended for &quot;Fate&quot; to publish &quot;documented&quot; articles. He claimed that if documentation was lacking, &quot;Fate&quot; would point this out and take a neutral stand on the truthfulness of the matter. The magazine covered alternative medicine, anomalous archeological discoveries, automatic writing, belief in the survival of personality after death, cryptozoology (particularly sea serpents and Yeti), divination, flying saucer sightings, Fortean events, ghosts, mental telepathy, New religious movements, predictive dreaming, psychedelic drugs, and many paranormal topics. A few Shaver Mystery stories appeared, but once Palmer left Ziff Davis and worked full-time at &quot;Fate&quot; these no longer were run.

&quot;Fate&quot; became a key magazine for those who believed in flying saucers. The first issue of &quot;Fate&quot; featured a painting of UFOs harassing a small red civilian airplane. The cover story was Kenneth Arnold&#x27;s first-hand account of his 1947 UFO sighting, &quot;I Did See the Flying Disks!&quot; Inside was an article by aeronautical expert John C. Ross, &quot;What Were the Flying Doughnuts?&quot; George Adamski, who claimed to be a contactee, sent his first photos of UFOs to &quot;Fate&quot; in 1950.

Through &quot;Fate&quot;, Palmer was instrumental in popularizing belief in flying saucers. &quot;Fate&quot; was ridiculed by freelance journalist Sidney Shalett in the April and May 1949 editions of the &quot;Saturday Evening Post&quot;. Palmer accused the Air Force of intimidating the magazine into writing the story, and all but writing it.

&quot;Fate&quot; readership rose to 120,000 per issue. Chester S. Geier began freelancing as an editor at &quot;Fate&quot; in early 1952, and joined the magazine as a full-time assistant editor in May. Fuller&#x27;s uncle, although a silent investor in Clark Publishing, was demanding that Curtis Fuller take more editorial control, do beginning in 1952 Palmer&#x27;s editorials in &quot;Fate&quot; began to be replaced more and more frequently by Fuller&#x27;s &quot;I See By the Papers&quot; column. By late 1953, Ray Palmer was no longer engaged in any editorial or publishing capacity in &quot;Fate&quot;, and he sold his share to Fuller in 1955.

===&quot;Other Worlds&quot; magazine===

Clark Publications published its first, and best, science fiction magazine, &quot;Other Worlds Science Stories&quot;, in November 1949. Hamling loaned Palmer $10,000 to get the magazine off the ground. Palmer said in an editorial in the first issue that he intended to publish stories running the gamut from the high-brow work found in &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot; to the sensational &quot;life on other planets&quot; work of &quot;Planet Stories&quot;.

The first issue of &quot;Other Worlds&quot; featured Shaver&#x27;s &quot;The Fall of Lemuria&quot;, three stories by Roger P. Graham (appearing under the pen name Rog Phillips), and one by Palmer (using the pen name G.H. Irwin). The Shaver Mystery had grown stale, however, and Graham&#x27;s was the only Shaver story published that year in any of Palmer&#x27;s magazines.

===&quot;Other Worlds&quot; becomes &quot;Flying Saucers&quot;===
&quot;Other Stories&quot; readership began dropping sharply in 1954. To save the magazine, Palmer decided to begin publication of a new series of Tarzan stories set on Mars. He believed this mashup of Tarzan and the John Carter of Mars milieu would bring in 20,000 new readers. The estate of Edgar Rice Burroughs, which held the copyright to both Tarzan and John Carter, considered the plan copyright infringement and issued a cease-and-desist letter to Clark Publishing. At first, Palmer pleaded in November 1955 for the Burroughs estate to permit the mashup. When this failed, Palmer tried to transform the disagreement into a crusade for creativity and &quot;fan rights&quot;. This failed, and no series was written.

1957 proved to be a turning point in Palmer&#x27;s magazines. The collapse of the pulp fiction industry had been coming for almost a decade: Street &amp; Smith canceled almost all of its pulp magazines in 1949. Most pulp magazines were no longer profitable, and American News Company went bankrupt in 1957. Palmer&#x27;s magazines also suffered financially and in 1957 he was forced to fire Bea Mahaffey.

In May 1957, Palmer retitled &quot;Other Worlds&quot;, changing the name to &quot;Flying Saucers from Other Worlds&quot;. The new focus was UFOs, and the magazine ceased to run fiction after the September 1957 issue. The name changed again to &quot;Flying Saucers, The Magazine of Space Conquest&quot; in July 1958, and became &quot;Flying Saucers, Mysteries of the Space Age&quot; in October 1958.

Palmer said &quot;Flying Saucers&quot;, a bimonthly, had 20,000 readers in 1963, of whom a quarter were subscribers. He named Helga Onan associate editor of &quot;Flying Saucers&quot; in 1963, only minimally continuing his involvement with it.

Gradually, Palmer began taking the position in &quot;Flying Saucers&quot; that UFOs were Shaver Mystery vehicles. He began promoting the Hollow Earth theory that the interior of the planet could be reached via gigantic holes at the north and south poles. After reading F. Amadeo Giannini&#x27;s 1959 book &quot;Worlds Beyond the Poles&quot;, which claimed that &quot;moving beyond&quot; the poles led to celestial lands, Palmer began claiming that UFOs were coming not from outer space but out of the Antarctic hole. He even claimed in a December 1959 article that an Antarctic expedition had proven it. In his own twist on the Hollow Earth legend, Palmer alleged that the Earth was actually shaped like a giant Möbius strip or perhaps doughnut-shaped. In an attempt to show that he was giving editorial space to &quot;both sides&quot;, he printed Delmar H. Bryant&#x27;s article &quot;Hollow Earth Hoax&quot; in the April 1965 issue of &quot;Flying Saucers&quot;. Bryant attacked both Giannini and Raymond Bernard, author of &quot;The Hollow Earth&quot;. (Bernard was really Walter Siegmeister.) Bryant&#x27;s article &quot;refuted&quot; the claim by Giannini and others that there was a hole at the north pole. It was, Bryant said, at the south pole. Bryant accused Palmer of helping to spread and add to Giannini&#x27;s story; Palmer, in turn, exposed Bryan as Walter Siegmeister, claimed he was engaged in a real estate scam, and accused Siegmeister of wanting to found a dictatorship.

In 1965, Palmer shifted his claim and began arguing that UFOs were actually visitors from solid layers of Earth&#x27;s outer atmosphere. He rapidly reinterpreted the Shaver Mystery in Oahspean terms. &quot;Oahspe&quot; said that the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere was high, and contained multiple &quot;heavens&quot;. Each layer was occupied by a different &quot;race&quot; of dead souls, each race having achieved different levels of enlightenment. Dead souls migrated to these &quot;solid heavens&quot;, which were very much like Earth, with schools, factories, money, and various types of professions. As people learned new skills in a lower heaven, they progressed to a higher one. Ultimately, people could become gods, having learned the skill to building an entire cosmos. &quot;Oahspe&quot; claimed that these &quot;Atmosphereans&quot; built &quot;arrow ships&quot; to travel to Earth. Ray Palmer was among the first of the UFO believers to argue that flying saucers were not extraterrestrial but rather spiritual.

Palmer&#x27;s new claims about UFOs harmed his friendship with Richard Shaver. Shaver rejected anything that hinted at spiritualism, and he felt Palmer had distorted Shaverism. Palmer replied that he thought Shaver was under attack by &quot;Deros&quot;. The disagreement between the two worsened over time, and by 1971 Richard Shaver was openly accusing Ray Palmer of turning every idea he encountered into mystical and religious &quot;claptrap&quot;.

Palmer fixated on the idea that flying saucers originated in heaven, and for the rest of his life sought to synthesize &quot;Oahspe&quot; with the Shaver Mystery.

About July 1966, &quot;Flying Saucers&quot; shifted from a glue-bound to a cheaper stapled format.

In 1971, Raymond Palmer suffered a severe bout of influenza which left him in frail health. He hired James Oberg to edit &quot;Flying Saucers&quot;.

In the fall 1976 of &quot;Search&quot;, another of his magazines, Palmer abandoned the idea that flying saucers are real. He asked his readers to consider if they were &quot;intruders&quot; instead. At UFO conference in Chicago in 1977 just before his death, Palmer again implied that flying saucers were not real. Science fiction, he said had distorted the public&#x27;s view of reality, leading people to invent flying saucers.

&quot;Flying Saucers&quot; continued publication until June 1976.

===&quot;Mystic&quot; and &quot;Search&quot;===

Raymond Palmer began publishing &quot;Mystic&quot; magazine in November 1953. His motivation for starting the new publication may have been a waning interest in &quot;Fate&quot;, or it may have been because &quot;Fate&quot; was losing readership and Palmer felt only a new magazine with a different approach could survive.

&quot;Mystic&quot; was bimonthly and primarily a contactee magazine, although Palmer tended to publish articles about anything that interested him. His editorial approach was that &quot;Mystic&quot; was a magazine of theory, and its articles did not have to be scientifically rational or documented.

Until he severed his connection with it, &quot;Fate&quot; gave Palmer a steady supply of unused material for publishing in &quot;Mystic&quot;. The first issue contained Orfeo Angelucci article &quot;I Traveled in a Flying Saucer&quot;. Angelucci also wrote &quot;I Meet the Flying Saucer Man&quot; in the May 1954 issue and &quot;My Awakening on Another Planet&quot; in the October 1954 issue. Readers made racist attacks on Angelucci for being Italian and called his claims lies. Palmer later edited Angelucci&#x27;s stories into a book, &quot;The Secret of the Saucers&quot;, published in 1955. Hannes Bok, a noted science fiction artist, wrote articles for &quot;Mystic&quot; about astrology and mandalas.

Finances for &quot;Mystic&quot; were precarious, and in August 1955 Palmer announced he would no longer pay authors for any work that appeared there.

&quot;Mystic&quot; was renamed &quot;Search&quot; in October 1956. Readers began writing letters about the Shaver Mystery as soon as &quot;Mystic&quot; appeared, and Palmer claimed hundreds, if not thousands, of people were Shaver Mystery fans.

About 1949, Richard Shaver became interested in rocks around his Wisconsin home. He began seeing ancient writing and artwork and much more in them, and began calling them &quot;song stones&quot; and &quot;picture rocks&quot;. Shaver claimed the rocks were &quot;books&quot; written by ancient alien races known as Giants, Amazons, and Mers, and a record of an antediluvian civilization that existed around Amherst. Initially, he thinly sliced rocks and sold the slices to believers in Shaverism. Later, he began photographing the rock, and then painting the images he saw on canvas. He called the art Rokfogo. Shaver stories and Shaverist elder race stories, found in the rocks, and photos of Shaver&#x27;s rocks began appearing in &quot;Mystic&quot;.

Readership of the bimonthly &quot;Search&quot; was roughly 20,000 per issue in 1960, and 19,000 in 1961. Palmer claimed the magazine sold 15,000 copies via newsstand and had 5,000 subscribers in 1963.

In 1960, Richard Shaver told Palmer that he had written a comprehensive history of Shaverism&#x27;s ancient races, and a guide to how &quot;Deros&quot; and &quot;Teros&quot; behaved in the modern world. Shaver had given up on his magnum opus, however, and he asked if Palmer would complete it, edit it, and publish the manuscript. Palmer swiftly agreed. There were 16 paperback volumes in what came to be known as &quot;The Hidden World&quot;. Three of them contained personal correspondence between Shaver and Palmer, which Palmer had published without Shaver&#x27;s consent. Shaver was deeply angered by their publication. The first four volumes of &quot;The Hidden World&quot;, released in 1961, sold 5,000 copies each. Sales quickly tapered off, however. Each of the four volumes released in 1962 found just 3,000 buyers. The four volumes issued in 1963 were purchased by just 1,700 people, and only 900 purchased the final four volumes in 1964. Richard Shaver received no income from the publication.

Did Raymond Palmer believe that Shaver&#x27;s rocks really contained ancient writing and images of the distant past? Palmer shifted his position throughout the 1960s, but by 1969 was claiming that the images really were there. He even said that &quot;Oahspe&quot; made references to the rock images.

Palmer named Helga Onan associate editor of &quot;Search&quot; and stepped back from most active involvement with the magazine.

In 1964, Palmer and Shaver engaged in a public dispute in the pages of the fanzine &quot;Searchlight.&quot; The dispute began when Shaver claimed that Ray Palmer had played no creative role in his Shaver stories. Palmer responded by attacking Shaver&#x27;s writing as very poor, and that Ziff Davis would never have run &quot;A Warning to Future Man&quot; unless Palmer made significant changes to it. Palmer reran the exchange of letters in &quot;Search&quot; in November 1966.

About July 1966, &quot;Search&quot; shifted from a glue-bound to a cheaper stapled format.

Palmer poor health after 1971 led him to turn editorship of the magazine over to his wife, Marjorie. He limited his involvement to writing one editorial and one article per issue.

In 1976, &quot;Search&quot; merged with &quot;Flying Saucers&quot;. When the magazine folded in 1977, its readership stood at just 3,000.

===Other Clark publications===
Clark began publishing &quot;Imagination&quot; in October 1950, but sold it to Hamling&#x27;s Greenleaf Publishing at the end of the year. Palmer edited four issues of &quot;Imagination&quot; for Greenleaf Publishing, leaving that position in February 1951.

In 1963, Palmer purchased &quot;Space News&quot;, a magazine about astronomy, the space race, and rocketry. It had been founded by his old friend, Otto Binder. Poor health after 1971 saw Palmer turn over the editorship of the magazine to James Oberg. Palmer published &quot;Space World&quot; magazine until his death.

Palmer began publishing &quot;Forum&quot; in 1966. Also called &quot;Ray Palmer&#x27;s Forum&quot;, the stapled, small format, 32-page magazine printed on good-quality paper initially appeared biweekly but later switched to monthly. &quot;Forum&quot; was essentially one long letters-to-the-editor column. It usually ran a single editorial by Ray Palmer, and occasionally featured articles by others. It contained no artwork; the cover consisted of a black-and-white drawing of the Roman Forum and, later, Auguste Rodin statue &quot;The Thinker&quot;. Available by subscription only, it began with about 2,200 readers. At its height, &quot;Forum&quot; had roughly 3,000 subscribers. Palmer intended for &quot;Forum&quot; to be more outspoken and even sexually explicit than a newsstand publication could be. Topics covered included conspiracy theories about the Bilderberg Group, John F. Kennedy assassination, and Federal Reserve; if there is sex in heaven; and reincarnation. New Shaver material also appeared in &quot;Forum&quot;.

&quot;Ray Palmer&#x27;s Newsletter&quot; was the smallest of Palmer&#x27;s magazines. It was little more than a catalog for his mail-order bookstore.

&quot;Forum&quot; and &quot;Ray Palmer&#x27;s Newsletter&quot; merged in 1966.

==Spiritual publications==

Palmer&#x27;s interest in spirituality and alternative explanations of reality was reflected in his choice of publications.

He was especially dedicated to spreading awareness and availability of &quot;Oahspe&quot;. Palmer&#x27;s biographer, Fred Nadis, says that Palmer learned about the book from readers of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;. He and his wife read it aloud to one another and frequently discussed it. Palmer first mentioned &quot;Oahspe&quot; in response to a letter to the editor in the &quot;Report From the Forgotten Past&quot; column in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; for September 1945. He mentioned it at length in &quot;Report From the Forgotten Past&quot; in December 1945 and again in his &quot;The Observatory&quot; editorial in February 1946. Palmer claimed he was studying the book in May 1946. From the mid-1940s onward, Palmer frequently editorialized that he believed the claims made in the religious text, although his friend and assistant editor at Ziff Davis, Howard Browne, was convinced that Palmer did not believe it.

About the early 1970s, Palmer Publications won a contract to print three magazines published by the Assembly of God church.

==FBI investigation==
In 1948, Palmer began to crusade against mutually assured destruction and nuclear weapons. In 1953, Walter Winchell gave the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) a letter denouncing Palmer as a communist propagandist. He accused Palmer of publishing the Roger Phillips Graham story &quot;Frontiers Beyond the Sun&quot; and the E.K. Jarvis story &quot;Death Beyond the Veil&quot; (both in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, January 1953). He also accused &quot;Other Worlds&quot; of advocating &quot;peace at any price&quot; communist propaganda. The FBI ran background checks on Palmer&#x27;s employees but found nothing incriminatory.

A second complaint was made to the FBI in 1954. The anti-communist group Aware, Inc. sent a letter to the FBI accusing Palmer of anti-Americanism in an editorial he wrote in &quot;Mystic&quot;. The FBI declined to investigate the claim.

Chicago FBI Special Agents interviewed Palmer after he ran a story, &quot;Venusians Walk Our Streets&quot;, by science fiction author Frank M. Vest. The story claimed the FBI laboratories were researching a mystery metal from Venus. The FBI did a records search, and found that their laboratories had never received any such metal and that no such research was being performed. When confronted with this falsehood, Palmer claimed that he did not catch the FBI reference and the &quot;mystery metal&quot;, in his final edit, but quickly apologized for the mistake, and offered to run a retraction. Palmer told the Special Agents that the magazine received around 50 letters about flying saucer sightings each week, and that he forwarded the most feasible-sounding ones to the Central Intelligence Agency&#x27;s Chicago office.

The FBI released Palmer&#x27;s FBI file on June 22, 2018, under the Freedom of Information Act.

In 1962, Palmer printed an image of a $100 bill on the cover of &quot;Search&quot;. A United States Secret Service official sent him a letter warning him against counterfeiting. Palmer transformed this into a raid on his office by the Secret and local police.

For the rest of his life, Palmer stridently claimed that he was being harassed by U.S. government law enforcement agencies. In the 1970s, he claimed that this began in 1941 when he was arrested as a spay by border control agents as he attempted to drive into Canada. None of his friends, and few of his readers, believed this new story.

==Pornography allegations==
The move by Ziff Davis to New York City left many of the company&#x27;s editors and authors at loose ends, as they were unwilling to make the move as well. Among these was assistant editor William Hamling. In 1955, Hamling founded &quot;Rogue&quot; a men&#x27;s magazine which featured nude and semi-nude photographs of women, articles, and fiction. It was a direct competitor to &quot;Playboy&quot;. It made Hamling rich, and he began investing money in Palmer&#x27;s magazines to help keep them afloat.

About 1959, Robert Silverberg and Harlan Ellison advised Hamling to start publishing pornographic paperback books. Hamling incorporated this new company, Freedom Publishing, in Wisconsin in October 1962.
Hamling kept his pornographic activities at arm&#x27;s length from his mainstream writing and editing activities. To do so, he asked Richard Shaver; Shaver&#x27;s wife, Dottie; and Raymond Palmer to incorporate Freedom Publishing in his stead. In exchange for their names appearing as officers, Hamling agreed to pay them a monthly stipend. They would not have to do any work for the dummy corporation to earn the stipend. It is unclear if Shaver approached Palmer with this scheme, or if Palmer approached Shaver, but Freedom House was duly incorporated by the three. Later, Palmer would claim that he didn&#x27;t even know what Shaver was doing, he just signed the documents without reading them. Richard Shaver was the president and sole stockholder. Dottie Shaver was vice president, treasurer and secretary. Raymond Palmer was the lone director. Freedom Publishing expanded quickly, establishing the imprints Adult Books, Candida Readers, Companion Books, Corinth Publications, Ember Library, Greenleaf Classics, Greenleaf Publishing, Idle Hour Books, Late House Library, Leisure Books, Nightstand Books, Pleasure Readers, Red Enterprises, Regency Publications, and Midnight Reader, as well as buying the existing pornographic book publisher Bedside Books.

The &quot;Saturday Evening Post&quot; for the first week of April arrived in mailboxes in mid March 1963. Inside was a major article by Cleveland Amory attacking the pornographic book industry. Amory called Freedom Publishing &quot;the worst of the worst&quot;. A deeply alarmed Richard Shaver drove to the Wisconsin state capital on March 16 and dissolved the corporation.

On April 4, the &quot;Milwaukee Journal&quot; and the &quot;Milwaukee Sentinel&quot; newspapers ran articles that identified Ray Palmer as a director of Freedom Publishing. The Milwaukee and the Portage County district attorneys began investigating Freedom Publishing, and visited Palmer&#x27;s home, offices, and print shop.

Palmer and Shaver said they were mere figureheads in the company. Palmer denied knowing what kind of books Freedom published, and any involvement in printing pornography. He claimed that Shaver had approached him with incorporation papers, and he agreed to have his name added as a director without investigating what was being incorporated. He admitted that he received $200 a month for the use of his name.

The &quot;Milwaukee Journal&quot; ran a follow-up piece on April 19, disclosing that Palmer had resigned as a director of Freedom Publishing.

According to Shaver&#x27;s biographer Richard Toronto, Hamling, Palmer, and Shaver met shortly after the scandal broke and agreed that Shaver would shoulder the blame for everything. The rationale was that Hamling and Palmer were not only wealthy but respectable citizens in their communities, while Shaver was poor and eccentric. Their belief was that the press was less likely to blame Shaver. Although Shaver agreed to the plan, it soured the friendship between Shaver and Palmer.

Hamling&#x27;s name was never mentioned in the press.

A few months after the controversy began, Richard Shaver moved to Summit, Arkansas. Shaver claimed he did so to help out a friend, and biographer Richard Toronto believes that he did so to help Palmer out. The move may also have been suggested by Palmer&#x27;s lawyer. In March 1966 in &quot;Forum&quot;, Palmer &quot;revealed&quot; that Shaver had been declared dead but was, in fact, still alive. He had &quot;vanished&quot; to flee prosecution on obscenity charges, but had now been cleared. (The truth was that Palmer knew full well where Shaver was living, and no charges had ever been brought against anyone in the Freedom Publishing case.)

In July 1966, the U.S. Department of Justice began an obscenity prosecution against Hamling. Although Richard Shaver had to travel to Houston, Texas, (where the two-month trial was held), Palmer&#x27;s name never appeared in any charging documents and he was never called as a witness. Shaver never did have to testify, and Hamling was acquitted.

==Autobiography==
About 1968, Raymond Palmer announced that he was going to write an autobiography. He was inspired to title it &quot;Martian Diary&quot; for two reasons. First, when people were uneasy about Palmer&#x27;s physical appearance, he often defused the situation by saying, &quot;As you can see, I really am from Mars.&quot; Second, a reader had written a letter to Palmer describing how she had hypnotized her daughter, who promptly gave an accurate physical description of Palmer and said he was a Martian.

Palmer originally intended for &quot;Martian Diary&quot; to be about a Martian living on Earth, but soon changed it to a memoir. He felt that it would take hundreds of thousands of words to tell his life story. He proposed that it be published in a hardbound oversize format that would sell for $10 a volume. Readers replied that they were unlikely to purchase such a pricey, wieldy item, and suggested three paperbacks priced at $3.50 each.

His intent was to publish the book in 1970. For more than two years in &quot;Forum&quot;, Palmer discussed his writer&#x27;s block, frustrations, and goals in writing the memoir, and repeatedly agonized over the definition of &quot;truth&quot;. Most of &quot;Martian Diary&quot; originally appeared in these &quot;Forum&quot; columns.

Palmer was embittered when few readers made an advance purchase, and he tabled the book for a time.

In September 1971, Palmer told readers of &quot;Forum&quot; that he had nearly completed the book. Just four months later, he admitted he had yet to begin it. Biographer Richard Toronto believes that Palmer had spent so much of his life making up stories about his past that he now found it difficult to be truthful. The frustrations and anguish he talked about in &quot;Forum&quot; were a way of angry subscribers at bay.

Palmer later confessed that in his first year at work on the autobiography, he wrote just 800 words. In March 1973, he wrote in &quot;Forum&quot; that &quot;something&quot; in the world didn&#x27;t want him to write the memoir, and he blamed the Anti-Defamation League, Central Intelligence Agency, FBI, Internal Revenue Service, United States Air Force, and Second Amendment &quot;gun nuts&quot;.

Behind the scenes, Palmer had largely given up writing a memoir. In July 1972, he wrote a letter to Richard Shaver telling him that he wanted to publish a book about Shaver&#x27;s &quot;rock books&quot;. He even sent Shaver a $100 advance. Shaver quickly put his thoughts down on paper, along with several images. He titled his work &quot;The Ancient Earth—Its Story in Stone&quot;.

In spring 1975, Raymond Palmer published &quot;The Secret World&quot;. Two books in one, the first half contained his 36-page autobiography &quot;Martian Diary&quot;, while the second contained Shaver&#x27;s &quot;The Ancient Earth, Its Story in Stone&quot;. The writing of the autobiography, Palmer claimed, was guided by a &quot;Deliberate Manipulator&quot;. &quot;Martian Diary&quot; endorsed &quot;Oahspe&quot; and Shaverism, detailed Palmer&#x27;s belief that he had enhanced memory and could engage in astral projection and psychic travel, and discussed Palmer&#x27;s interests in conspiracy theories surrounding the Bilderberg Group, CIA, &quot;deep state&quot; government, one-world secret societies, and the Warren Commission.

&quot;The Secret World&quot; was published in an oversize format. It was hardbound with a baby blue cover, and retailed for $8.50. Only Palmer&#x27;s name appeared on the cover, along with the words &quot;Volume One&quot;. (There were no more volumes forthcoming.) The front and back covers featured &quot;rock book&quot; paintings by Shaver. The flyleafs depicted full color Rokfogo images.

No announcement or advertisements for the book appeared in any of Palmer&#x27;s magazines. The first mention Ray made of the book came in an editorial in &quot;Forum&quot; in June 1975.

Richard Shaver was furious that his name did not appear on the book&#x27;s cover, and that Palmer had combined his autobiography with Shaver&#x27;s work. Adding insult, Palmer never gave Shaver a complimentary copy.

==Promotion of conspiracy theories==

Beginning in the early 1960s, Palmer became, as Fred Nadis called him, a &quot;bitter, right-wing crank&quot; who promoted various right-wing conspiracy theories. He was convinced that only Barry Goldwater, George Wallace, and Richard Nixon could save the world from various cabals intent on destroying individual freedoms. He wrote increasingly panicky editorials in his magazines which claimed that liberty was about to be lost.

He wrote about &quot;world socialization under one world government under the control of the &#x27;secret hidden government&#x27;&quot; in an editorial in &quot;Search&quot; (September 1973). The United Nations was behind this &quot;secret government&quot;, and the UN was, in turn, controlled by a Zionist World Government. (Palmer asserted he was not antisemitic.) In the early 1960s, this took the form of a &quot;world credit card&quot; with an identifying mark to be emblazoned on a person&#x27;s hand. He voted for Goldwater in the belief Goldwater would stop it. He voted for George Wallace in the Republican primary in 1968, believing only Wallace could stop the coming crisis. (Palmer insisted Wallace was not a racist.) In 1974, he predicted that Nelson Rockefeller would depose Gerald Ford as president and create a &quot;mock&quot; constitution while ruling dictatorially. In October 1975, he claimed that conspirators were going to use the 1940 Potomac River Basin Compact to engage in an &quot;Internal Capture of the United States&quot;. He predicted that the coming one world government would execute or institutionalize him for these beliefs.

Black power, flying saucers, pollution, riots, secularization, student activism, the Vietnam War, and worsening murder rates were all signs of the coming crisis, he claimed. The crisis was being worsened by what he saw as worsening dependence on government, created by the civil rights movement, equal pay for equal work, the Great Society, &quot;new&quot; civil rights, and Social Security.

Palmer particularly opposed environmental regulation. He claimed that a &quot;conference of nations&quot; had occurred 25 years earlier in South America to establish a conspiracy to deprive landowners of their rights. The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources was even part of it.

Ray also tended to promote conspiracies about current events. He maintained that the Central Intelligence Agency was behind the killings of John F. Kennedy, Martin Luther King Jr., and Robert F. Kennedy. He blamed the Watergate scandal on G. Gordon Liddy. Nixon, Palmer declared, had &quot;sacrificed himself to protect our country from world disgrace&quot;.

He was not entirely in lockstep with the American conservative movement, however. He opposed the Vietnam War, and even claimed the secret bombing of Cambodia was to cover up the fact that there was a UFO base there. Although he criticized student unrest, he was generally supportive of hippie culture and the sexual revolution. He remained critical of hallucinogens, however, because he believed they kept people from self-actualization and could cause despair. He believed overpopulation was at the root of student activism, and in October 1972 proposed the colonization of space as a solution to &quot;youth discontent&quot;.

According to biographer Fred Nadis, Palmer&#x27;s standard rhetorical technique when proven incorrect was to admit that he was wrong, then claim that he was right anyway or that he made the claim only to &quot;elicit truth&quot;.

==Personal life and death==
===Beliefs===
Raymond Palmer believed that some sort of mysterious force or &quot;destiny&quot; was at work in his life. He believed in pre-birth memory, astrology, and magical thinking. By the mid-1940s, he was convinced that science was a cult which asked people to believe rather than seek truth. He also believed the public had been brainwashed by education and religion.

He was registered to vote as a Republican his entire life, although one biographer says his politics were more Libertarian than conservative.

Palmer was, for most of his adult life, outgoing and social. According to his assistant and co-editor Bea Mahaffey, he was also very sensitive and easily hurt. He also enjoyed cooking, classical music, and opera. While living in Amherst, he often invited 80 or more neighbors to his weekly summer picnics. His New Year&#x27;s Eve parties were widely attended and talked about.

===Family life===
Palmer began courting chorus girls at Milwaukee&#x27;s Riverside Theater in 1935. He often spent large amounts of money while courting various women. He tried to produce a comedy revue there in order to meet more girls, but the show never got off the ground. From October 1935 to March 1936 he dated Peggy, a blonde chorus girl who worked at the theater.

In 1940, Palmer began dating Florence McMillan, a 19-year-old actress. They married on August 3, 1940, but the marriage was annulled a few weeks later.

Palmer met his future wife, Marjorie Wilson, at an October 1942 dinner party hosted by his friend, the writer Leroy Yerxa. They married on December 25, 1942. According to biographer Richard Toronto, Palmer&#x27;s inferiority complex vanished after he married. The couple had three children: Raymond B., Jennifer, and Linda.

While living in Amherst, Raymond reconciled with his father, Roy. Roy became a frequent visitor to their home.

===Death===
In late July 1977, Palmer and his wife drove to Tallahassee, Florida, to visit their daughter, Jennifer, who had given birth. During the drive, Ray suffered from repeated bouts of numbness. He collapsed at his daughter&#x27;s home on July 31, and was hospitalized the next day. Physicians determined that he had a blocked artery in his neck, and operated to remove it. He suffered complications from the surgery, and had two strokes that left him unable to talk.

Raymond Palmer died in Tallahassee on August 15, 1977. He was interred at Greenwood Cemetery near Amherst, Wisconsin.

==Legacy and tributes==
The final issues of &quot;Forum&quot;, &quot;Flying Saucers&quot;, and &quot;Search&quot; were bundled together in a tribute issue to Ray Palmer. &quot;Fate&quot; ran a full-page obituary.

As editor of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, Palmer&#x27;s emphasis on more juvenile adventure-romance stories created a deep rift in the science fiction fandom community. The Futurians, a group of left-leaning science fiction fans based in New York City, strongly opposed his editorial approach. At the 1940 World Science Fiction Convention (Chicon) in Chicago, the Futurians published an anti-Palmer pamphlet that was given away to attendees as they entered the meeting hall. The conflict with Palmer remains part of the historic institutional and collective memory of East Coast fandom into the 21st century.

Palmer&#x27;s legacy as a writer and editor are mixed. Fred Nadis says that most writers of science fiction scorn Palmer for his hucksterism and fringe views. Nadis notes that Palmer did invent an entirely new genre of fiction, the paranormal pulp. Science fiction historian E. F. Bleiler went further. He said Palmer&#x27;s writing could be ignored, and his promotion of irrationality made him unimportant as an editor. Mike Ashley, however, called Palmer daring and innovative while he helmed &quot;Other Worlds&quot;. Author Frank M. Robinson also praised his editing of &quot;Universe&quot;.

Histories of the flying saucer and New Age movements tend to ignore Raymond Palmer. UFOlogists Peter Kor and John Keel, however, argue that Palmer was almost completely responsible for igniting the flying saucer movement. Religious scholar Jeffrey J. Kripal gives Palmer a central role in the bringing the paranormal into mainstream pop culture, and Fred Nadis points to Palmer&#x27;s promotion of and influence on the Shaver Mystery at major influences on television shows like &quot;The X-Files&quot; and &quot;Twin Peaks&quot;.

The secret identity of DC Comics superhero the Atom—introduced by comic book writer Gardner Fox in 1961—is named after Palmer. Julius Schwartz telephoned his old friend Palmer for his permission to give the new Atom the name &quot;Ray Palmer&quot;. Palmer consented. Schwartz was inspired by the call to give Atom the power to travel via telephone lines.

&quot;I Remember Lemuria&quot; was nominated for a Retro Hugo Award in 1996.

In September 2013, Palmer was posthumously named to the First Fandom Hall of Fame in a ceremony at the 71st World Science Fiction Convention.

==Bibliography==
===Short stories===
* &quot;The Time Ray of Jandra&quot;, Wonder Stories (June 1930)
* &quot;The Man Who Invaded Time&quot;, Science Fiction Digest (October 1932)
* &quot;Escape from Antarctica&quot;, Science Fiction Digest (Juneau 1933)
* &quot;The Girl from Venus&quot;, Science Fiction Digest (September 1933)
* &quot;The Return to Venus&quot;, Fantasy Magazine (May 1934)
* &quot;The Vortex World&quot;, Fantasy Magazine (1934)
* &quot;The Time Tragedy&quot;, Wonder Stories (December 1934)
* &quot;Three from the Test-Tube&quot;, Wonder Stories (1935)
* &quot;The Symphony of Death&quot;, Amazing Stories (December 1935)
* &quot;Matter Is Conserved&quot;, Astounding Science-Fiction (April 1938)
* &quot;Catalyst Planet&quot;, Thrilling Wonder Stories (August 1938)
* &quot;The Blinding Ray&quot;, Amazing Stories (August 1938)
* &quot;Outlaw of Space&quot;, Amazing Stories (August 1938)
* &quot;Black World&quot; (Part 1 of 2), Amazing Stories (March 1940)
* &quot;Black World&quot; (Part 2 of 2), Amazing Stories (April 1940)
* &quot;The Vengeance of Martin Brand&quot; (Part 1 of 2), Amazing Stories (August 1942)
* &quot;The Vengeance of Martin Brand&quot; (Part 2 of 2), Amazing Stories (September 1942)
* &quot;King of the Dinosaurs&quot;, Fantastic Adventures (October 1945)
* &quot;Toka and the Man Bats&quot;, Fantastic Adventures (February 1946)
* &quot;Toka Fights the Big Cats&quot;, Fantastic Adventures (December 1947)
* &quot;In the Sphere of Time&quot;, Planet Stories (Summer 1948)
* &quot;The Justice of Martin Brand&quot;, Other Worlds Science Stories (July 1950)
* &quot;The Hell Ship&quot;, Worlds of If (March 1952)
* &quot;Mr. Yellow Jacket&quot;, Other Worlds (June 1951)
* &quot;I Flew in a Flying Saucer&quot; (Part 1 of 2), Other Worlds Science Stories (October 1951)
* &quot;I Flew in a Flying Saucer&quot; (Part 2 of 2), Other Worlds Science Stories (December 1951)
* &quot;The Metal Emperor&quot;, Imaginative Tales (November 1955)

===Nonfiction===
* &quot;The Coming of the Saucers&quot; (with Kenneth Arnold) (1952)
* &quot;The Secret World&quot; (with Richard Shaver) (1975)

==References==
;Notes
;Citations
==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==
* 
* Raymond A. Palmer FBI files at TheBlackVault.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2025311" start="0" end="21" title="Raymond A. Palmer" label="Raymond Alfred Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419419" start="120" end="156" title="First Fandom" label="first wave of science fiction fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q199296" start="209" end="219" title="Ziff Davis" label="Ziff Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="275" end="290" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434224" start="349" end="366" title="Fantastic Stories" label="Fantastic Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267576" start="412" end="426" title="Shaver Mystery" label="Shaver Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067175" start="845" end="849" title="Fate (magazine)" label="Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887092" start="863" end="891" title="Other Worlds, Universe Science Fiction, and Science Stories" label="Other Worlds Science Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463509" start="964" end="978" title="Flying Saucers (magazine)" label="Flying Saucers"/>
<link wikidata="Q114566372" start="1081" end="1106" title="The Coming of the Saucers" label="The Coming of the Saucers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121306" start="1118" end="1132" title="Kenneth Arnold" label="Kenneth Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267576" start="1141" end="1162" title="Richard Sharpe Shaver" label="Richard Sharpe Shaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q829348" start="1237" end="1249" title="Spiritualism (movement)" label="spiritualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="1315" end="1334" title="Conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="1364" end="1367" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q291" start="1435" end="1447" title="Pornography" label="pornographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401971" start="1777" end="1790" title="flying saucer" label="flying saucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="1795" end="1802" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="1880" end="1889" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="1891" end="1900" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="1969" end="1974" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017729" start="2124" end="2142" title="Ulster Protestants" label="Ulster Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="2162" end="2178" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="2292" end="2301" title="Irish Catholics" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2354" end="2365" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="2423" end="2429" title="German people" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="2430" end="2438" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="2479" end="2488" title="Alcoholism" label="alcoholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q205398" start="3225" end="3238" title="social worker" label="social worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q63283181" start="3325" end="3340" title="Frances Yerxa" label="Frances Hamling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723627" start="3367" end="3386" title="Pott&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Pott&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="3388" end="3400" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q482853" start="3408" end="3413" title="vertebral column" label="spine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814234" start="3503" end="3513" title="Bone grafting" label="bone graft"/>
<link wikidata="Q478389" start="3598" end="3606" title="kyphosis" label="kyphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064483" start="3706" end="3720" title="prone position" label="prone position"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="3864" end="3872" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q223102" start="4094" end="4105" title="peritonitis" label="peritonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="4110" end="4119" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="4960" end="4973" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971918" start="5049" end="5071" title="Washington High School of Information Technology" label="Washington High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138671" start="5250" end="5265" title="Catholic school" label="Catholic school"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="5358" end="5373" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707847" start="5705" end="5715" title="bookkeeper" label="bookkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085171" start="5944" end="5966" title="science fiction fandom" label="science fiction fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15454805" start="6258" end="6269" title="Mike Ashley (writer)" label="Mike Ashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q181298" start="6359" end="6366" title="fanzine" label="fanzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726933" start="6374" end="6383" title="The Comet (fanzine)" label="The Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769338" start="7069" end="7087" title="The Time Traveller (fanzine)" label="The Time Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q18227" start="7100" end="7118" title="Forrest J Ackerman" label="Forrest J Ackerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q282102" start="7120" end="7135" title="Julius Schwartz" label="Julius Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235693" start="7141" end="7155" title="Mort Weisinger" label="Mort Weisinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933191" start="7413" end="7445" title="Muirdale Tuberculosis Sanatorium" label="Muirdale Tuberculosis Sanatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270448" start="7624" end="7631" title="Debridement" label="debride"/>
<link wikidata="Q29483" start="7699" end="7714" title="palliative care" label="palliative care"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097724" start="8530" end="8541" title="steeplejack" label="steeplejack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177899" start="8598" end="8605" title="bowling" label="bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q816261" start="8607" end="8614" title="jogging" label="jogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q171038" start="8620" end="8628" title="softball" label="softball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706756" start="9203" end="9217" title="Wonder Stories" label="Wonder Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q684748" start="9238" end="9252" title="Lester del Rey" label="Lester del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976265" start="9682" end="9700" title="Roger Sherman Hoar" label="Roger Sherman Hoar"/>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="9722" end="9730" title="pen name" label="pen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q944409" start="9752" end="9771" title="Stanley G. Weinbaum" label="Stanley G. Weinbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q355879" start="9773" end="9785" title="Robert Bloch" label="Robert Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q13737321" start="9787" end="9800" title="Jim Kjelgaard" label="Jim Kjelgaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800473" start="9806" end="9818" title="Arthur Tofte" label="Arthur Tofte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456296" start="9963" end="9969" title="fix-up" label="fix-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="11289" end="11315" title="Astounding Science Fiction" label="Astounding Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q110536081" start="11329" end="11341" title="Marvel Tales and Unusual Stories" label="Marvel Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706756" start="11359" end="11373" title="Wonder Stories" label="Wonder Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347298" start="12722" end="12734" title="Serial (literature)" label="serial novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307491" start="12741" end="12747" title="Cosmos (serial novel)" label="Cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443385" start="12793" end="12810" title="Round-robin story" label="round-robin style"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365739" start="12944" end="12959" title="David H. Keller" label="David H. Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439765" start="12961" end="12979" title="George Henry Weiss" label="George Henry Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q435056" start="13017" end="13033" title="John W. Campbell" label="John W. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108757" start="13035" end="13054" title="Otis Adelbert Kline" label="Otis Adelbert Kline"/>
<link wikidata="Q330376" start="13056" end="13071" title="A. Merritt" label="Abraham Merritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q144090" start="13073" end="13104" title="E. E. Smith" label="Edward E. &amp;quot;Doc&amp;quot; Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900938" start="13106" end="13124" title="P. Schuyler Miller" label="P. Schuyler Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q710435" start="13126" end="13146" title="Lloyd Arthur Eshbach" label="Lloyd Arthur Eshbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285626" start="13152" end="13167" title="Edmond Hamilton" label="Edmond Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q199296" start="13674" end="13684" title="Ziff Davis" label="Ziff Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965713" start="13753" end="13775" title="T. O&amp;#x27;Conor Sloane" label="T. O&amp;#x27;Conor Sloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893162" start="14311" end="14327" title="Bernard George Davis" label="Bernard G. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="15121" end="15147" title="Astounding Science Fiction" label="Astounding Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="15884" end="15896" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604995" start="15919" end="15928" title="Adam Link" label="Adam Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q638055" start="15946" end="15958" title="Eando Binder" label="Eando Binder"/>
<link wikidata="Q350153" start="16000" end="16011" title="Otto Binder" label="Otto Binder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662638" start="17691" end="17709" title="Harold W. McCauley" label="Harold W. McCauley"/>
<link wikidata="Q85616" start="18135" end="18148" title="Frank R. Paul" label="Frank R. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010777" start="18375" end="18390" title="William Hamling (publisher)" label="William Hamling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682621" start="18702" end="18715" title="Howard Browne" label="Howard Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140799" start="19013" end="19033" title="Fantastic Adventures" label="Fantastic Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879431" start="19231" end="19239" title="bedsheet" label="bedsheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q148234" start="19319" end="19339" title="Edgar Rice Burroughs" label="Edgar Rice Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q717071" start="19860" end="19874" title="Nelson S. Bond" label="Nelson S. Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809593" start="20205" end="20223" title="John Russell Fearn" label="John Russell Fearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480302" start="20555" end="20566" title="digest size" label="digest size"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938376" start="20705" end="20726" title="Robert Moore Williams" label="Robert Moore Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046972" start="20829" end="20844" title="Carson of Venus" label="Carson of Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267576" start="21122" end="21143" title="Richard Sharpe Shaver" label="Richard Sharpe Shaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267576" start="21954" end="21968" title="Shaver Mystery" label="Shaver Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267576" start="22148" end="22169" title="Richard Sharpe Shaver" label="Richard Sharpe Shaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q649143" start="22254" end="22266" title="Hollow Earth" label="Hollow Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="22617" end="22630" title="Schizophrenia" label="schizophrenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="23689" end="23699" title="Ghostwriter" label="ghostwrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333051" start="24612" end="24625" title="Genetic memory (psychology)" label="racial memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865466" start="26678" end="26697" title="Barto, Pennsylvania" label="Barto, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005465" start="27618" end="27633" title="William Bernard Ziff Sr." label="William B. Ziff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351381" start="27968" end="27987" title="Oahspe" label="Oahspe: A New Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q829348" start="28003" end="28015" title="Spiritualism (movement)" label="spiritualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="29897" end="29911" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344930" start="31643" end="31674" title="Maurice Doreal" label="Brotherhood of the White Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q40640" start="33147" end="33159" title="Ray Bradbury" label="Ray Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722707" start="33164" end="33175" title="Henry Hasse" label="Henry Hasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357638" start="33765" end="33786" title="Rog Phillips" label="Roger Phillips Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q969121" start="34252" end="34266" title="Vincent Gaddis" label="Vincent Gaddis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456655" start="34268" end="34284" title="L. Taylor Hansen" label="L. Taylor Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="35253" end="35275" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="35312" end="35337" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q337355" start="35356" end="35379" title="William S. Baring-Gould" label="William S. Baring-Gould"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36647" end="36676" title="Queens Science Fiction League" label="Queens Science Fiction League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276490" start="36735" end="36748" title="Sam Moskowitz" label="Sam Moskowitz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36753" end="36773" title="James V. Taurasi Sr." label="James V. Taurasi Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q112788907" start="39995" end="40014" title="1947 flying disc craze" label="flying saucer craze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149892" start="41080" end="41097" title="Maury Island hoax" label="Maury Island hoax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121306" start="41138" end="41152" title="Kenneth Arnold" label="Kenneth Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q194057" start="41203" end="41216" title="Mount Rainier" label="Mount Rainier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="41233" end="41243" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q604141" start="41375" end="41386" title="Puget Sound" label="Puget Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793978" start="41392" end="41404" title="Maury Island" label="Maury Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q199797" start="41427" end="41433" title="Tacoma" label="Tacoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494920" start="41470" end="41482" title="Fred Crisman" label="Fred Crisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="41643" end="41666" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q868654" start="41841" end="41858" title="Kelso, Washington" label="Kelso, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610159" start="45730" end="45748" title="Amherst, Wisconsin" label="Amherst, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218120" start="45786" end="45803" title="Lanark, Wisconsin" label="Lanark, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401257" start="46005" end="46027" title="Saint Francis Hospital of Evanston" label="Saint Francis Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q462799" start="46031" end="46049" title="Evanston, Illinois" label="Evanston, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q270029" start="47226" end="47236" title="Lions Clubs International" label="Lions Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644222" start="47878" end="47914" title="7th World Science Fiction Convention" label="7th World Science Fiction Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q30686654" start="48414" end="48426" title="Bea Mahaffey" label="Bea Mahaffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="48455" end="48464" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="48801" end="48813" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q363227" start="48815" end="48828" title="Fredric Brown" label="Fredric Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q240253" start="48834" end="48851" title="Theodore Sturgeon" label="Theodore Sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548630" start="50207" end="50229" title="George Hunt Williamson" label="George Hunt Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="50292" end="50299" title="Fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501730" start="50321" end="50342" title="William Dudley Pelley" label="William Dudley Pelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753311" start="50351" end="50375" title="Silver Legion of America" label="Silver Legion of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="50412" end="50424" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q240253" start="50737" end="50754" title="Theodore Sturgeon" label="Theodore Sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q463416" start="51939" end="51979" title="American Association of University Women" label="American Association of University Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067175" start="52237" end="52241" title="Fate (magazine)" label="Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480302" start="52423" end="52434" title="digest size" label="digest size"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52543" end="52556" title="Wing Anderson" label="Wing Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q194267" start="52846" end="52858" title="Rosicrucianism" label="Rosicrucians"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="53440" end="53460" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="53472" end="53497" title="archaeology" label="archeological discoveries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682005" start="53499" end="53516" title="automatic writing" label="automatic writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578143" start="53518" end="53567" title="Spiritualism (beliefs)" label="belief in the survival of personality after death"/>
<link wikidata="Q180933" start="53569" end="53582" title="cryptozoology" label="cryptozoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q379173" start="53597" end="53608" title="sea serpent" label="sea serpent"/>
<link wikidata="Q129628" start="53614" end="53618" title="Yeti" label="Yeti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="53621" end="53631" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q421" start="53633" end="53646" title="unidentified flying object" label="flying saucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q443325" start="53658" end="53665" title="Fortean" label="Fortean"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="53682" end="53698" title="mental telepathy" label="mental telepathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q477544" start="53700" end="53722" title="New religious movement" label="New religious movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640439" start="53725" end="53744" title="Oneiromancy" label="predictive dreaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="53746" end="53762" title="psychedelic drug" label="psychedelic drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q332102" start="53774" end="53784" title="paranormal" label="paranormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q437335" start="54348" end="54362" title="George Adamski" label="George Adamski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527177" start="54384" end="54393" title="contactee" label="contactee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302345" start="54665" end="54686" title="Saturday Evening Post" label="Saturday Evening Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887092" start="55576" end="55604" title="Other Worlds, Universe Science Fiction, and Science Stories" label="Other Worlds Science Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="55836" end="55862" title="Analog Science Fiction and Fact" label="Astounding Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201176" start="55936" end="55950" title="Planet Stories" label="Planet Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357638" start="56076" end="56091" title="Rog Phillips" label="Roger P. Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q170241" start="56545" end="56551" title="Tarzan" label="Tarzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894452" start="56590" end="56596" title="Mashup novel" label="mashup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734913" start="56615" end="56634" title="John Carter of Mars" label="John Carter of Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500230" start="57261" end="57279" title="Street &amp;amp; Smith" label="Street &amp;amp; Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q19060368" start="57382" end="57403" title="American News Company" label="American News Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463509" start="57608" end="57640" title="Flying Saucers (magazine)" label="Flying Saucers from Other Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q226843" start="58883" end="58895" title="Möbius strip" label="Möbius strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059955" start="59247" end="59265" title="Walter Siegmeister" label="Walter Siegmeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="61445" end="61454" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806694" start="61496" end="61507" title="James Oberg" label="James Oberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888615" start="62886" end="62901" title="Orfeo Angelucci" label="Orfeo Angelucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="63162" end="63169" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5649104" start="63314" end="63324" title="Hannes Bok" label="Hannes Bok"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="63402" end="63411" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q191431" start="63416" end="63423" title="mandala" label="mandala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167928" start="64463" end="64473" title="elder race" label="elder race"/>
<link wikidata="Q609318" start="67168" end="67179" title="Imagination (magazine)" label="Imagination"/>
<link wikidata="Q180212" start="68199" end="68210" title="Roman Forum" label="Roman Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q30755" start="68223" end="68236" title="Auguste Rodin" label="Auguste Rodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18003128" start="68250" end="68261" title="The Thinker" label="The Thinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q184937" start="68579" end="68595" title="Bilderberg Meeting" label="Bilderberg Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321697" start="68597" end="68626" title="John F. Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories" label="John F. Kennedy assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="68632" end="68647" title="Federal Reserve" label="Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q128593" start="68680" end="68693" title="reincarnation" label="reincarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q494890" start="70160" end="70175" title="Assemblies of God" label="Assembly of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q637802" start="70248" end="70276" title="mutually assured destruction" label="mutually assured destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="70281" end="70295" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097952" start="70307" end="70322" title="Walter Winchell" label="Walter Winchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="70332" end="70363" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71211" end="71224" title="Frank M. Vest" label="Frank M. Vest"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="71852" end="71879" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q503224" start="72087" end="72115" title="United States Secret Service" label="United States Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359502" start="72865" end="72870" title="Rogue (magazine)" label="Rogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="73014" end="73021" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q314553" start="73146" end="73163" title="Robert Silverberg" label="Robert Silverberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="73168" end="73182" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568759" start="74737" end="74752" title="Cleveland Amory" label="Cleveland Amory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765623" start="74998" end="75015" title="Milwaukee Journal Sentinel" label="Milwaukee Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765623" start="75036" end="75054" title="Milwaukee Journal Sentinel" label="Milwaukee Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q500908" start="75171" end="75185" title="Portage County, Wisconsin" label="Portage County"/>
<link wikidata="Q80153" start="76462" end="76478" title="Summit, Arkansas" label="Summit, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="77178" end="77185" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="77187" end="77192" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983" start="78034" end="78040" title="memoir" label="memoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="79463" end="79485" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="79487" end="79514" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="79521" end="79545" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="79547" end="79570" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q210645" start="79576" end="79592" title="Second Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658150" start="80652" end="80662" title="deep state" label="deep state"/>
<link wikidata="Q722319" start="80717" end="80734" title="Warren Commission" label="Warren Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="81703" end="81713" title="Right-wing politics" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="81714" end="81733" title="Conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="81762" end="81777" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="81779" end="81793" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="81799" end="81812" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="82200" end="82214" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q282728" start="82303" end="82327" title="International Jewish conspiracy" label="Zionist World Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="82725" end="82731" title="racism" label="racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237" start="82761" end="82779" title="Nelson Rockefeller" label="Nelson Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="82793" end="82804" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q489268" start="83086" end="83106" title="world government" label="one world government"/>
<link wikidata="Q880483" start="83165" end="83176" title="Black power" label="Black power"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="83194" end="83203" title="pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q85502" start="83212" end="83226" title="secularization" label="secularization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83228" end="83244" title="Student activism#United States" label="student activism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="83250" end="83261" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="83438" end="83459" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11414572" start="83461" end="83485" title="equal pay for equal work" label="equal pay for equal work"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191264" start="83491" end="83504" title="Great Society" label="Great Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="83522" end="83534" title="Civil and political rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184791" start="83540" end="83555" title="Social Security (United States)" label="Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q328798" start="83586" end="83610" title="Environmental law" label="environmental regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="83929" end="83956" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="84062" end="84079" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q952688" start="84083" end="84098" title="G. Gordon Liddy" label="G. Gordon Liddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q683271" start="84335" end="84361" title="Operation Menu" label="secret bombing of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="84490" end="84496" title="hippie" label="hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q465467" start="84513" end="84530" title="sexual revolution" label="sexual revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q198827" start="84622" end="84640" title="self-actualization" label="self-actualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984324" start="85228" end="85244" title="Near-birth experience" label="pre-birth memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="85246" end="85255" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q136783" start="85261" end="85277" title="magical thinking" label="magical thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q11038979" start="85333" end="85337" title="cult" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="85500" end="85510" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="85580" end="85591" title="Libertarianism" label="Libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="85597" end="85609" title="Conservatism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="85797" end="85812" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="85818" end="85823" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338624" start="86063" end="86080" title="Riverside Theater (Milwaukee)" label="Riverside Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q701040" start="86488" end="86496" title="Annulment" label="annulled"/>
<link wikidata="Q37043" start="87014" end="87034" title="Tallahassee, Florida" label="Tallahassee, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="87391" end="87397" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q848452" start="87936" end="87945" title="Futurians" label="Futurians"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="87958" end="87962" title="Left-wing politics" label="left"/>
<link wikidata="Q617378" start="88069" end="88101" title="Worldcon" label="World Science Fiction Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321850" start="88648" end="88661" title="E. F. Bleiler" label="E. F. Bleiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q843541" start="88901" end="88918" title="Frank M. Robinson" label="Frank M. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q219611" start="89054" end="89064" title="Ufology" label="UFOlogists"/>
<link wikidata="Q776700" start="89079" end="89088" title="John Keel" label="John Keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176072" start="89210" end="89227" title="Jeffrey J. Kripal" label="Jeffrey J. Kripal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744" start="89455" end="89466" title="The X-Files" label="The X-Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085" start="89483" end="89493" title="Twin Peaks" label="Twin Peaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q930420" start="89506" end="89521" title="secret identity" label="secret identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="89525" end="89534" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685120" start="89549" end="89553" title="Ray Palmer (comics)" label="Atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333848" start="89586" end="89597" title="Gardner Fox" label="Gardner Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452993" start="89992" end="90017" title="First Fandom Hall of Fame award" label="First Fandom Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643136" start="90039" end="90076" title="71st World Science Fiction Convention" label="71st World Science Fiction Convention"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405875" wikidata="Q1416857" url="?curid=405875" title="Lackland Air Force Base">
<text>Lackland Air Force Base is a United States Air Force (USAF) base located in Bexar County, Texas, United States. The base is under the jurisdiction of the 802d Mission Support Group, Air Education and Training Command (AETC) and an enclave of the city of San Antonio. It is the only site for USAF and United States Space Force enlisted Basic Military Training (BMT).

Lackland AFB is part of Joint Base San Antonio (JBSA), an amalgamation of Fort Sam Houston, Randolph AFB and Lackland AFB, which were merged on 1 October 2010. JBSA was established in accordance with congressional legislation implementing the recommendations of the 2005 Base Realignment and Closure Commission. The legislation ordered the consolidation of the three facilities which were adjoining, but separate military installations, into a single joint base – one of 12 joint bases formed in the United States as a result of the law.

==Units==
United States Air Force
* 502nd Installation Support Group
: A unit of the JBSA 502nd Air Base Wing, the 502nd ISG is the focal point for all base activities, serving and supporting the 37th and 737th Training Groups and all of its mission partners as well as the more than 24,000 retirees living in the local area.
* 37th Training Wing
: 37th Training Group
: Provides professional, military and technical training in the knowledge and skills needed for graduates to perform their jobs worldwide. Joint service training for USAF, U.S. Army, U.S. Navy and U.S. Marine Corps personnel is provided in numerous courses, such as the military working dog program and security and law enforcement
: 737th Training Group
: Provides Basic Military Training for all enlisted people entering the USAF, Air Force Reserve and Air National Guard, earning Lackland the nickname, &quot;Gateway to the Air Force.&quot; The group was the center of the United States Air Force Basic Training scandal, 2012. Since 2020, it has also provided basic training for enlisted recruits to the United States Space Force.
* Sixteenth Air Force
: Operates, maintains and defends the USAF information networks and directs mission critical cyber terrain, provides multisource intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance products, and is the Service Cryptologic Component responsible to the National Security Agency&#x27;s Central Security Service for Air Force matters involving the conduct of cryptologic activities.
* 624th Operations Center
:: Interfaces with theater and functional Air Operations Centers to establish, plan, direct, coordinate, assess, and command &amp; control cyber operations in support of USAF and Joint warfighting requirements. The 624th Operations Center was inactivated in 2020.

Department of Defense
* Inter-American Air Forces Academy
: Fostering enduring Inter-American engagement through education and training. Teaches 37 technical courses, in Spanish and in English, to students from more than 22 countries every year.
* Defense Language Institute
: Primary mission was to teach English to Allied pilot candidates. In 1966, its mission expanded to include other career fields, and the school moved under the Department of Defense with the U.S. Army as the executive agent.

National Security Agency
* Texas Cryptologic Center

Lackland AFB hosts a collection of vintage military aircraft on static display on its parade grounds as part of the USAF Airman Heritage Museum, including a Boeing B-52 Stratofortress, McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II, Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird, B-29 Superfortress, C-121 Constellation, Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress and a B-25 Mitchell.

==Training mission==
Lackland Air Force Base is home to the 37th Training Wing (37 TRW) which operates a variety of training squadrons. Within the 37th TRW is the 37th Training Group (37 TRG) which oversees the 5 technical training schools on the base, and the 737 TRG which oversees the Basic Military Training squadrons.

===Basic training (enlisted)===


Lackland is best known for its role in being the sole location for U.S. Air Force enlisted Basic Military Training (BMT) for the active duty Regular Air Force, Air Force Reserve and Air National Guard. BMT is organized into nine basic training squadrons, each with their own training site on the base. Each squadron is equipped with either a dining facility or a medical clinic. Some BMT squadrons share dining facilities if they are located close enough together and the same is true for medical clinics. Each squadron also has a specific exercise area where basic trainees conduct physical readiness training (PRT). Also, AFOSI anti-terrorism teams are trained here.

In October 2008 the BMT was expanded an extra two weeks to implement more air base defense training as well as other rudimentary skills. The BMT course of training is weeks.

===Officer training===
Prior to 22 September 1993, Lackland AFB&#x27;s Medina Annex was also home to Air Force Officer Training School (OTS), one of three USAF officer accession and commissioning sources in addition to the U.S. Air Force Academy and Air Force ROTC. On 25 September 1993, OTS permanently relocated to Maxwell AFB, Alabama.

===Technical training===
Lackland, like many other Air Education and Training Command (AETC) bases, trains enlisted airmen out of basic training in a specific specialty via various &quot;tech schools.&quot; Lackland currently has six technical training squadrons on base training multiple airmen in various Air Force Specialty Codes (AFSCs).
* The 37th Training Group supports the following five training squadrons and also trains technical training instructors, military training instructors and military training leaders.
* The 341st Training Squadron trains military working dogs and handlers for the entire Department of Defense and several federal agencies.
* The 342nd Training Squadron teaches Pararescuemen (PJs), Combat Controllers, Special Reconnaissance (SR), Tactical Air Control Party (TACPs) Special Warfare Airmen, Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE) Specialists, and a variety of advanced Security Forces courses.
* The 343rd TRS trains airmen to become Security Forces members in a 13-week academy.
* The 344th TRS provides technical training for more than 10,000 active duty, Reserve, Guard, international and civilian students annually in Career Enlisted Aviator, Vehicle Maintenance, Logistics Readiness Officer, Logistics Plans, Materiel Management, Contracting, Recruiting, Safety, Cryptological, and TEMPEST courses.
* The 345th TRS trains, develops and educates technical training students into skilled graduates in the Services, Air Transportation, Hazardous Material Transportation School (HAZMAT) and Traffic Management Office career fields..

==History==

===World War II===
Construction on Lackland Air Force Base began on 15 June 1941, and it was originally part of Kelly Field. One year later, it became an independent organization—the San Antonio Aviation Cadet Center (SAAC). On 8 January 1943, the War Department constituted and activated the 78th Flying Training Wing (Preflight) at San Antonio and assigned it to the United States Army Air Force&#x27;s Central Flying Training Command. The 78th Wing provided aviation cadets the mechanics and physics of flight and required the cadets to pass courses in mathematics and the hard sciences. Then the cadets were taught to apply their knowledge practically by teaching them aeronautics, deflection shooting, and thinking in three dimensions. Once completed, the graduates were designated as aviation cadets and were sent to one of the primary flight schools for pilot training.

===Cold War===
On 3 February 1948, the facility was named Lackland AFB after Brigadier General Frank Lackland, who was commissioned into the regular Army after serving in the District of Columbia National Guard. It shared Basic Military Training status temporarily with Sampson Air Force Base in New York during the Korean War; and Amarillo Air Force Base during the Vietnam War until Amarillo&#x27;s closure in 1968.

As a result of the Korean War, training populations at Lackland soared to 28 basic military training squadrons (BMTS) within the 3700th Military Training Wing. Temporary facilities, to include 129 &quot;I dormitories&quot;, were hastily erected as a quick fix to replace tents cities housing recruits. In 1955 the number of BMTS was reduced to 16, where it remained for the next two decades.

The Vietnam War buildup necessitated a &quot;split-phase&quot; training from August 1965 to April 1966. This program provided for 22 days at Lackland and 8 days at a technical school, with directed duty assignees receiving the full 30 days at Lackland. When BMT returned to a single phase on 1 April 1966, it was briefly cut back to 24 days from April to July 1966. After that, basic training stabilized at a length of six weeks. This was the same length as the program used by the Army Air Forces when Lackland opened as a basic training base 20 years before. Training requirements also expanded to include teaching English to Allied military members from foreign countries.

No other item in the 1960s compared to the incident that occurred at Lackland in February 1966 with the death of a basic trainee. An airman died of spinal meningitis and while ten other cases were confirmed, no other deaths were reported. Virtually all non-essential activities requiring gatherings of basic trainees were canceled. To control the issue further, a cadre of personnel was assigned to activate the 3330th Basic Military Training School at Amarillo AFB in Amarillo, Texas, in February 1966. As a result of the continuing expansion of the USAF, Amarillo AFB continued to conduct basic training until December 1968.

During the 1960s, more permanent facilities were constructed, including four 1,000-person steel and brick Recruit Housing and Training (RH&amp;T) dormitories built between 1966 and 1970 for basic military training by the Lackland Military Training Center. These state-of-the-art buildings included living space, dining halls, and training areas for four basic training squadrons under one roof. Eventually six full-size dormitories, and two 600-person facilities, were constructed, enabling excess space to be converted to classroom use.

===Air Defense Command===
In late 1951, Air Defense Command selected Lackland AFB as one of twenty-eight radar stations built as part of the second segment of the permanent radar surveillance network. Prompted by the start of the Korean War, on 11 July 1950, the Secretary of the Air Force asked the Secretary of Defense for approval to expedite construction of the second segment of the permanent network. Receiving the Defense Secretary&#x27;s approval on 21 July, the Air Force directed the Corps of Engineers to proceed with construction.

On 1 February 1953, the 741st Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron was activated at Lackland (P-75) with an AN/FPS-3 search radar and an AN/FPS-4 height-finder radar. In 1958 the AN/FPS-4 height-finder radar was replaced by AN/FPS-6 and AN/FPS-6A sets.

By late 1959, Lackland was also performing air-traffic-control duties for the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). At this time the site hosted an AN/FPS-20A radar. One AN/FPS-6 was retired by 1963. On 31 July 1963, the site was redesignated as NORAD ID Z-75.

In addition to the main facility, Lackland operated an AN/FPS-14 Gap Filler site:
* Schulenburg, TX (P-75A): 

In 1965, AN/FPS-20A was upgraded to an AN/FPS-91A radar, then in 1969 it was modified to an AN/FPS-66A. The 741st Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron was inactivated in December 1969, and the FAA assumed control of the radar site.

In September 1972, the Houston-based 630th Radar Squadron sent a detachment (OL-D) to this FAA-operated site to set up an AN/FPS-6 height-finder radar to join the AN/FPS-66A search radar already in place (Z-241). The Air Force ceased using the Lackland AFB radar site on 30 September 1976.

The Lackland ADC site was taken over by the FAA (also known as &#x27;San Antonio&#x27;) and remained in operation for a number of years. This then-FAA long-range radar site was data-tied into the Joint Surveillance System. The site operated the AN/FPS-66A search radar. However, the radar facility has been deactivated, and all the structures have been razed.

===Post–Cold War era===

From the end of the Cold War, Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) actions in the 1990s relocated several specialized training programs at Lackland. This included Air Education and Training Command&#x27;s relocation of Air Force Officer Training School (OTS) from Lackland to Maxwell AFB in Montgomery, Alabama.

Lackland gained a flying mission when adjacent Kelly AFB closed in 2001. The two-mile-long runway is now a joint-use facility between Lackland AFB and Port San Antonio. The portion of the former Kelly AFB still under USAF control is now known as Lackland AFB/Kelly Field Annex and its permanently based flying units include the Air Force Reserve Command&#x27;s (AFRC) 433d Airlift Wing, an Air Mobility Command (AMC)-gained unit flying the C-5 Galaxy and the 149th Fighter Wing of the Texas Air National Guard, an AETC-gained unit flying the F-16 Fighting Falcon. The civilian side of the former Kelly AFB is now known as Port San Antonio and hosts numerous major DoD defense contractors such as Boeing and Lockheed Martin, many of which directly or indirectly support major overhaul and repair of military aircraft previously conducted, and in facilities previously occupied, by the Air Force&#x27;s former San Antonio Air Logistics Center (SA-ALC) when Kelly was an active Air Force Logistics Command (AFLC) and Air Force Materiel Command (AFMC) installation.

In addition, with the closure of Kelly AFB, Lackland gained the section of base known as Security Hill. Security Hill is home to numerous units such as Air Combat Command&#x27;s 24th Air Force and 67th Network Warfare Wing and the Air Force Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Agency. All units on Security Hill are considered tenant units.

Lackland now consists of the Kelly airstrip, Security Hill, main base Lackland, and the old Medina officer training base now named Medina/Lackland Training Annex. With the exception of a few buildings most of the old Kelly air base including the housing has been turned over to civilian jurisdiction.

On 15 May 2009, USAF officials announced that Lackland is the preferred alternative location for the 24th Air Force.

In winter of 2009 it was decided to combine all the military bases in San Antonio into one large base named Joint Base San Antonio.

In April 2012 Lackland served as an overflow shelter for an influx of illegal immigrant minors after the Administration for Children and Families determined that all other local shelters were filled to capacity.

On 28 October 2013, the Military Working Dog Teams National Monument was unveiled during a dedication ceremony with full military fanfare. The U.S. National Monument was authorized with the passage of Public Law 110–181, Section 2877, (having been introduced to Congress by Rep. Walter B. Jones) which was passed by the United States Congress and signed into law by President George W. Bush. The monument was built next to the Basic Military Training Parade Field, that location being chosen due to the historical significance of the base as the training center and headquarters of the United States Department of Defense Military Working Dog Program.

===Sexual assault scandal===
In the United States Air Force Basic Training scandal, involving sexual assault on the base, dozens of female and male recruits said that they were sexually harassed or raped by their instructors from 2010 onward.

===2016 shooting===
On 8 April 2016, an airman on the base shot and killed a squadron commander, then killed himself.

===Kelly Field Renaming===
In December 2017, Lackland AFB renamed Kelly Field Annex to Kelly Field to commemorate the 100 year anniversary of the airfield becoming property of the US Government and to better fit its joint nature 

===Chapman Training Annex Renaming===
On March 4, 2020, Medina Training Annex was renamed to Chapman Training Annex after Medal of Honor recipient Master Sgt. John A. Chapman

==Demographics==
Lackland Air Force Base CDP is a census-designated place (CDP) covering the permanent residential population of the Lackland Air Force Base in Bexar County, Texas, United States. It first appeared as an unincorporated community in the 1970 United States census and then as a census designated place in the 1980 United States census. Per the 2020 United States census, the population was 9,467. It does include the Kelly Field annex or the Lakeland training annex.

===2020 census===
===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 7,123 people, 174 households, and 152 families residing on the base. The population density was . There were 412 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 65.20% White, 19.01% Black or African American, 0.86% Native American, 3.64% Asian, 0.32% Pacific Islander, 2.20% from other races, and 8.77% from two or more races. 13.77% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 174 households, out of which 79.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 73.0% were married couples living together, 9.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 12.6% were non-families. 12.1% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 3.49 and the average family size was 3.78.

On the base the population was spread out, with 5.3% under the age of 18, 79.8% from 18 to 24, 14.5% from 25 to 44, 0.4% from 45 to 64, and none who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 20 years. For every 100 females, there were 256 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 267.3 males.

The median income for a household in the base was $32,250, and the median income for a family was $31,923. Males had a median income of $16,435 versus $15,572 for females. The per capita income for the base was $10,048. 7.3% of the population and 6.9% of families were below the poverty line. Out of the total population, 7.3% of those under the age of 18 were living below the poverty line.

==See also==
* 433rd Security Forces Squadron
* Texas Cryptology Center
* Texas World War II Army Airfields
* Air Training Command
* List of airports in Texas
* Twenty-Fourth Air Force
* United States general surveillance radar stations

==References==

==External links==

* Lackland AFB official site
* Lackland AFB Personnel Locator
* USAF: A Narrative History of Lackland Air Force Base
* USAF BMT Flight Photograph Project
* 802nd Force Support Squadron (formerly Lackland Services) Website
* Unofficial website
* Lackland Air Force Base at LacklandAFB.com (Comprehensive Lackland AFB Directory)
* BRAC 2005: Closings, Realignments to Reshape Infrastructure
* &quot;Voices on Antisemitism&quot; Interview with Colonel Edward B. Westermann from the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum
* Military Working Dog Teams National Monument official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1416857" start="0" end="23" title="Lackland Air Force Base" label="Lackland Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="29" end="52" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q16861" start="76" end="95" title="Bexar County, Texas" label="Bexar County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q407064" start="182" end="216" title="Air Education and Training Command" label="Air Education and Training Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="254" end="265" title="San Antonio, Texas" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q55088961" start="300" end="325" title="United States Space Force" label="United States Space Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889211" start="335" end="358" title="United States Air Force Basic Military Training" label="Basic Military Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269109" start="391" end="413" title="Joint Base San Antonio" label="Joint Base San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438706" start="441" end="457" title="Fort Sam Houston" label="Fort Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q980034" start="459" end="471" title="Randolph AFB" label="Randolph AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886428" start="638" end="677" title="Base Realignment and Closure Commission" label="Base Realignment and Closure Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="916" end="939" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639783" start="996" end="1015" title="502nd Air Base Wing" label="502nd Air Base Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635920" start="1234" end="1252" title="37th Training Wing" label="37th Training Wing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1255" end="1274" title="37th Training Group" label="37th Training Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="1447" end="1456" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="1458" end="1467" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="1472" end="1489" title="U.S. Marine Corps" label="U.S. Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1609" end="1629" title="737th Training Group" label="737th Training Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q407191" start="1708" end="1725" title="Air Force Reserve" label="Air Force Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q407622" start="1730" end="1748" title="Air National Guard" label="Air National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889210" start="1851" end="1897" title="United States Air Force Basic Training scandal" label="United States Air Force Basic Training scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q55088961" start="1982" end="2007" title="United States Space Force" label="United States Space Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552109" start="2011" end="2030" title="Sixteenth Air Force" label="Sixteenth Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="2277" end="2301" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492824" start="2309" end="2333" title="Central Security Service" label="Central Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641839" start="2407" end="2430" title="624th Operations Center" label="624th Operations Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113646" start="2473" end="2495" title="Air Operations Centers" label="Air Operations Centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="2696" end="2717" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102209" start="2944" end="2970" title="Defense Language Institute" label="Defense Language Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="3131" end="3152" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="3197" end="3221" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707617" start="3224" end="3248" title="Texas Cryptologic Center" label="Texas Cryptologic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q65237111" start="3366" end="3393" title="USAF Airman Heritage Museum" label="USAF Airman Heritage Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q174534" start="3407" end="3433" title="Boeing B-52 Stratofortress" label="Boeing B-52 Stratofortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q151432" start="3435" end="3467" title="McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II" label="McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II"/>
<link wikidata="Q190114" start="3469" end="3493" title="Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird" label="Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q184870" start="3495" end="3513" title="B-29 Superfortress" label="B-29 Superfortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3836000" start="3515" end="3534" title="C-121 Constellation" label="C-121 Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185000" start="3536" end="3563" title="Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress" label="Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q502117" start="3570" end="3583" title="B-25 Mitchell" label="B-25 Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635920" start="3646" end="3664" title="37th Training Wing" label="37th Training Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550460" start="4035" end="4058" title="Basic Military Training" label="Basic Military Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q407191" start="4104" end="4121" title="Air Force Reserve" label="Air Force Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q407622" start="4126" end="4144" title="Air National Guard" label="Air National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863034" start="4568" end="4573" title="AFOSI" label="AFOSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697932" start="4890" end="4923" title="Air Force Officer Training School" label="Air Force Officer Training School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="5012" end="5034" title="U.S. Air Force Academy" label="U.S. Air Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697942" start="5039" end="5053" title="Air Force ROTC" label="Air Force ROTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785757" start="5106" end="5117" title="Maxwell AFB" label="Maxwell AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q407064" start="5180" end="5214" title="Air Education and Training Command" label="Air Education and Training Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q408832" start="5245" end="5251" title="airmen" label="airmen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5477" end="5496" title="37th Training Group" label="37th Training Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5659" end="5682" title="341st Training Squadron" label="341st Training Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="5740" end="5761" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5798" end="5821" title="342nd Training Squadron" label="342nd Training Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q442272" start="5830" end="5843" title="Air Force Pararescue" label="Pararescuemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8776719" start="5851" end="5869" title="Combat Control Team" label="Combat Controllers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697963" start="5871" end="5893" title="United States Air Force Special Reconnaissance" label="Special Reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889233" start="5900" end="5926" title="United States Air Force Tactical Air Control Party" label="Tactical Air Control Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507188" start="5959" end="5999" title="Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape" label="Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635335" start="6077" end="6086" title="343rd Training Squadron" label="343rd TRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q18177009" start="6111" end="6126" title="Air Force Security Forces" label="Security Forces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6163" end="6172" title="344th TRS" label="344th TRS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6487" end="6496" title="345th TRS" label="345th TRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860401" start="6837" end="6848" title="Kelly Field" label="Kelly Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="6973" end="6987" title="United States Department of War" label="War Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057746" start="7018" end="7043" title="78th Flying Training Wing (U.S. Army Air Forces)" label="78th Flying Training Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="7094" end="7122" title="United States Army Air Force" label="United States Army Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061102" start="7130" end="7161" title="Central Flying Training Command" label="Central Flying Training Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283422" start="7778" end="7813" title="District of Columbia National Guard" label="District of Columbia National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410208" start="7873" end="7895" title="Sampson Air Force Base" label="Sampson Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="7919" end="7929" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570890" start="7935" end="7958" title="Amarillo Air Force Base" label="Amarillo Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="7970" end="7981" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="9240" end="9257" title="spinal meningitis" label="spinal meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9545" end="9557" title="Rick Husband Amarillo International Airport#Amarillo Air Force Base (1951–1968)" label="Amarillo AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825671" start="10299" end="10318" title="Air Defense Command" label="Air Defense Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q261746" start="10522" end="10548" title="United States Secretary of the Air Force" label="Secretary of the Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="10559" end="10579" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="10753" end="10771" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643312" start="10827" end="10870" title="741st Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron" label="741st Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887132" start="10912" end="10920" title="AN/FPS-3" label="AN/FPS-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280744" start="10941" end="10949" title="AN/FPS-4" label="AN/FPS-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531863" start="11028" end="11036" title="AN/FPS-6" label="AN/FPS-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="11136" end="11167" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887132" start="11207" end="11216" title="AN/FPS-20" label="AN/FPS-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887130" start="11376" end="11385" title="AN/FPS-14" label="AN/FPS-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887132" start="11471" end="11480" title="AN/FPS-91" label="AN/FPS-91"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887132" start="11524" end="11533" title="AN/FPS-66" label="AN/FPS-66"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631951" start="11703" end="11723" title="630th Radar Squadron" label="630th Radar Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531863" start="11788" end="11796" title="AN/FPS-6" label="AN/FPS-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269420" start="12153" end="12178" title="Joint Surveillance System" label="Joint Surveillance System"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="12363" end="12371" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886428" start="12373" end="12401" title="Base Realignment and Closure" label="Base Realignment and Closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q407064" start="12505" end="12539" title="Air Education and Training Command" label="Air Education and Training Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697932" start="12571" end="12594" title="Officer Training School" label="Officer Training School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785757" start="12618" end="12629" title="Maxwell AFB" label="Maxwell AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860401" start="12702" end="12711" title="Kelly AFB" label="Kelly AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q407191" start="12983" end="13008" title="Air Force Reserve Command" label="Air Force Reserve Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637849" start="13023" end="13040" title="433d Airlift Wing" label="433d Airlift Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q407588" start="13045" end="13065" title="Air Mobility Command" label="Air Mobility Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q182012" start="13095" end="13105" title="C-5 Galaxy" label="C-5 Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549910" start="13114" end="13132" title="149th Fighter Wing" label="149th Fighter Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707500" start="13140" end="13164" title="Texas Air National Guard" label="Texas Air National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q100026" start="13197" end="13217" title="F-16 Fighting Falcon" label="F-16 Fighting Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230924" start="13277" end="13293" title="Port San Antonio" label="Port San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="13351" end="13357" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="13362" end="13377" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739932" start="13563" end="13595" title="San Antonio Air Logistics Center" label="San Antonio Air Logistics Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697918" start="13630" end="13657" title="Air Force Logistics Command" label="Air Force Logistics Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q407147" start="13669" end="13695" title="Air Force Materiel Command" label="Air Force Materiel Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q407015" start="13870" end="13888" title="Air Combat Command" label="Air Combat Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857727" start="13896" end="13910" title="24th Air Force" label="24th Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642296" start="13915" end="13940" title="67th Network Warfare Wing" label="67th Network Warfare Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q407139" start="13949" end="14011" title="Air Force Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Agency" label="Air Force Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857727" start="14473" end="14487" title="24th Air Force" label="24th Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q185367" start="14693" end="14717" title="Illegal immigration to the United States" label="illegal immigrant minors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683424" start="14728" end="14768" title="Administration for Children and Families" label="Administration for Children and Families"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714648" start="14860" end="14904" title="Military Working Dog Teams National Monument" label="Military Working Dog Teams National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="14979" end="15001" title="National monument (United States)" label="U.S. National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q512537" start="15115" end="15130" title="Walter B. Jones" label="Walter B. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="15212" end="15226" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="15422" end="15457" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889210" start="15525" end="15571" title="United States Air Force Basic Training scandal" label="United States Air Force Basic Training scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="16205" end="16219" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q54866727" start="16230" end="16257" title="John A. Chapman" label="Master Sgt. John A. Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="16309" end="16332" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q16861" start="16419" end="16431" title="Bexar County, Texas" label="Bexar County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="16433" end="16438" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730452" start="16511" end="16536" title="1970 United States census" label="1970 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="16551" end="16574" title="census designated place" label="census designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121710" start="16582" end="16607" title="1980 United States census" label="1980 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="16617" end="16642" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17009" end="17014" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17023" end="17028" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17032" end="17048" title="Race (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17056" end="17071" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17079" end="17084" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17092" end="17108" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17121" end="17132" title="Race (U.S. Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17198" end="17206" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17210" end="17216" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q28446535" start="18310" end="18340" title="433rd Security Forces Squadron" label="433rd Security Forces Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707617" start="18343" end="18366" title="Texas Cryptology Center" label="Texas Cryptology Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708216" start="18369" end="18402" title="Texas World War II Army Airfields" label="Texas World War II Army Airfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698220" start="18405" end="18425" title="Air Training Command" label="Air Training Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833687" start="18428" end="18453" title="List of airports in Texas" label="List of airports in Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857727" start="18456" end="18479" title="Twenty-Fourth Air Force" label="Twenty-Fourth Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027808" start="18482" end="18531" title="United States general surveillance radar stations" label="United States general surveillance radar stations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405880" wikidata="Q1965713" url="?curid=405880" title="T. O'Conor Sloane">
<text>Thomas O&#x27;Conor Sloane (November 24, 1851 – August 7, 1940) was an American scientist, inventor, author, editor, educator, and linguist, perhaps best known for writing &quot;The Standard Electrical Dictionary&quot; and as the editor of &quot;Scientific American&quot;, from 1886 to 1896 and the first science fiction magazine, &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, from 1929 to 1938.

==Life and career==
Sloane was born in New York City in 1851, eventually moving to South Orange, New Jersey while maintaining work offices in New York City.

===Education===
Sloane was academically exceptional, graduating with an A.B. from the College of St. Francis Xavier in NYC in 1869 at only eighteen years of age. He then earned an E.M from Columbia University in NYC in 1872, an A.M. from the College of St. Francis Xavier in 1873, a Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Columbia University in 1876 and later, an LL.D. from the College of St. Francis Xavier. It has also been stated that Sloane held a Ph.D. in chemistry, although beyond his extensive professional experience in the field of chemistry there does not seem to be evidence to support this.

===Early career===
Sloane was employed as a chemist by the N.Y. Gas Light Co. in 1872 and in 1877 as chief engineer for Citizens&#x27; Gas Light Co. in Brooklyn.

===Self-recording photometer for gas power===
Sloane&#x27;s best known invention, introduced in 1878, was the self-recording photometer for gas power — the first instrument to mechanically register the illuminating power of natural gas. He was granted a patent for the invention January 29, 1884. In 1877, Sloane had described a new process for determining sulphur in natural gas. He also served as a scientific expert in patent lawsuits.

===Works===
Sloane was the author of &quot;The Standard Electrical Dictionary&quot;, first published in 1892, as well as &quot;Arithmetic of Electricity: A Practical Treatise on Electrical Calculations&quot;, &quot;Electricity Simplified: The Practice and Theory of Electricity&quot;, &quot;Questions and Answers About Electricity: A First Book for Students: Theory of Electricity and Magnetism&quot;, &quot;Electric Toy Making for Amateurs&quot;, &quot;How to Become a Successful Electrician&quot;, &quot;The Electrician&#x27;s Handy Book&quot;, &quot;Practical Electricity&quot;, &quot;An Electrical Library&quot;, &quot;Elementary Electrical Calculations&quot;, &quot;A Manual of Simple Engineering Mathematics: Covering the Whole Field of Direct Current Calculations&quot;, &quot;Speed and Fun with Figures&quot;, &quot;Rapid Arithmetic: Quick and Special Methods in Arithmetical Calculation&quot;, &quot;Fortunes in Formulas for Home, Farm, and Workshop&quot;, &quot;Henley&#x27;s Twentieth Century Book of Formulas, Processes and Trade Secrets&quot;, &quot;Motion Picture Projection&quot;, &quot;Liquid Air and the Liquefaction of Gases&quot;, &quot;Home Experiments in Science&quot;, &quot;Rubber Hand Stamps and the Manipulation of India Rubber&quot;, &quot;Facts Worth Knowing&quot; and others; including translations into English of &quot;Saint Francis of Assisi: A Biography&quot; written by Johannes Jorgensen and &quot;The Electric Light: Its History, Production, and Applications&quot; by Alglave and Boulard.

A copy of &quot;Electric Toy Making for Amateurs&quot; is held by the Smithsonian Libraries.

Sloane was also a prodigious contributor to many and various scientific and other publications such as the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;, &quot;Annual Cyclopedia&quot;, &quot;Alden&#x27;s Cyclopedia&quot;, &quot;The Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;, &quot;The Independent&quot;, &quot;The Times&quot; newspaper (London) and &quot;Popular Science&quot;.

===&quot;Scientific American&quot;===
Sloane was the editor of &quot;Scientific American&quot; from 1886 to 1896, contributing over fifty scientific articles to the magazine during his tenure. 
Sloane also served on the editorial staff of several other popular periodicals such as &quot;Everyday Engineering Magazine&quot;, &quot;Plumber and Sanitary Engineer&quot;, &quot;Youth&#x27;s Companion&quot;, &quot;The Experimenter&quot; (formerly, &quot;Practical Electrics&quot;) and &quot;Science and Invention&quot; (formerly, &quot;The Electrical Experimenter&quot;).&lt;ref name=&quot;The Experimenter / Amazing Stories&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

===Seton Hall University===
Sloane was a professor of natural sciences and higher mathematics at Seton Hall University in South Orange, New Jersey, having first joined the faculty in 1883 and teaching there non-continuously through the 1890s. In 1894, Sloane was elected to the Board of Trustees, while also continuing in his capacity as a member of the faculty.

===New Jersey State Board of Education===
Sloane was a member of the New Jersey State Board of Education (1905–11) and lectured in its educational series for several years.

===American Chemical Society===
Sloane served as treasurer for the American Chemical Society from 1882 to 1886 and wrote articles about the US mineral industry for the &quot;Journal of the American Chemical Society&quot;.

===Chemical Institute of New York===
For many years Sloane was the educational director of the Chemical Institute of New York, which provided a distance-learning course of study in chemistry. The courses were copyrighted. The institute advertised heavily in the periodicals of the day (magazine ad for the Chemical Institute of New York, 1922), like &quot;Popular Mechanics&quot;, &quot;Popular Science&quot;, &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, &quot;Radio-Craft&quot; and &quot;The Experimenter&quot;.

===&quot;Amazing Stories&quot;===
Sloane was involved with Hugo Gernsback&#x27;s &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; from the very beginning, his editorial work at &quot;The Experimenter&quot; and &quot;Science and Invention&quot; magazines, published by Gernsback&#x27;s Experimenter Publishing led to Sloane&#x27;s involvement with &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; when Gernsback merged the two magazines, devoting the editorial and printing time, resources and distribution from &quot;The Experimenter&quot; to the newly created &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; and retaining Sloane to edit the magazine with Gernsback having the final say over the fiction content (see also, history of US science fiction and fantasy magazines to 1950). Sloane served as the managing editor for the first issue of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; (April 1926) and as the associate editor from the second issue (May 1926) on. His role in the magazine production continued to grow and in 1929 when B. A. MacKinnon purchased Experimenter Publishing then sold it to Bernarr Macfadden, Sloane was named editor (November 1929 issue). Of note, Sloane&#x27;s managing editor at &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; was Miriam Bourne, in a time when women were particularly underrepresented in the science fiction publishing world; as well, Sloane and later, Raymond A. Palmer, advanced and expanded upon Gernsback&#x27;s mandate for the magazine, actively publishing women SF writers, poets and science journalists, progressing the industry.

Sloane was one of several stockholders owning significant shares in the Experimenter Publishing Company, Inc., New York, NY.

Sloane published first stories by science fiction authors including John W. Campbell, Jr., Eando Binder, John Russell Fearn, S. P. Meek, John Benyon Harris, Henry Hasse and E. E. &quot;Doc&quot; Smith and a first poem by Frederik Pohl. Sloane published a first science fiction story by Howard Fast, early work by Neil R. Jones, Charles R. Tanner, Lloyd Arthur Eshbach, Edmond Hamilton, Harold Vincent Schoepflin (Harl Vincent), David H. Keller, Miles J. Breuer, Stanton A. Coblentz, George Henry Weiss (Francis Flagg), Alfred Johannes Olsen (Bob Olsen) and Leslie Francis Silberberg (Leslie F. Stone), one of the first women writing science fiction pulp; and as associate editor was directly involved in the publication of first stories by Philip Francis Nowlan, Jack Williamson, Alpheus Hyatt Verrill and many other important science fiction writers, including Clare Winger Harris, one of the first women writing science fiction and who is credited with being the first woman to publish stories using her own name in science fiction magazines. During Sloane&#x27;s tenure as associate editor, the magazine published &quot;The Colour Out of Space&quot; by H. P. Lovecraft, in the September 1927 issue. As editor, Sloane is credited with accepting but not publishing the first science fiction story written by Clifford D. Simak who submitted &quot;Cubes of Ganymede&quot; to &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; early in 1931. Sloane held onto the story for years, finally returning it to Simak as being outdated.

Sloane also managed to publish a story, &quot;The Universal Merry-Go-Round&quot; by Roger Bird in the April 1933 edition of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; that science fiction historian Mike Ashley refers to as &quot;what could arguably be called the worst story ever published in an American sf magazine...This story is so bad as to be compulsive reading, and no plot summary can do it justice.&quot; On the other hand, he published the only stories of the equally unknown W. K. Sonneman, who science fiction historian Sam Moskowitz considered to be a &quot;writer among writers&quot; and a &quot;&#x27;master&#x27; of science fiction.&quot;

====Professor Jameson====

Sloane published the first Professor Jameson story by Neil R. Jones, &quot;The Jameson Satellite,&quot; launching the series and publishing the next eleven stories. The series was among the most popular in the science fiction pulp magazines of the 1930s and Isaac Asimov credits it as being an influence on his own science fiction writing. Frederik Pohl was also a fan of the Professor Jameson stories which have become the longest surviving series in science fiction.

====Buck Rogers====

Sloane was the associate editor of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; when the first Buck Rogers story, a novella, &quot;Armageddon - 2419 A.D.&quot; by Phillip Francis Nowlan was published in the August 1928 edition of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;. By early 1929, Buck Rogers was appearing as a syndicated comic strip and inspired the creation of Flash Gordon, John Carter of Mars and others. &quot;The Airlords of Han,&quot; a sequel, was published in the March 1929 issue of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;. In 1960, these two novellas were combined into one novel, titled &quot;Armageddon 2419 A.D.&quot;(no longer included the dash in the title).

====The first space opera====

Sloane was the associate editor of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; when the first space opera, &quot;The Skylark of Space&quot; by E. E. &quot;Doc&quot; Smith was published in the August 1928 edition of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;. Science fiction historians Sam Moskowitz and Joe Sanders state that Sloane, while associate editor, accepted &quot;The Skylark of Space&quot; for publication. As editor, Sloane published the second installment, &quot;Skylark Three,&quot; as a three-part serial in the August to October 1930 issues of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;. Smith&#x27;s novel, &quot;Spacehounds of IPC,&quot; serialized in the August, September, and October 1931 issues of the magazine, introduced the term &quot;tractor beam&quot; to the popular culture.

====The scholarly octogenarian====

Much discussion by science fiction fans and historians has surrounded assigning credit during the Gernsback era to the various editors of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; for publishing first works by writers during this early period of the genre, who then went on to become giants of science fiction, based on the chronology of their job title on the masthead of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;. Additionally, the octogenarian Sloane has been criticized for routinely taking an inordinate amount of time to respond to writers anxious to hear back from &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; on the status of their submission, such as with Simak&#x27;s work or that of Malcolm Afford and Raymond Z. Gallun, and on one occasion famously losing a manuscript, &quot;Invaders from the Infinite&quot; by John W. Campbell, Jr. (later found, Sloane published it in &quot;Amazing Stories Quarterly&quot;). Some context provides a measure of insight regarding these matters. Science fiction historian Mike Ashley writes in &quot;The Time Machines: The Story of the Science-Fiction Pulp Magazines from the Beginning to 1950&quot; (Liverpool University Press, 2000): &quot;Essentially Sloane was the editor. He read the new fiction and moulded the magazine&#x27;s contents, leaving the gimmickry and ideas to Gernsback.&quot; During the subsequent transition of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;&#x27; ownership, Ashley writes: &quot;Gernsback was no longer its editor. Although Miriam Bourne was by now Managing Editor, Arthur Lynch was brought in as Editor-in-Chief. However the main job was done by Sloane. The change came with the May 1929 issue, and by the November 1929 issue Sloane was fully in charge.&quot; Science fiction historians Peter Nicholls and John Clute support Ashley&#x27;s work in their book &quot;The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction&quot; (Granada, 1979) by stating that Sloane &quot;carried much responsibility for the actual running of the magazines [&quot;Amazing Stories&quot; and &quot;Amazing Stories Quarterly&quot;], though they were in the overall charge of, successively, Hugo Gernsback and Arthur Lynch. He succeeded to the editorship...in 1929.&quot; Eric Davin in &quot;Pioneers of Wonder&quot; (Prometheus Books, 1999) states &quot;and T. O&#x27;Conor Sloane, &quot;Amazing&#x27;s&quot; associate editor (who handled the actual editorial chores)...&quot; Alexei Panshin, writing in &quot;Fantastic Stories&quot; and with Cory Panshin in &quot;SF in Dimension: A Book of Explorations&quot;, states that Sloane had been &quot;editor-in-fact&quot; for Gernsback. This is also treated by science fiction historian Gary Westfahl, writing in DePauw University&#x27;s journal &quot;Science Fiction Studies&quot;.

====Cover art====

In 1933, Sloane experimented with a series of surreal cover art for &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; by artist A. Sigmond which science fiction historian Mike Ashley states were revolutionary for their time but were not warmly received by the readership. Leo Morey was a prodigious producer of cover art for &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;; Hans Waldemar Wessolowski (Wesso) also produced cover art for the magazine.

====Space travel====

Sloane&#x27;s editorial essays for the March and July 1930 issues of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; detail why he did not believe that space travel was possible. His doubt in the matter was a scientific one, believing that the pilot of a rocket ship attaining escape velocity would be crushed by the g-force experienced. It was not until the high-altitude and centrifuge tests of the late 1950s that this question was answered.

====Gernsback and Sloane====

Gernsback and Sloane had a long and productive working relationship that began in 1920 and continued through Gernsback&#x27;s departure from &quot;Amazing Stories.&quot; Gernsback and Sloane believed that science fiction should promote science and technology and that the stories published in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; should be as scientifically plausible as possible, with Sloane in particular emphasizing this. Sloane may have collaborated with Gernsback in originating the term &quot;scientifiction&quot; which was superseded by &quot;science fiction&quot; to describe this genre, as suggested in part by the first issue of &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;.

====Ziff-Davis====

In 1938, publisher Ziff-Davis bought the magazine and moved its production from New York City to Chicago, naming Raymond A. Palmer as Sloane&#x27;s successor.

===&quot;Amazing Stories Quarterly&quot;===
From 1929 to 1934, Sloane was the editor of &quot;Amazing Stories Quarterly&quot;, which had begun publication in 1928 with Sloane serving as the associate editor, it was the companion publication to &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; and the successor to &quot;Amazing Stories Annual&quot;; it ceased production in 1934. Featuring a complete novel in each edition as well as short stories, &quot;Amazing Stories Quarterly&quot; published, particularly during the early 1930s, what science fiction historians Mike Ashley, Brian Stableford, Milton Wolf, Robert Silverberg and others regard to be important work in the genre and among the best early pulp science fiction novels.

===2014 Retro Hugo Award===
Sloane was nominated for the 2014 Retro Hugo Award in the Best Editor, Short Form award category but fell below the nominations cutoff by one vote.

==Family==
Sloane married Isabel Mitchel, who was born (September 1852) in Van Diemen&#x27;s Land to John Mitchel and Jane &quot;Jenny&quot; Mitchel; she died in childbirth (1879). Sloane&#x27;s son, T. O&#x27;Conor Sloane, Jr. became a well-known photographer; another son, John Eyre Sloane, an airplane factory owner, married Thomas Alva Edison&#x27;s daughter Madeleine in 1914; their four sons were Edison&#x27;s only grandchildren. Sloane&#x27;s grandson was T. O&#x27;Conor Sloane III, a senior editor at Doubleday. Sloane&#x27;s grandfather was Thomas O&#x27;Conor, a journalist and author who established three newspapers, the &quot;Military Monitor&quot;, the &quot;Shamrock&quot; and the &quot;Globe&quot;.

Sloane&#x27;s great-great-grandson is Justin T. O&#x27;Conor Sloane, an author, publisher and the editor of &quot;Worlds of IF&quot; magazine and &quot;Galaxy Science Fiction&quot; magazine.

==Death==
Sloane died in 1940 in South Orange, New Jersey.

==Bibliography==
*&quot;The Standard Electrical Dictionary&quot;
*&quot;Arithmetic of Electricity: A Practical Treatise on Electrical Calculations&quot;
*&quot;Electricity Simplified: The Practice and Theory of Electricity&quot;
*&quot;Questions and Answers About Electricity: A First Book for Students: Theory of Electricity and Magnetism&quot;
*&quot;Electric Toy Making for Amateurs&quot;
*&quot;How to Become a Successful Electrician&quot;
*&quot;The Electrician&#x27;s Handy Book&quot;
*&quot;Practical Electricity&quot;
*&quot;An Electrical Library&quot;
*&quot;Elementary Electrical Calculations&quot;
*&quot;A Manual of Simple Engineering Mathematics: Covering the Whole Field of Direct Current Calculations&quot;
*&quot;Speed and Fun with Figures&quot;
*&quot;Rapid Arithmetic: Quick and Special Methods in Arithmetical Calculation&quot;
*&quot;Fortunes in Formulas for Home, Farm, and Workshop&quot;
*&quot;Henley&#x27;s Twentieth Century Book of Formulas, Processes and Trade Secrets&quot;
*&quot;Motion Picture Projection&quot;
*&quot;Liquid Air and the Liquefaction of Gases&quot;
*&quot;Home Experiments in Science&quot;
*&quot;Rubber Hand Stamps and the Manipulation of India Rubber&quot;
*&quot;Facts Worth Knowing&quot;

== References ==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1965713" start="0" end="26" title="T. O&amp;#x27;Conor Sloane" label="Thomas O&amp;#x27;Conor Sloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12733420" start="230" end="236" title="List of science fiction editors" label="editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="246" end="265" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="305" end="320" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="337" end="352" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="419" end="432" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q656185" start="463" end="475" title="South Orange, New Jersey" label="South Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="477" end="487" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="727" end="746" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="830" end="852" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="998" end="1007" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="1294" end="1302" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609326" start="3340" end="3361" title="Smithsonian Libraries" label="Smithsonian Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q773087" start="3695" end="3710" title="Popular Science" label="Popular Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037977" start="4205" end="4226" title="Science and Invention" label="Science and Invention"/>
<link wikidata="Q585828" start="4459" end="4480" title="Seton Hall University" label="Seton Hall University"/>
<link wikidata="Q247556" start="4967" end="4992" title="American Chemical Society" label="American Chemical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q898902" start="5074" end="5114" title="Journal of the American Chemical Society" label="Journal of the American Chemical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274577" start="5479" end="5496" title="Popular Mechanics" label="Popular Mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q312242" start="5680" end="5694" title="Hugo Gernsback" label="Hugo Gernsback"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038447" start="5885" end="5908" title="Experimenter Publishing" label="Experimenter Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q25338388" start="6271" end="6342" title="History of US science fiction and fantasy magazines to 1950" label="(see also, history of US science fiction and fantasy magazines to 1950)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356411" start="6647" end="6664" title="Bernarr Macfadden" label="Bernarr Macfadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025311" start="6926" end="6943" title="Raymond A. Palmer" label="Raymond A. Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q435056" start="7305" end="7326" title="John W. Campbell, Jr." label="John W. Campbell, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q638055" start="7328" end="7340" title="Eando Binder" label="Eando Binder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809593" start="7342" end="7360" title="John Russell Fearn" label="John Russell Fearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387739" start="7362" end="7372" title="S. P. Meek" label="S. P. Meek"/>
<link wikidata="Q313673" start="7374" end="7392" title="John Benyon Harris" label="John Benyon Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722707" start="7394" end="7405" title="Henry Hasse" label="Henry Hasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q144090" start="7410" end="7437" title="E. E. Smith" label="E. E. &amp;quot;Doc&amp;quot; Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q312641" start="7458" end="7471" title="Frederik Pohl" label="Frederik Pohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q380202" start="7523" end="7534" title="Howard Fast" label="Howard Fast"/>
<link wikidata="Q324060" start="7550" end="7563" title="Neil R. Jones" label="Neil R. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081890" start="7565" end="7582" title="Charles R. Tanner" label="Charles R. Tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q710435" start="7584" end="7604" title="Lloyd Arthur Eshbach" label="Lloyd Arthur Eshbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285626" start="7606" end="7621" title="Edmond Hamilton" label="Edmond Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111913" start="7623" end="7648" title="Harl Vincent" label="Harold Vincent Schoepflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365739" start="7665" end="7680" title="David H. Keller" label="David H. Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q15492302" start="7682" end="7697" title="Miles J. Breuer" label="Miles J. Breuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046383" start="7699" end="7718" title="Stanton Coblentz" label="Stanton A. Coblentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439765" start="7720" end="7738" title="George Henry Weiss" label="George Henry Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933556" start="7756" end="7777" title="Alfred Johannes Olsen" label="Alfred Johannes Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q64481957" start="7794" end="7819" title="Leslie Francis Silberberg" label="Leslie Francis Silberberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q865585" start="7886" end="7890" title="Pulp magazine" label="pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q705999" start="7977" end="7998" title="Philip Francis Nowlan" label="Philip Francis Nowlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q316788" start="8000" end="8015" title="Jack Williamson" label="Jack Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960928" start="8017" end="8038" title="Alpheus Hyatt Verrill" label="Alpheus Hyatt Verrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126278" start="8099" end="8118" title="Clare Winger Harris" label="Clare Winger Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212384" start="8360" end="8383" title="The Colour Out of Space" label="The Colour Out of Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="8393" end="8408" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q294625" start="8546" end="8563" title="Clifford D. Simak" label="Clifford D. Simak"/>
<link wikidata="Q15454805" start="8925" end="8936" title="Mike Ashley (writer)" label="Mike Ashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276490" start="9259" end="9272" title="Sam Moskowitz" label="Sam Moskowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="9668" end="9680" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q969746" start="9979" end="9990" title="Buck Rogers" label="Buck Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q676538" start="10015" end="10037" title="Armageddon 2419 A.D." label="Armageddon - 2419 A.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q92566" start="10241" end="10253" title="Flash Gordon" label="Flash Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734913" start="10255" end="10274" title="John Carter of Mars" label="John Carter of Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="10651" end="10662" title="space opera" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208037" start="10670" end="10690" title="The Skylark of Space" label="The Skylark of Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537832" start="11018" end="11031" title="Skylark Three" label="Skylark Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572689" start="11157" end="11175" title="Spacehounds of IPC" label="Spacehounds of IPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q20147" start="11287" end="11299" title="tractor beam" label="tractor beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742156" start="12016" end="12030" title="Malcolm Afford" label="Malcolm Afford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421205" start="12035" end="12052" title="Raymond Z. Gallun" label="Raymond Z. Gallun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059433" start="12110" end="12136" title="Invaders from the Infinite" label="Invaders from the Infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176095" start="13073" end="13087" title="Peter Nicholls (writer)" label="Peter Nicholls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133864" start="13092" end="13102" title="John Clute" label="John Clute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099499" start="13150" end="13185" title="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction" label="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594123" start="13193" end="13200" title="Granada plc" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305628" start="13722" end="13736" title="Alexei Panshin" label="Alexei Panshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173625" start="13788" end="13800" title="Cory Panshin" label="Cory Panshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526134" start="13977" end="13990" title="Gary Westfahl" label="Gary Westfahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179599" start="14003" end="14020" title="DePauw University" label="DePauw University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433544" start="14042" end="14065" title="Science Fiction Studies" label="Science Fiction Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5650808" start="14425" end="14450" title="Hans Waldemar Wessolowski" label="Hans Waldemar Wessolowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q284602" start="14821" end="14828" title="g-force" label="g-force"/>
<link wikidata="Q199296" start="15679" end="15689" title="Ziff-Davis" label="Ziff-Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="15757" end="15764" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033874" start="15914" end="15939" title="Amazing Stories Quarterly" label="Amazing Stories Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631376" start="16379" end="16395" title="Brian Stableford" label="Brian Stableford"/>
<link wikidata="Q314553" start="16410" end="16427" title="Robert Silverberg" label="Robert Silverberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="16592" end="16613" title="Hugo Award" label="2014 Retro Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780114" start="16787" end="16809" title="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land" label="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247240" start="16813" end="16825" title="John Mitchel" label="John Mitchel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18671658" start="16830" end="16860" title="Jane Mitchel" label="Jane &amp;quot;Jenny&amp;quot; Mitchel"/>
<link wikidata="Q55539860" start="16912" end="16939" title="T. O&amp;#x27;Conor Sloane, Jr." label="T. O&amp;#x27;Conor Sloane, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6232136" start="16987" end="17003" title="John Eyre Sloane" label="John Eyre Sloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="17040" end="17058" title="Thomas Alva Edison" label="Thomas Alva Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q104244299" start="17176" end="17202" title="T. O&amp;#x27;Conor Sloane III" label="T. O&amp;#x27;Conor Sloane III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="17223" end="17232" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066263" start="17264" end="17283" title="Thomas O&amp;#x27;Connor (writer)" label="Thomas O&amp;#x27;Conor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382305" start="17538" end="17562" title="If (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Worlds of IF&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007573" start="17582" end="17604" title="Galaxy Science Fiction" label="Galaxy Science Fiction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405882" wikidata="Q859825" url="?curid=405882" title="Botswana Democratic Party">
<text>The Botswana Democratic Party (abbr. BDP, colloquially known as Domkrag) is a centre-right political party in Botswana. From the country&#x27;s inaugural election in 1965 until the 2024 general election the party governed the country without interruption for 58 years. At the time of its defeat, the BDP was the longest continuous ruling party in the democratic world.

The party was founded in February 1962 as the Bechuanaland Democratic Party while the country was a British protectorate. It adopted its current name following Botswana&#x27;s independence in 1966. In its beginnings, it was led by Seretse Khama, the country&#x27;s first president and his successor Quett Masire. Subsequent presidents of Botswana, Festus Mogae, Ian Khama and Mokgweetsi Masisi, have chaired the party. The party won an overwhelming majority in the first elections under universal suffrage in 1965, leading Khama to become the first president of the new state, a position he held until his death in 1980. The BDP enjoyed virtually unquestioned hegemony for the next three decades, benefiting from the relative success of its economic policy and its pragmatic management of the relations between the different tribal groups of the country. Beginning in the late 1980s, the country&#x27;s increasing urbanization and the emergence of a middle class less influenced by tribal relations weakened the BDP&#x27;s support base and strengthened its opponents, while a growing economic slowdown in the 1990s caused the party to suffer harsh electoral setbacks, leading it to implement numerous reforms in an attempt to avoid exacerbating political polarization in the country. In subsequent elections, the BDP retained power with less support, largely benefiting from the first-past-the-post voting and facing an opposition plagued by constant divisions.

Although its sources of voters have varied over the years and itself has suffered some splits that gave rise to other opposition parties, such as the liberal Botswana Movement for Democracy and the populist Botswana Patriotic Front, the BDP did not see its hegemony seriously threatened for much of its rule and won every election held since the introduction of universal suffrage in 1965 until 2024. Under its long government, elections in Botswana were considered credible and transparent by the international community.

From independence until the late 2010s, the BDP was particularly strong in the Central District, Seretse Khama&#x27;s home region and the territory of the Ngwato tribe, while it became weak in urban areas and in the North-West and the South. During the presidency of Ian Khama (2008–2018), a polarizing figure within the party itself, the BDP suffered considerable internal crises that changed its voter base. The presidency of Mokgweetsi Masisi saw the departure of Khama from the party and the founding of the BPF by members located in the Central District, as well as a recovery of the party in the cities (mostly opposed to Khama) that led the BDP to triumph in the south and in urban areas in the 2019 elections while losing votes and seats in the Central District.

Having been a party of power for nearly six-decades, the BDP&#x27;s ideology is considered by political analysts to be a party with an amorphous character, although in essence, it can be seen as a paternalistic conservative party that defends positions linked to traditionalism, economic nationalism, the market economy, the welfare state and multiparty democracy. The party&#x27;s historical voter base has been tribal communities, which has, in turn, led the BDP to mirror their conservative views. The internal democratization of the party since 1998 has since increased its ideological breadth.

==History==
===Founding years===
The BDP was the third political party founded in the British protectorate of Bechuanaland, present-day Botswana. In this region, political development was much more gradual and slow, yet also more peaceful than in other neighboring African countries. An expansion of British central authority and the evolution of tribal government resulted in the establishment of two consultative councils in 1920 to represent Africans and Europeans. The African Council comprised the eight chiefs of the Tswana tribes and some elected members. A European-African Advisory Council formed in 1951 and the colonial constitution of 1961 marked the establishment of a consultative Legislative Council. By 1960, the party system in the region was still very basic, with only the Federal Party existing, mostly oriented towards the small educated population, aiming to achieve independence from the protectorate through peaceful discussion and the African nationalist and socialist-based Bechuanaland People&#x27;s Party (BPP). The BPP was the first mass party in the country and the first to demand total independence from the colony. However, by the mid-1960s, a series of internal struggles and conflicts between the country&#x27;s different ethnic groups had affected its political strength.

After a series of meetings, the &quot;Bechuanaland Democratic Party&quot; was established in November 1961 in Lobatse by a group of members of the African Consultative Council, a limited representative body of the protectorate, under the leadership of Seretse Khama, former head of the BaNgwato tribe, with Ketumile Quett Masire as general secretary. The party held its first constitutive congress in 28 February 1962 and began organizing to establish a presence throughout the protectorate&#x27;s territory. Masire also started publishing the party newspaper, &quot;Therisanyo&quot; (), in 1963, drawing from his past journalistic experiences.

In everyday language, the term &quot;Domkrag&quot; became more commonly used to refer to the BDP and its supporters. The name originated during the founding stage due to elders&#x27; difficulty in pronouncing the word &quot;Democratic&quot; in English. They used the word &quot;Domkrag,&quot; which is Afrikaans for a jack used to lift heavy objects off the ground. This led the BDP to adopt the jack as its party symbol, symbolically equating it with its role in &quot;lifting Botswana&quot; from one of the poorest countries in the world to one of the fastest-growing economies. Since in Afrikaans, &quot;dom krag&quot; can be translated as &quot;stupid power&quot; or &quot;power of the stupid,&quot; opponents used the term derogatorily to refer to the BDP. However, the word was reappropriated by the party itself and today, the word &quot;domkrag&quot; is synonymous with the BDP.

The first political test for the BDP was the general election of 1965, the first election under universal suffrage in the history of the country. The BDP benefited from extensive control over the central territory of the country guaranteed by Khama&#x27;s prestige as chief of the Ngwato tribe, as well as the growing internal conflicts faced by the BPP, which was mired in inter-ethnic struggles that encouraged the formation of a new party, the Botswana Independence Party (BIP). Khama and Masire focused their speeches on the defense of liberal democracy, a negotiated transition to independence and an economic development plan for the heavily neglected and impoverished colony. The BDP&#x27;s discourse was seen as much more moderate compared to its African socialist opponents who had a more aggressive rhetoric, which several voters perceived as unrealistic.

The elections took place on the 1st of March and the BDP won an overwhelming victory with 80% of the popular vote and an absolute majority of 28 out of 31 seats, against 14% of the popular vote and just 3 seats for the BPP. Two days later, Khama was sworn in as Prime Minister, becoming the first democratically elected head of government in Bechuanaland. The general elections were followed by local elections on 12 June 1966, just months before the end of the protectorate. The BDP also emerged victorious with 62% of the votes and secured 122 out of 141 members in the local government councils.

=== Post-independence years (1966–1994) ===
Bechuanaland gained independence as the Republic of Botswana on 30 September 1966. Following transitional agreements between the authorities elected in 1965 and the UK government at the time, Khama assumed the role of President of Botswana, with Masire serving as vice-president and the legislative council transformed into the National Assembly. On the same day, the BDP changed its name to the Botswana Democratic Party.

In contrast to other African leaders of the time, Khama did not seek the establishment of a one-party state with the BDP as the sole legal party. Instead, he preferred to uphold the rule of law and maintain the presence of a &quot;responsible opposition&quot; in Parliament. Likewise, calls to immediately &quot;indigenize&quot; the bureaucracy, which had caused devastating effects on the public service in neighboring countries, were resisted. The government retained foreign expatriates working in the country until suitably qualified local replacements could be found. However, the following decades would be characterized by the overarching hegemony of the BDP. This was explained by the inability of its opponents to unite, being strongly influenced by tribal interests or advocating ideas based on African socialism that the conservative local population found too radical or unattractive. Nevertheless, tribal relations had a significant influence on the BDP, which was virtually the only party with a presence in the Central District (the territory of the Ngwato tribe) for decades. This dominance would continue until the 2019 Botswana general election in which Seretse Khama&#x27;s son, Ian, would break ranks with the BDP and thereby ending its five-decade stranglehold over the region.

At the time of its independence, Botswana was one of the world&#x27;s poorest countries, even ranking below several African states. It possessed only 12 kilometers of paved road, 22 university graduates and 100 individuals with completed secondary education. The first years after independence were marked by the rapid development of a national infrastructure. The BDP aimed to implement an economic program that would transform Botswana into a country relying on exports of beef, copper and diamonds. In 1967, the discovery of the Orapa diamond deposits helped make this program viable. However, many social improvements were not visible to the majority of the population until the early 1970s. Simultaneously, the early years witnessed the strengthening of the authority of the Botswana central government over traditional tribal leadership, leading to some resentment among tribal leaders outside the BaNgwato. In this context, Bathoen Gaseitsiwe, chief of the Bangwaketse tribe, denounced the loss of tribal power and resigned his position to engage in politics. He joined the nascent Botswana National Front, led by socialist leader Kenneth Koma. In the context of profound apathy and conflicts with tribal leaders, the BDP suffered a significant loss of votes in the 1969 general elections. Nevertheless, it managed to secure a new two-thirds majority against the BNF, the BPP and the BIP, but electoral participation dropped significantly. With 68.21% of the vote and 24 of 31 seats elected, it would be the party&#x27;s smallest victory under Khama&#x27;s leadership. Indeed, the seven opposition MPs elected that year would be the most opposition the BDP would face in the first quarter-century of independence.

The BDP dedicated its second term in power (1969–1974) to implementing policies that benefited the rural sector. This included the construction of extensive infrastructure in remote regions, leading to a rapid surge in popular support for the party, even though the majority of the population remained politically apathetic. The 1974 Botswana general election demonstrated this support. The BDP secured the highest popular vote in its history with 77%. At the local level, it obtained a majority in all councils except the North-East District, where the BPP emerged victorious. However, voter turnout was the lowest in Botswana&#x27;s electoral history, with only 31% of registered voters casting their ballots. Concerned about the possibility that high abstention could challenge its legitimacy, the BDP launched a broad media campaign in the second half of the 1970s to engage the population, encouraging voter registration and participation. The 1979 election saw the BDP achieve another landslide victory, securing 75% of the vote and 29 of the 32 seats. Although the BDP managed to take the Francistown seat from the BPP, there was a slight drop in Gaborone, where BNF leader Koma received just over 40% of the vote. Khama was re-elected for a fourth term but passed away a few months later on July 13, 1980 and was succeeded by vice-president Quett Masire.

Initially viewed as an &quot;acting president,&quot; Masire, a native of the Bangwaketse region, spent his initial years in power consolidating his position within the party. He made some strategic moves to distance the BDP from the Ngwato elite and maintain dominance in other regions of the country. To achieve this, he appointed Peter Mmusi, MP for Gaborone, as vice-president. However, the 1984 general election signaled a change in the country&#x27;s political landscape following Khama&#x27;s death. Under Koma&#x27;s leadership, the BNF achieved a series of municipal victories and became the most voted force in the capital. Months later, an electoral fraud scandal, known as &quot;Botswana Watergate,&quot; led to a re-election in Gaborone South in which Koma defeated vice-president Mmusi and assumed the role of Leader of the Opposition. The subsequent mandate was marked by economic difficulties, including an economic recession that adversely affected the diamond industry, a persistent drought and a resulting famine. The government had to address these challenges through aggressive food aid policies. The BDP government also faced increasing pressure from Apartheid South Africa, which resulted in the military intervention of the South African Defence Force in Gaborone on June 1985, directed against members of the ANC stationed in the country due to the passivity of the Botswana armed forces.

The second half of the 1980s witnessed a significant decline in electoral support for the BDP as Botswana&#x27;s population underwent urbanization, foreshadowing the considerable decline it would experience in the following decade. However, during the first fourteen years after Khama&#x27;s death, this decline was not accompanied by a loss of parliamentary power. The 1989 general election saw the BDP obtain 65% of the popular vote, marking the first time in its history that it failed to secure more than two-thirds of the popular vote. Nonetheless, the party still managed to secure 31 of the 34 parliamentary seats. Benefiting from Bathoen&#x27;s departure from the BNF and the division of votes with the new BFP, the BDP managed to penetrate its old support base in the Bangwaketse tribe, winning the Ngwaketse South seat from the opposition. These elections revealed the significant overrepresentation of rural areas compared to urban areas. Although it marked the lowest popular vote achieved by the BDP in its history up to that point, the party secured its best historical result in parliamentary terms, controlling 91% of the seats in the National Assembly. Despite the BNF increasing its percentage of votes by almost 7%, it only obtained three seats, losing one of the four achieved in 1984.

=== Declining popularity and reform (1994–2008) ===

The 1990s marked the end of the economic boom in Botswana that had characterized the previous three decades. Between 1989 and 1993, Botswana transitioned from a GDP growth rate exceeding 13% to experiencing negative growth for the first time in its independent history. Unemployment and poverty increased as a consequence of reduced demand for diamonds, copper and nickel, driven by the global recession. The country continued to experience growing urbanization, creating an urban class less influenced by tribal divisions and a more vocal, politicized population. Informal settlements began to emerge in urban areas like Gaborone, Francistown, Selebi-Phikwe and Lobatse.

These rapid demographic changes, combined with the worsening economic and social situation, eroded popular support for the BDP. Within the party, which had been previously unified and disciplined, factionalism and internal conflicts began to surface, setting the tone for the party&#x27;s future.

While President Masire&#x27;s leadership remained unquestioned, internal clashes between factions within the cabinet became commonplace. Despite Botswana&#x27;s reputation for comparatively low corruption in sub-Saharan Africa, the first half of the decade was marred by scandals. One of the most notable scandals involved the irregular sale of tland, which led to the resignations of Vice-president Peter Mmusi and the then Minister of Agriculture, Daniel Kwelagobe, both high-ranking officials in the former ruling party.

The 1994 Botswana general election took place against a backdrop of economic complexity and increasing demands for transparency in electoral administration by the opposition. The BDP suffered a significant decline and only won 26 of the 39 contested seats. The BNF made gains by capitalizing on urban discontent and even penetrated the party&#x27;s rural base for the first time, achieving important advances in local elections. It was the first time that the BDP faced than seven opposition MPs.

After the elections, the political climate in Botswana deteriorated. The supplementary election in the Thamaga parliamentary constituency, delayed due to the sudden death of Mmusi (a candidate in that constituency), highlighted the internal crisis of the BDP. Factionalism increased as the central leadership imposed Gladys Kokorwe&#x27;s candidacy despite the local congress overwhelmingly electing Kabo Morwaeng. Younger sectors of the BDP began demanding greater internal democracy in the party. Nonetheless, the BDP retained the seat. In January 1995, a series of demonstrations in Mochudi and Gaborone culminated in a student protest in front of the Parliament building, which was met with severe police repression, regarded as one of the most serious cases of police brutality in the country&#x27;s history. This event prompted Masire&#x27;s government to accede to some of the opposition&#x27;s reformist demands, leading to the first bipartisan negotiations in post-independence Botswana. The reforms implemented included the creation of the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC), lowering the voting age from 21 to 18, allowing voting abroad and setting a ten-year limit (equivalent to two terms) on the presidency.

The BDP also adopted a series of internal reforms, including a primary election system known as &quot;buleladitswe&quot;, () which brought a profound change in the party&#x27;s internal management. Despite these changes, the constitutional limit was not retroactive. Masire resigned as president and leader of the BDP on March 31, 1998, handing power to vice-president Festus Mogae, while the vice presidency remained in the hands of Seretse Khama&#x27;s son, Ian Khama. The BDP adopted an internal reform that implemented the same limit for party leadership, setting the leadership change to occur a year and a half before the regular general elections, giving the incumbent president a prolonged interim period to reinforce their public image and avoid the wear and tear of the outgoing administration. Mogae&#x27;s presidency focused on addressing poverty, unemployment and the spread of HIV/AIDS, which affected a significant portion of Botswana&#x27;s population.

In the same year, the BDP&#x27;s fortunes improved as the BNF faced internal conflicts between Kenneth Koma and a dissident faction led by Michael Dingake, which led to the founding of the Botswana Congress Party (BCP). The BDP achieved a landslide victory in the 1999 elections, winning 33 of the 40 elected seats and securing 57% of the popular vote.

The economic situation improved in the following years, stabilizing popular support for the BDP. The government maintained an international reputation for adhering to the rule of law. However, factionalism plagued the BDP throughout the 2000s, raising concerns that the party might split. The Barata-Phathi () faction, led by Ponatshego Kedikilwe and former party secretary-general Daniel Kwelagobe, contended with the dominant faction, Team A, led by President Mogae, vice-president Khama and cabinet ministers Jacob Nkate and Mompati Merafhe.

Despite these challenges, Mogae&#x27;s leadership managed to maintain unity during the 2004 elections, where the BDP reaffirmed its majority with 44 of the 57 contested seats. Its popular vote was the lowest in its history at that time (at 52%). The campaign popularized the BDP slogan &quot;There is Still No Alternative&quot; to emphasize the inability of other parties to take power and govern the country. The transition of party leadership began, with Khama becoming increasingly active in politics before succeeding Mogae as president on 20 March 2008. French president Nicolas Sarkozy awarded Mogae the Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor for his &quot;exemplary leadership&quot; in making Botswana a &quot;model&quot; of democracy and good governance and he also received the Ibrahim Prize that same year.

=== Ian Khama era (2008–2018) ===

Ian Khama assumed the presidency and leadership of the BDP on April 1, 2008, succeeding Mogae after a decade. In his inaugural speech, Khama pledged to continue the course set by the Mogae administration, ruling out &quot;radical changes.&quot; However, Khama&#x27;s presidency coincided with an escalation in the internal conflicts that had plagued the ruling party throughout the previous decade. Upon taking office, Khama stepped down as the BDP leader and Kwelagobe, belonging to a rival faction and a leader of the party&#x27;s old guard, was selected to replace him. The Barata-Phathi faction, including Gomolemo Motswaledi, alongside Kwelagobe, criticized Khama&#x27;s leadership during his early months in office, accusing him of exceeding his prerogatives as a party leader. Motswaledi abandoned his ambition to run for a seat in Serowe to make way for the president&#x27;s brother, Tshekedi Khama II, but he was soon barred from contesting a seat in Gaborone Central after openly clashing with Khama. Motswaledi lost a lawsuit against Khama when the High Court ruled that the president enjoyed presidential immunity from legal action due to his office. Although voices within the party began criticizing Khama&#x27;s autocratic tendencies, the president insisted that he was only instilling greater discipline within the BDP.

Khama&#x27;s initial year in power was characterized by his decision to lead the BDP to adopt a hardline stance against the ZANU–PF regime, led by Robert Mugabe since 1980, during the country&#x27;s violent elections. Several months later, Kwelagobe and Khama reached a separate agreement to defuse their conflict and project an image of unity in preparation for the 2009 Botswana general election. With the opposition Botswana National Front grappling with a growing internal conflict around its leader, Otsweletse Moupo and several party leaders running as independents, the BDP achieved a sweeping victory, securing 53% of the votes and 45 out of 57 seats. They also gained control of the Gaborone City Council for the first time since 1984. The outcome solidified Khama&#x27;s control over the party, even though questions about his leadership style persisted throughout his term.

The remainder of the period was marked by economic challenges stemming from Great Recession that significantly impacted Botswana&#x27;s economy. Khama implemented harsh austerity measures recommended by the International Monetary Fund, leading to conflicts with both the influential Botswana Federation of Public Sector Unions (BOFEPUSU), which staged the longest public service strike in the country&#x27;s history in 2011 and a substantial faction within the BDP that disapproved of these policies. Motswaledi&#x27;s faction finally split from the BDP in mid-2010, forming the Botswana Movement for Democracy (BMD), the first significant split experienced by the BDP in its history. In 2012, the BMD, BNF and BPP established the Umbrella for Democratic Change (UDC) coalition, marking the first permanent alliance between various opposition parties since independence, exclusive of the BCP. Motswaledi tragically died in a car accident in 2014 under controversial circumstances, which cast a shadow over the subsequent election campaign.

The 2014 general election was a significant setback for the BDP, marking its worst result in history at that time. They secured only 37 of the 57 seats elected and 46% of the popular vote, compared to the UDC&#x27;s 30% and the BCP&#x27;s 20%. The party&#x27;s losses were particularly pronounced in urban areas, experiencing a resounding defeat in the Gaborone City Council elections, where they ranked third in parliamentary strength behind the UDC and the BCP. This election marked the first instance in the country&#x27;s electoral history where the party failed to secure over 50% of the popular vote or more than two-thirds of the elected seats. In fact, if the UDC and the BCP were united, they would have won the election. The outcome was attributed to the dissatisfaction of young urban voters with Khama&#x27;s economic management, while rural voters remained loyal to the party, especially in the Ngwato tribe&#x27;s territory in the Central District. Nevertheless, the party retained its overall majority, allowing President Khama to serve a second five-year term. After the elections, Khama initiated a cabinet reshuffle and appointed his former Minister of Education, Mokgweetsi Masisi, as vice-president and therefore his direct successor as president.

=== Post-Khama era (2018–2024) ===

On April 1, 2018, Khama completed his term and Masisi succeeded him as both the President of Botswana and the leader of the BDP. Seen as closely associated with Khama, Masisi inherited a government and a party suffering a sharp decline in popularity and a weakened economy. Additionally, he faced a united and nominally strengthened opposition after the Botswana Congress Party joined the UDC. Shortly after taking office, Masisi adopted a leadership style distinct from his predecessor and began to politically marginalize the Khama family while revoking various privileges. He also reversed several of Khama&#x27;s controversial policies and adopted a more conciliatory stance towards the unions.

Between 2018 and 2019, the relationship between the new president and Khama deteriorated to the point where the family severed ties with the BDP in early 2019, accusing Masisi of &quot;treason.&quot; Many significant party leaders, particularly in the crucial Central District, Ngwato territory, defected to the newly founded Botswana Patriotic Front (BPF). In constituencies where the BPF could not field a candidate, they supported the UDC. Looking ahead to the 2019 Botswana general election, the BDP adjusted its discourse and adopted a more personalized approach, emphasizing a forward-looking perspective and definitively breaking with the previous administration. With the opposition discredited due to its association with Khama and a reinvigorated leadership, the BDP achieved a comprehensive victory, securing 53% of the vote and 38 of the 57 elected seats.

The election brought about a significant shift in Botswana&#x27;s electoral politics. The BDP experienced substantial losses in the northern part of the country due to the inclusion of the BCP in the UDC. Furthermore, in the Central District, it was affected by the concentration of the pro-Khama tribal vote in the UDC and the BPF. However, it enjoyed unexpected growth in urban areas and dominated in the southern part of the country, where most of the opposition&#x27;s primary strongholds had been situated. Boko refused to acknowledge the results, alleging &quot;massive electoral discrepancies,&quot; and announced his intention to challenge the election in court. Ultimately, his appeal was dismissed.

=== Political wilderness (2024–present) ===
The 2024 Botswana general election saw the BDP resoundingly defeated by the opposition UDC. In one of the worst defeats of a governing party in the Commonwealth, the BDP lost 90% of its parliamentary representation and was reduced to a rump of four seats out of 61, making it the smallest of the four factions represented in the National Assembly. The BDP was decimated despite finishing with the second-highest national vote share (at 30%). Due to the nature of the first-past-the-post system, which awards power solely on the basis of seats won, the geographic dispersion of the BDP&#x27;s support base proved electorally inefficient. Its votes were distributed evenly across the country, and were not concentrated in enough areas to secure a sufficient number of constituencies. This vote-spread phenomenon, often termed a &quot;wasted vote&quot; effect in psephology, ended the BDP&#x27;s uninterrupted 58-year majority.

In contrast, the historical opposition parties benefitted from the FPTP system&#x27;s bias toward concentrated voter bases. The Botswana Congress Party leveraged its geographically dense support in the northern constituencies to maximize its seat-to-vote efficiency, securing official opposition status despite trailing the BDP by over 79,000 votes nationally, leading to an electoral inversion. Similarly, the UDC consolidated its dominance in the southern and western regions and benefited from the steep decline in BDP support, while the pro-Ian Khama Botswana Patriotic Front effectively harnessed its concentrated support in the Ngwato-dominated constituencies around Serowe, allowing it to gain one more seat than the BDP.

With the BDP&#x27;s defeat beyond doubt, then-president Mokgweetsi Masisi conceded defeat two days after the election and ensured a peaceful transfer of power. Later that day, President Boko was sworn-in by Chief Justice Terence Rannowane, allowing him to form the first government since independence with no BDP participation.

== Ideology ==
Although it is typically characterized as a conservative party with a centre-right leaning on the political left–right axis, the BDP&#x27;s ideological framework is quite broad. Officially, the party upholds national unity, economic development and political democracy as its core values, complemented by the concepts of &quot;kagisano&quot; () and &quot;botho&quot; ().

A fundamental factor in maintaining the BDP&#x27;s electoral dominance has been its unwavering support for Botswana&#x27;s local tribal traditions. This stance has garnered the backing of Ngwato elites in the eastern part of the country while sometimes leading to the rejection of minority groups and the more globally-oriented urban class. Nevertheless, the BDP also places a strong emphasis on national unity over tribal affiliations, often adopting a civic nationalist rhetoric.

In economic terms, the party has maintained a pragmatic approach. During its initial years in power, the BDP implemented pro-free market policies, ensuring low and stable taxes to stimulate foreign investment and encourage mining company activities in the country while deterring budget evasion. The revenues generated from these endeavors were allocated to expanding the nation&#x27;s infrastructure, which was practically non-existent at the time of independence, as well as strengthening the healthcare and education systems. Additionally, alternative industries such as livestock were nationalized. The party&#x27;s consistent defense of social solidarity and the welfare state, combined with its mixed economic policies, traditionalism and clear rejection of leftist or Marxist ideologies, have led foreign analysts to sometimes characterize the BDP as a proponent of &quot;paternalistic conservatism&quot;.

The BDP is relatively conservative on social issues, primarily influenced by the fact that Botswana is predominantly a Protestant Christian nation. However, some party members have expressed liberal viewpoints on certain sensitive topics, including LGBT rights. The BDP has maintained its support for the death penalty, making Botswana the sole country in the Southern African Development Community that continues to enforce it. The party has rejected calls for its repeal, asserting that a majority of Botswana&#x27;s population favors its continuation. In terms of security, the BDP initially allocated minimal spending to the country&#x27;s territorial defense during its early years in government, prioritizing economic and social development. The party only established a professional army when faced with the serious threat of military incursions by apartheid South Africa.

Regarding foreign policy, the BDP has historically adopted a Western-oriented approach, aligning closely with the United States, NATO and the European Union. This stance has prompted criticism from its detractors, particularly those from a leftist tradition, who have labeled the party as a &quot;neocolonial&quot; entity. Nonetheless, the party maintained a staunch opposition to the white minority regimes in neighboring South Africa, South West Africa and Rhodesia during its initial three decades in power, collaborating with forces opposing these regimes, such as the African National Congress (ANC).

Under the leadership of Ian Khama, the BDP adopted a more assertive stance in promoting democracy in Africa through its foreign policy. It engaged in open conflict with the ZANU–PF government in neighboring Zimbabwe, accusing it of human rights violations. In recent years, the party has reaffirmed its historical role as a significant player in the struggle for Botswana&#x27;s decolonization and independence. Once Mokgweetsi Masisi became president it became a part of the regional organization Former Liberation Movements of Southern Africa (FLMSA) in 2019, predominantly consisting of socialist parties that participated in African nationalist movements against colonialism or white minority regimes in southern Africa. Many of these parties now govern their countries as dominant and/or autocratic parties. Nevertheless, the BDP and its government continue to view themselves as allies of the West in international affairs, particularly on issues such as the Russian invasion of Ukraine, as they consistently vote in favor of condemnatory United Nations resolutions. Sponsored by the ANC, the BDP joined the Socialist International as an &quot;observer member&quot; in 2014.

==Electoral history ==

=== National Assembly ===
== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q859825" start="4" end="29" title="Botswana Democratic Party" label="Botswana Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q102786" start="31" end="36" title="Abbreviation" label="abbr."/>
<link wikidata="Q859825" start="37" end="40" title="Botswana Democratic Party" label="BDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q859825" start="64" end="71" title="Botswana Democratic Party" label="Domkrag"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="78" end="90" title="centre-right politics" label="centre-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="91" end="106" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="110" end="118" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878577" start="144" end="170" title="1965 Bechuanaland general election" label="inaugural election in 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q116449433" start="181" end="202" title="2024 Botswana general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q747314" start="470" end="490" title="Bechuanaland" label="British protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q219962" start="601" end="614" title="Seretse Khama" label="Seretse Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q310574" start="669" end="681" title="Quett Masire" label="Quett Masire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193238" start="718" end="730" title="Festus Mogae" label="Festus Mogae"/>
<link wikidata="Q57449" start="732" end="741" title="Ian Khama" label="Ian Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618891" start="746" end="763" title="Mokgweetsi Masisi" label="Mokgweetsi Masisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878577" start="879" end="883" title="1965 Bechuanaland general election" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="1749" end="1775" title="first-past-the-post voting" label="first-past-the-post voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="1983" end="1990" title="Liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q859682" start="1991" end="2022" title="Botswana Movement for Democracy" label="Botswana Movement for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q72976241" start="2040" end="2064" title="Botswana Patriotic Front" label="Botswana Patriotic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q57525" start="2436" end="2452" title="Central District (Botswana)" label="Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628797" start="2512" end="2524" title="Mangwato tribe" label="Ngwato tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q60713425" start="3059" end="3073" title="2019 Botswana general election" label="2019 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052908" start="3143" end="3157" title="party of power" label="party of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333466" start="3326" end="3352" title="Paternalistic conservatism" label="paternalistic conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466570" start="3392" end="3406" title="Traditionalist conservatism" label="traditionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q555887" start="3408" end="3428" title="economic nationalism" label="economic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q747314" start="3839" end="3851" title="Bechuanaland" label="Bechuanaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874021" start="4689" end="4708" title="African nationalism" label="African nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893988" start="4729" end="4761" title="Botswana People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Bechuanaland People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q165768" start="5148" end="5155" title="Lobatse" label="Lobatse"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="5986" end="5995" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q272882" start="6002" end="6006" title="Jack (device)" label="jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520214" start="6468" end="6482" title="Reappropriation" label="reappropriated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878577" start="6617" end="6641" title="1965 Bechuanaland general election" label="general election of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628797" start="6853" end="6865" title="Ngwato tribe" label="Ngwato tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q390056" start="7019" end="7046" title="Botswana Independence Party" label="Botswana Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="7112" end="7129" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q590478" start="7327" end="7344" title="African socialism" label="African socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709714" start="8248" end="8261" title="Labour government, 1964–1970" label="UK government"/>
<link wikidata="Q866725" start="8301" end="8322" title="President of Botswana" label="President of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q859658" start="8411" end="8428" title="National Assembly of Botswana" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="8599" end="8614" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439061" start="9153" end="9161" title="Dominant-party system" label="hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q60713425" start="9639" end="9669" title="2019 Botswana general election" label="2019 Botswana general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q57449" start="9705" end="9708" title="Ian Khama" label="Ian"/>
<link wikidata="Q859817" start="10339" end="10361" title="Orapa diamond mine" label="Orapa diamond deposits"/>
<link wikidata="Q116908137" start="10738" end="10756" title="Bathoen Gaseitsiwe" label="Bathoen Gaseitsiwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855641" start="10771" end="10782" title="Bangwaketse" label="Bangwaketse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310801" start="10896" end="10919" title="Botswana National Front" label="Botswana National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q47537349" start="10945" end="10957" title="Kenneth Koma" label="Kenneth Koma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948956" start="11080" end="11102" title="1969 Botswana general election" label="1969 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948959" start="11858" end="11888" title="1974 Botswana general election" label="1974 Botswana general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q57636" start="12052" end="12071" title="North-East District (Botswana)" label="North-East District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948960" start="12478" end="12491" title="1979 Botswana general election" label="1979 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q310574" start="12878" end="12890" title="Quett Masire" label="Quett Masire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298758" start="13225" end="13236" title="Peter Mmusi" label="Peter Mmusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630228" start="13287" end="13308" title="1984 Botswana general election" label="1984 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q124518412" start="13633" end="13647" title="Gaborone South" label="Gaborone South"/>
<link wikidata="Q117322798" start="13716" end="13740" title="Leader of the Opposition (Botswana)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="14065" end="14074" title="Apartheid" label="Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283745" start="14111" end="14132" title="Raid on Gaborone" label="military intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779935" start="14140" end="14167" title="South African Defence Force" label="South African Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="14226" end="14229" title="African National Congress" label="ANC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948962" start="14677" end="14698" title="1989 Botswana general election" label="1989 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919" start="16289" end="16297" title="Gaborone" label="Gaborone"/>
<link wikidata="Q165422" start="16299" end="16310" title="Francistown" label="Francistown"/>
<link wikidata="Q141263" start="16312" end="16325" title="Selebi-Phikwe" label="Selebi-Phikwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q165768" start="16330" end="16337" title="Lobatse" label="Lobatse"/>
<link wikidata="Q125447301" start="16965" end="16988" title="Kgabo Commission" label="irregular sale of tland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298758" start="17038" end="17049" title="Peter Mmusi" label="Peter Mmusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217839" start="17088" end="17104" title="Daniel Kwelagobe" label="Daniel Kwelagobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722325" start="17167" end="17197" title="1994 Botswana general election" label="1994 Botswana general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618887" start="17978" end="17992" title="Gladys Kokorwe" label="Gladys Kokorwe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18061" end="18074" title="Kabo Morwaeng" label="Kabo Morwaeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q615877" start="18247" end="18254" title="Mochudi" label="Mochudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q126372469" start="18711" end="18743" title="Independent Electoral Commission (Botswana)" label="Independent Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q57449" start="19348" end="19357" title="Ian Khama" label="Ian Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="19779" end="19787" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q47537349" start="19953" end="19965" title="Kenneth Koma" label="Kenneth Koma"/>
<link wikidata="Q15433092" start="19997" end="20012" title="Michael Dingake" label="Michael Dingake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894021" start="20047" end="20070" title="Botswana Congress Party" label="Botswana Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139832" start="20538" end="20558" title="Ponatshego Kedikilwe" label="Ponatshego Kedikilwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217839" start="20594" end="20610" title="Daniel Kwelagobe" label="Daniel Kwelagobe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20724" end="20735" title="Jacob Nkate" label="Jacob Nkate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436517" start="20740" end="20755" title="Mompati Merafhe" label="Mompati Merafhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q329" start="21334" end="21349" title="Nicolas Sarkozy" label="Nicolas Sarkozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="21368" end="21402" title="Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor" label="Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077746" start="21541" end="21554" title="Ibrahim Prize" label="Ibrahim Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q57449" start="21607" end="21616" title="Ian Khama" label="Ian Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581224" start="22217" end="22236" title="Gomolemo Motswaledi" label="Gomolemo Motswaledi"/>
<link wikidata="Q855634" start="22446" end="22452" title="Serowe" label="Serowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849607" start="22499" end="22516" title="Tshekedi Khama II" label="Tshekedi Khama II"/>
<link wikidata="Q124528552" start="22567" end="22583" title="Gaborone Central" label="Gaborone Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669817" start="22711" end="22732" title="Absolute immunity" label="presidential immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910161" start="23068" end="23075" title="ZANU–PF" label="ZANU–PF"/>
<link wikidata="Q10707" start="23091" end="23104" title="Robert Mugabe" label="Robert Mugabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154365" start="23143" end="23160" title="2008 Zimbabwean general election" label="violent elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q859733" start="23311" end="23341" title="2009 Botswana general election" label="2009 Botswana general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310801" start="23363" end="23386" title="Botswana National Front" label="Botswana National Front"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23449" end="23465" title="Otsweletse Moupo" label="Otsweletse Moupo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093536" start="23636" end="23657" title="Gaborone City Council" label="Gaborone City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="23906" end="23921" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="24037" end="24064" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q859682" start="24409" end="24440" title="Botswana Movement for Democracy" label="Botswana Movement for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893988" start="24541" end="24544" title="Botswana People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="BPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q18347306" start="24561" end="24591" title="Umbrella for Democratic Change" label="Umbrella for Democratic Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q17494283" start="24875" end="24896" title="2014 Botswana general election" label="2014 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628797" start="25779" end="25791" title="Ngwato tribe" label="Ngwato tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q57525" start="25816" end="25832" title="Central District (Botswana)" label="Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618891" start="26053" end="26070" title="Mokgweetsi Masisi" label="Mokgweetsi Masisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894021" start="26530" end="26553" title="Botswana Congress Party" label="Botswana Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q72976241" start="27202" end="27226" title="Botswana Patriotic Front" label="Botswana Patriotic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q60713425" start="27340" end="27370" title="2019 Botswana general election" label="2019 Botswana general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q116449433" start="28503" end="28533" title="2024 Botswana general election" label="2024 Botswana general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046450" start="29331" end="29342" title="wasted vote" label="wasted vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412461" start="29359" end="29369" title="psephology" label="psephology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894021" start="29553" end="29576" title="Botswana Congress Party" label="Botswana Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q127424520" start="29800" end="29819" title="Concordance (apportionment)" label="electoral inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q72976241" start="29980" end="30004" title="Botswana Patriotic Front" label="Botswana Patriotic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q855634" start="30098" end="30104" title="Serowe" label="Serowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618891" start="30211" end="30228" title="Mokgweetsi Masisi" label="Mokgweetsi Masisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158595" start="30229" end="30244" title="Concession (politics)" label="conceded defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q115316256" start="30376" end="30393" title="Terence Rannowane" label="Terence Rannowane"/>
<link wikidata="Q131277885" start="30416" end="30436" title="Boko cabinet" label="the first government"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="30569" end="30581" title="Centre-right politics" label="centre-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q210918" start="30597" end="30622" title="Political spectrum" label="political left–right axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628797" start="31059" end="31065" title="Ngwato tribe" label="Ngwato"/>
<link wikidata="Q59599" start="31325" end="31342" title="Civic nationalism" label="civic nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="31475" end="31490" title="Free market" label="pro-free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821141" start="31849" end="31859" title="Health in Botswana" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q859841" start="31864" end="31873" title="Education in Botswana" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="32129" end="32136" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333466" start="32233" end="32259" title="paternalistic conservatism" label="paternalistic conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="32387" end="32407" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163426" start="32517" end="32529" title="LGBTQ rights in Botswana" label="LGBT rights."/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="32628" end="32666" title="Southern African Development Community" label="Southern African Development Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283745" start="33101" end="33146" title="Raid on Gaborone" label="military incursions by apartheid South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="33210" end="33226" title="Western world" label="Western-oriented"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="33263" end="33276" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="33278" end="33282" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="33291" end="33305" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="33572" end="33584" title="Apartheid South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="33586" end="33603" title="South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="33608" end="33616" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="33722" end="33747" title="African National Congress" label="African National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q57449" start="33780" end="33789" title="Ian Khama" label="Ian Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910161" start="33929" end="33936" title="ZANU–PF" label="ZANU–PF"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618891" start="34173" end="34190" title="Mokgweetsi Masisi" label="Mokgweetsi Masisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200407" start="34254" end="34300" title="Former Liberation Movements of Southern Africa" label="Former Liberation Movements of Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="34721" end="34748" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q159454" start="34870" end="34893" title="Socialist International" label="Socialist International"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405886" wikidata="Q24229376" url="?curid=405886" title="List of census-designated places in Alaska">
<text>Alaska is a state situated in the northwest extremity of the North American continent. According to the 2010 United States Census, Alaska is the 3rd least populous state with 733,391 inhabitants but is the largest by land area spanning of land. As of the 2020 Census, Alaska has 206 census-designated places.

Changes for 2020 include the addition of five census-designated places: Eareckson Station (last gazetted in 1980), Mill Bay, North Lakes, Petersburg (a former city), and South Lakes. Six former census-designates places counted for the 2010 census were not included in 2020: Edna Bay, incorporated in 2014; Lakes, split into North Lakes and South Lakes; New Allakaket, annexed by neighboring Allakaket in March 2015; Northway Junction and Northway Village, both merged with Northway; and Whale Pass, incorporated in 2017.

Changes for 2010 include the addition of twelve new census-designated places: Badger, Chena Ridge, Eureka Roadhouse, Farmers Loop, Goldstream, Loring, Mertarvik, Nabesna, Point Possession, South Van Horn, Steele Creek, and Whitestone. Six former census-designated places counted for the 2000 census were not included in 2010: Alpine, Copperville (merged into Tazlina CDP), Cube Cove, Miller Landing (annexed to Homer city), Meyers Chuck and Thoms Place (both incorporated into Wrangell city and borough). Two former CDPs became cities: Adak (incorporated in 2001) and Gustavus (incorporated in 2004). Skagway (disincorporated in 2007) is now a census-designated place. Finally, one census-designated place has a new name: Y is now Susitna North.

==List of census-designated places==
==List of former census-designated places==

==See also==
* List of boroughs and census areas in Alaska
* List of cities in Alaska

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="0" end="6" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="12" end="17" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="61" end="85" title="North America" label="North American continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="104" end="129" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="145" end="169" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population" label="3rd least populous state"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="206" end="226" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="largest by land area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276973" start="382" end="399" title="Eareckson Air Station" label="Eareckson Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q106448473" start="425" end="433" title="Mill Bay, Alaska" label="Mill Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q106448479" start="435" end="446" title="North Lakes, Alaska" label="North Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q80027" start="448" end="458" title="Petersburg, Alaska" label="Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q106448483" start="480" end="491" title="South Lakes, Alaska" label="South Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="545" end="556" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q975982" start="584" end="592" title="Edna Bay, Alaska" label="Edna Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q180085" start="616" end="621" title="Lakes, Alaska" label="Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836919" start="663" end="676" title="New Allakaket, Alaska" label="New Allakaket"/>
<link wikidata="Q79350" start="701" end="710" title="Allakaket, Alaska" label="Allakaket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436993" start="726" end="743" title="Northway Junction, Alaska" label="Northway Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090657" start="748" end="764" title="Northway Village, Alaska" label="Northway Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768393" start="783" end="791" title="Northway, Alaska" label="Northway"/>
<link wikidata="Q519276" start="797" end="807" title="Whale Pass, Alaska" label="Whale Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q8239616" start="910" end="916" title="Badger, Alaska" label="Badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q8345212" start="918" end="929" title="Chena Ridge, Alaska" label="Chena Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5852087" start="931" end="947" title="Eureka Roadhouse, Alaska" label="Eureka Roadhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5856095" start="949" end="961" title="Farmers Loop, Alaska" label="Farmers Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882374" start="963" end="973" title="Goldstream, Alaska" label="Goldstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q5979198" start="975" end="981" title="Loring, Alaska" label="Loring"/>
<link wikidata="Q16302471" start="983" end="992" title="Mertarvik, Alaska" label="Mertarvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q946867" start="994" end="1001" title="Nabesna, Alaska" label="Nabesna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6081500" start="1003" end="1019" title="Point Possession, Alaska" label="Point Possession"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132819" start="1021" end="1035" title="South Van Horn, Alaska" label="South Van Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838661" start="1037" end="1049" title="Steele Creek, Alaska" label="Steele Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167246" start="1055" end="1065" title="Whitestone, Alaska" label="Whitestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="1119" end="1130" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002762" start="1158" end="1164" title="Alpine, Alaska" label="Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182532" start="1166" end="1177" title="Copperville, Alaska" label="Copperville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673845" start="1191" end="1198" title="Tazlina, Alaska" label="Tazlina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006697" start="1205" end="1214" title="Cube Cove, Alaska" label="Cube Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q79441" start="1216" end="1230" title="Miller Landing, Alaska" label="Miller Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q79441" start="1243" end="1248" title="Homer, Alaska" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837562" start="1256" end="1268" title="Meyers Chuck, Alaska" label="Meyers Chuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014200" start="1273" end="1284" title="Thoms Place, Alaska" label="Thoms Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q43983" start="1309" end="1317" title="Wrangell, Alaska" label="Wrangell"/>
<link wikidata="Q79371" start="1368" end="1372" title="Adak, Alaska" label="Adak"/>
<link wikidata="Q80116" start="1400" end="1408" title="Gustavus, Alaska" label="Gustavus"/>
<link wikidata="Q615975" start="1433" end="1440" title="Skagway (CDP), Alaska" label="Skagway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018020" start="1554" end="1555" title="Y, Alaska" label="Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018020" start="1563" end="1576" title="Susitna North, Alaska" label="Susitna North"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="1676" end="1719" title="List of boroughs and census areas in Alaska" label="List of boroughs and census areas in Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q28869" start="1722" end="1746" title="List of cities in Alaska" label="List of cities in Alaska"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405888" wikidata="Q310574" url="?curid=405888" title="Quett Masire">
<text>Ketumile Quett Joni Masire, GCMG (23 July 1925 – 22 June 2017), was the second and longest-serving president of Botswana, in office from 1980 to 1998. He was given an honorary knighthood of the Grand Cross of Saint Michael and Saint George by Queen Elizabeth II (GCMG) in 1991. 

He was a leading figure in the independence movement and then the new government, and played a crucial role in facilitating and protecting Botswana&#x27;s steady financial growth and development. He stepped down in 1998 and was succeeded by Vice-President Festus Mogae, who became the third president of Botswana.

==Early life==
Masire was born on 23 July 1925 in Kanye, Bechuanaland Protectorate, into a cattle-herding family to Gaipone (née Kgopo) and Joni Masire. He grew up at a time when there was not much economic activity in the country other than being a lowly-paid migrant labourers in the mines of apartheid South Africa. From an early age Masire set himself apart through academic achievement. After graduating at the top of his class at the Kanye school, he won himself a scholarship to further his education at the Tiger Kloof Educational Institute in South Africa.

In 1950, after graduating from Tiger Kloof, Masire helped found the Seepapitso II Secondary School, the first institution of higher learning in the Bangwaketse Reserve. He served as the school&#x27;s headmaster for about six years. During this period he clashed with Bathoen II, the autocratic Bangwaketse ruler. Resenting Bathoen&#x27;s many petty interferences in school affairs, Masire, working through the revived Bechuanaland African Teachers Association, became an advocate for the autonomy of protectorate schools from chiefly authority.

In 1957, Masire earned a Master Farmers Certificate and established himself as one of the territory&#x27;s leading agriculturalists. His success led to renewed conflict with the jealous Bathoen, who seized his farms as a penalty for the supposed infraction of fencing communal land.

In 1958, Masire was appointed as the protectorate reporter for the &quot;African Echo/Naledi ya Botswana&quot; newspaper. He was also elected to the newly reformed Bangwaketse Tribal Council and after 1960, the protectorate-wide African and Legislative Councils. Although he attended the first Kanye meeting of the People&#x27;s Party, the earliest nationalist grouping to enjoy a mass following in the territory, he declined to join the movement.

Masire married Gladys Olebile Masire in 1958. Sir Quett and Lady Masire had six children.

==Politics and governance==
In 1961, Masire helped found the Botswana Democratic Party (BDP). He was instrumental in the formation of the party, and served as its first secretary-general.

In March 1965, the Democratic Party won 28 of the 31 contested seats in the new Legislative Assembly, giving it a clear mandate to lead Botswana to independence. Masire was elected to the legislature and became Deputy Prime Minister in 1966 under Prime Minister Seretse Khama. Upon independence later that year, Masire became the new nation&#x27;s vice-president, under President Khama. Until 1980 he also held the significant portfolios of finance (from 1967) and development planning (from 1967), which were formally merged in 1971.

As a principal architect of Botswana&#x27;s steady economic and infrastructural growth between 1966 and 1980, Masire earned a reputation as a highly competent technocrat. However, his local Bangwaketse political base was eroded by his old nemesis Bathoen. During the initial years of independence the Democratic Party government moved decisively to undercut many of the residual powers of the chiefs. As a result, in 1969 Bathoen II a Seêpapitsô abdicated, only to reemerge as the leader of the opposition National Front. This set the stage for Bathoen&#x27;s local electoral victory over Masire during the same year. However, the ruling party won decisively at the national level, thus allowing Masire to maintain his position as one of the four &quot;specially elected&quot; members of Parliament.

==Presidency==

Khama died on 13 July 1980, and Masire automatically became acting president per the Constitution.

Five days after Khama&#x27;s death, Masire was elected as president by secret ballot at the National Assembly on 18 July 1980.
Masire&#x27;s three full terms were characterised by an emphasis on developments through regional and international organisations. Masire was chairman of the Southern African Development Community and vice chairman of the Organisation of African Unity; he was also chairman of the Global Coalition for Africa and a member of the UN group on Africa Development.

On 7 August 1988, while flying with his staff to a summit in Angola, his executive jet was accidentally shot at by an Angolan Air Force MiG-23. The plane was damaged and Masire was injured, but the co-pilot was able to make a successful emergency landing.

==Post-presidency and death==
Following his retirement in 1998, Sir Ketumile Masire was involved in numerous diplomatic initiatives in a number of African countries, including Ethiopia, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Ghana and Swaziland. Between 1998 and 2000 he served as Chairman of the International Panel of Eminent Personalities Investigating the Circumstances Surrounding the 1994 Rwandan genocide, and between 2000 and 2003 was the facilitator for the Inter-Congolese National Dialogue, which had the objective of bringing about a new political dispensation for the Democratic Republic of Congo, in terms of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.

In 2007, Sir Ketumile Masire set up the Sir Ketumile Masire Foundation to promote the social and economic well-being of the society of Botswana. The foundation strives to facilitate and drive efforts to promote peace, good governance and political stability internationally; assist children with disabilities from birth; and promote innovation and alternatives in agriculture.

During the last decade of his life, Masire became increasingly unhappy with the direction of the Botswana Democratic Party and the government of Ian Khama. Events such as the loss of about a fifth of the membership to the breakaway Botswana Movement for Democracy in 2010, and the bitter 2011 BOFEPUSU strike made him question leadership decisions. He came to conclude that the BDP had lost its original ideas, and had instead been taken over by opportunists looking to benefit from senior government positions. As a result, he became estranged from the party for the first time in his life.

Sir Ketumile was also a founding member of the Global Leadership Foundation, an organization which works to support democratic leadership, prevent and resolve conflict through mediation and promote good governance in the form of democratic institutions, open markets, human rights and the rule of law. It does so by making available, discreetly and in confidence, the experience of former leaders to today&#x27;s national leaders. It is a not-for-profit organization composed of former heads of government, senior governmental and international organization officials who work closely with heads of government on governance-related issues of concern to them.

In May 2010 Sir Ketumile Masire led an African Union Election Observer Mission to the May 2010 Ethiopian general election, and in October 2010 he co-led (with fellow GLF Member Joe Clark) a National Democratic Institute pre-election assessment mission in Nigeria, which identified a number of hurdles that could undermine a successful process surrounding the 2011 state and national polls.

He was the chancellor of the University of Botswana from 1982 to 1998.

Masire died at Bokamoso Hospital in Mmopane, Botswana, surrounded by his family, on 22 June 2017 at the age of 91. He had been hospitalized on 18 June after undergoing surgery for an unspecified reason, but his health deteriorated afterwards. He was buried on the morning of Thursday 29 June 2017 in his home village Kanye, Botswana.

==Honours and accolades==
*Three Honorary Doctorates of Law (L.L.D.) from St. John&#x27;s University, New York, and Williams College, Massachusetts, in the United States (1980), and in the United Kingdom (1988)
*Two Honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters from Ohio University (1988), and DePaul University (1994) in the United States.
*Africa Prize for Leadership for the Sustainable End of Hunger (1988)
*Grand Counsellor of the Royal Order of Sobhuza II, Swaziland (1988)
*Honorary Knighthood of the Grand Cross of Saint Michael and Saint George (GCMG), UK (1990)
*Namibia&#x27;s Order of the Welwitschia (1995)
*Free Market Award from the Free Market Foundation of South Africa (2000)
*Sir Ketumile Masire Hospital named after the second president of Botswana

==References==
==Further reading==
* Masire, Quett Ketumile Joni and Stephen R. Lewis Jr. (ed.), &quot;Very Brave or Very Foolish: Memoirs of an African Democrat&quot; (2008). Palgrave Macmillan. 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q310574" start="0" end="26" title="Quett Masire" label="Ketumile Quett Joni Masire"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="28" end="32" title="Order of St Michael and St George" label="GCMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q866725" start="99" end="120" title="president of Botswana" label="president of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="249" end="261" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q859757" start="521" end="535" title="Vice-President of Botswana" label="Vice-President"/>
<link wikidata="Q193238" start="536" end="548" title="Festus Mogae" label="Festus Mogae"/>
<link wikidata="Q170730" start="645" end="650" title="Kanye, Botswana" label="Kanye"/>
<link wikidata="Q747314" start="652" end="677" title="Bechuanaland Protectorate" label="Bechuanaland Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="890" end="899" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="900" end="912" title="Union of South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801429" start="1110" end="1143" title="Tiger Kloof Educational Institute" label="Tiger Kloof Educational Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855641" start="1310" end="1321" title="Bangwaketse" label="Bangwaketse"/>
<link wikidata="Q116908137" start="1429" end="1439" title="Bathoen Gaseitsiwe" label="Bathoen II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153960" start="1976" end="1989" title="communal land" label="communal land"/>
<link wikidata="Q24004803" start="2456" end="2477" title="Gladys Olebile Masire" label="Gladys Olebile Masire"/>
<link wikidata="Q859825" start="2593" end="2618" title="Botswana Democratic Party" label="Botswana Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878577" start="2757" end="2789" title="1965 Bechuanaland general election" label="won 28 of the 31 contested seats"/>
<link wikidata="Q219962" start="2983" end="2996" title="Seretse Khama" label="Seretse Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q106623304" start="3162" end="3169" title="Minister of Finance (Botswana)" label="finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310801" start="3763" end="3777" title="Botswana National Front" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q859658" start="4266" end="4283" title="National Assembly of Botswana" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="4459" end="4497" title="Southern African Development Community" label="Southern African Development Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="4523" end="4552" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="Organisation of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="4724" end="4730" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628695" start="4781" end="4798" title="Angolan Air Force" label="Angolan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q155679" start="4799" end="4805" title="MiG-23" label="MiG-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="5096" end="5104" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013" start="5106" end="5113" title="Lesotho" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="5115" end="5121" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="5123" end="5133" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="5135" end="5140" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="5145" end="5154" title="Swaziland" label="Swaziland"/>
<link wikidata="Q131297" start="5305" end="5321" title="Rwandan genocide" label="Rwandan genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q919629" start="5537" end="5563" title="Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement" label="Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q859825" start="6041" end="6066" title="Botswana Democratic Party" label="Botswana Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q57449" start="6089" end="6098" title="Ian Khama" label="Ian Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q859682" start="6176" end="6207" title="Botswana Movement for Democracy" label="Botswana Movement for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570469" start="6584" end="6612" title="Global Leadership Foundation" label="Global Leadership Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q549392" start="7287" end="7318" title="2010 Ethiopian general election" label="2010 Ethiopian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q128574" start="7374" end="7383" title="Joe Clark" label="Joe Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701197" start="7387" end="7416" title="National Democratic Institute" label="National Democratic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="7452" end="7459" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033044" start="7571" end="7585" title="2011 Nigerian parliamentary election" label="national polls"/>
<link wikidata="Q493141" start="7617" end="7639" title="University of Botswana" label="University of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q38857" start="7696" end="7703" title="Mmopane" label="Mmopane"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="7705" end="7713" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138374" start="8069" end="8095" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s University (New York City)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49166" start="8111" end="8127" title="Williams College" label="Williams College"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="8129" end="8142" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075339" start="8253" end="8268" title="Ohio University" label="Ohio University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179603" start="8281" end="8298" title="DePaul University" label="DePaul University"/>
<link wikidata="Q379576" start="8438" end="8448" title="Sobhuza II" label="Sobhuza II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="8450" end="8459" title="Swaziland" label="Swaziland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30673887" start="8635" end="8657" title="Free Market Foundation" label="Free Market Foundation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405889" wikidata="Q10420" url="?curid=405889" title="Neustadt an der Waldnaab (district)">
<text>Neustadt an der Waldnaab is a &quot;Landkreis&quot; (district) in Bavaria, Germany. It is bounded by (from the south and clockwise) the districts of Schwandorf, Amberg-Sulzbach, Bayreuth and Tirschenreuth, and by the Czech Republic (Plzeň Region). The city of Weiden in der Oberpfalz is enclosed by, but does not belong to the district.

== History ==
The district was established in 1972 by merging the former districts of Neustadt an der Waldnaab, Eschenbach and Vohenstrauß.

== Geography ==
The district is located in the mountains of the Upper Palatine Forest (&quot;Oberpfälzer Wald&quot;). The two headstreams of the River Naab, the Waldnaab and Haidenaab, both run through the district to merge in the south of the area.

== Coat of arms ==
The coat of arms displays:
* the heraldic lion of the Palatinate
* three stars from the arms of the county of Störnstein
* blue and white bars from the arms of the county of Leuchtenberg

== Towns and municipalities ==

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10420" start="0" end="24" title="Neustadt an der Waldnaab (district)" label="Neustadt an der Waldnaab"/>
<link wikidata="Q106658" start="30" end="62" title="Districts of Germany" label="&amp;quot;Landkreis&amp;quot; (district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="66" end="73" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="75" end="82" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q10423" start="149" end="159" title="Schwandorf (district)" label="Schwandorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q10421" start="161" end="176" title="Amberg-Sulzbach" label="Amberg-Sulzbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q10439" start="178" end="186" title="Bayreuth (district)" label="Bayreuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q10419" start="191" end="204" title="Tirschenreuth (district)" label="Tirschenreuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="217" end="231" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46070" start="233" end="245" title="Plzeň Region" label="Plzeň Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q14803" start="260" end="283" title="Weiden in der Oberpfalz" label="Weiden in der Oberpfalz"/>
<link wikidata="Q685984" start="543" end="564" title="Upper Palatine Forest" label="Upper Palatine Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q702507" start="624" end="634" title="River Naab" label="River Naab"/>
<link wikidata="Q447783" start="640" end="648" title="Waldnaab" label="Waldnaab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569103" start="653" end="662" title="Haidenaab" label="Haidenaab"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405891" wikidata="Q462164" url="?curid=405891" title="Iuliu Maniu">
<text>Iuliu Maniu (; 8 January 1873 – 5 February 1953) was a Romanian lawyer and politician. He was a leader of the National Party of Transylvania and Banat before and after World War I, playing an important role in the Union of Transylvania with Romania.

Maniu served as Prime Minister of Romania for three terms during 1928–1933, and, with Ion Mihalache, co-founded the National Peasants&#x27; Party. Arrested by the ascendant communist authorities in 1947 as a result of the Tămădău affair, he was convicted of treason in a show trial and sent to Sighet Prison, where he died six years later.

==Early years==
Maniu was born to an ethnic Romanian family in Szilágybadacsony, Austria-Hungary (now Bădăcin, Sălaj County, Romania); his parents were Ioan Maniu and Clara Maniu. He finished the Calvinist College in Zalău in 1890, and studied law at Franz Joseph University in Cluj-Napoca, then at the University of Budapest and the University of Vienna, being awarded the doctorate in 1896.

Maniu joined the Romanian National Party of Transylvania and Banat (PNR), became a member of its collective leadership body in 1897, and represented it in the Budapest Parliament on several occasions. He settled in Blaj, and served as a lawyer for the Greek Catholic Church (to which he belonged). Maniu was influenced by the activity of Simion Bărnuțiu, a maternal uncle of his father, Ioan Maniu.

After serving as an advisor for Archduke Franz Ferdinand, counseling on the latter&#x27;s projects to redefine the Habsburg states along the lines of a &quot;United States of Greater Austria&quot;, Maniu moved towards the option of a union with the Romanian Old Kingdom when the Archduke was assassinated in Sarajevo in 1914.

==PNR leadership==

Together with such figures as Vasile Goldiș, Gheorghe Pop de Băsești, the Romanian Orthodox cleric Miron Cristea, and Alexandru Vaida-Voevod, Maniu engaged in an intensive unionist campaign, leading to the Great National Assembly of Alba Iulia on 1 December 1918, during which Romanians demanded separation from Austria-Hungary. On 2 December, Maniu became head of Transylvania&#x27;s Directory Council – a position equivalent to interim governorship.
In May 1919, during the Hungarian–Romanian War, he accompanied King Ferdinand I and Queen Marie on a visit to Alba Iulia, Oradea, and Carei, and a meeting with the frontline troops at Békéscsaba.

After the creation of Greater Romania, the PNR formed the government in Bucharest—a cabinet led by Al. Vaida-Voevod and allied with Ion Mihalache&#x27;s Peasants&#x27; Party. It entered in competition with one of the traditional parties of the Romanian Kingdom, the National Liberal Party, and with its leader Ion I. C. Brătianu, when the Peasants&#x27; Party deadlocked the Parliament of Romania with calls for a widespread land reform.

After King Ferdinand I dissolved Parliament, Iuliu Maniu found himself at odds with the national leadership, especially after the new Prime Minister Alexandru Averescu, with support from the National Liberals, dissolved the Transylvanian Council in April 1920. Consequently, Maniu refused to attend King Ferdinand&#x27;s Crowning ceremony as &quot;King of Greater Romania&quot; (held in Alba Iulia, in 1922), seeing it as an attempt to tie multi-religious Transylvania to Orthodoxy. At the same time, the PNR rejected the centralization imposed by the 1923 Constitution favored by Brătianu, and demanded that any constitutional reform be passed by a Constituent Assembly, and not by a regular vote in Parliament. Citing fears that the PNL had ensured a grip over Romanian politics, the PNR and the Peasants&#x27; Party united in 1926, and Maniu was the President of the new political force, the National Peasants&#x27; Party (PNȚ), for the following seven years, and again between 1937 and 1947.

==PNȚ in interwar Romania==
Despite its success in elections, the PNȚ was blocked out of government by the Royal Prerogative of King Ferdinand, who had preferred to nominate Brătianu, Averescu, and Prince Barbu Știrbey. Maniu publicly protested, and attempted to organize a peasants&#x27; march on Bucharest as a public show of support modeled on the Alba Iulia assembly. He also showed himself open to deals proposed by Viscount Rothermere regarding a review of the Treaty of Trianon and, as King Ferdinand&#x27;s death approached, started negotiations with the disinherited Prince Carol (King Ferdinand&#x27;s son), proposing that the latter bypass the Constitution and crown himself in Alba Iulia (as a new foundation for the Romanian Kingdom). Talks with Carol were ended abruptly after the Romanian authorities called on the United Kingdom to expel the Prince from its territory.

The PNȚ first came to power in November 1928, after both King Ferdinand and Brătianu had died; in the elections of that year, it allied itself with the Romanian Social Democratic Party and the German Party. In 1930, Maniu manoeuvered against the Constitution, and, together with Gheorghe Mironescu, brought about Carol&#x27;s return and deposition of his son Michael. However, Carol did not respect the terms of his agreement with Maniu, refusing to resume his marriage to Queen Elena. After alternating governments of Maniu and Vaida-Voevod that had brought the party into conflict with the King&#x27;s inner circle and with his lover, Magda Lupescu, during its tenure his government was faced with a strike by coal miners in the Jiu Valley and major social and economic problems caused by the Great Depression in Romania. Maniu resigned for the third and final time on 13 January 1933, due to his ongoing conflict with King Carol.

==Under successive dictatorships==
The country moved towards an authoritarian regime formed around Carol and prompted by the rapid growth of the fascist Iron Guard. In 1937, Maniu agreed to sign an electoral pact with the Iron Guard&#x27;s Corneliu Zelea Codreanu, in the hope that this would block the monarch&#x27;s maneuvers. The king instead sought an agreement with other members of the political class, including the National Liberal Ion Duca and the former PNȚ politician Armand Călinescu, while clamping down on the Iron Guard—leading to a wave of similar actions in reprisal.

With the loss of Northern Transylvania, Bessarabia, Northern Bukovina, and Southern Dobruja in 1940, Carol conceded power and exiled himself, leading to the creation of the National Legionary State around the Iron Guard and General Ion Antonescu, a regime which aligned Romania with Nazi Germany and the Axis. The PNȚ survived in semi-clandestinity and, after Antonescu purged the Guard, achieved some unofficial status when Maniu began holding talks with the general over several issues (notably, he called for an end to persecution of the Jews and transports of Jews to Transnistria). He remained an opponent of Antonescu, a view which he balanced with his adversity towards the Soviet Union, and joined the plotters of the pro-Allied royal coup of 23 August 1944, while expressing his resentment of the Romanian Communist Party (PCR) involvement.

==Anticommunism==
Subsequently, Maniu was a prominent supporter of the Western Allies and one of the main adversaries of growing Soviet influence in Romania. His party became the predilect target of PCR hostility. PNȚ supporters and Communists engaged in several street fights in February 1945. &quot;This man, in his seventies, who holds no meetings, makes no public speeches, publishes no articles, possesses no wealth, and is not allowed to answer one single calumny hurled against him, seems to have filled the Government with fear.&quot; &quot;This is shown by the...unprecedented storm of attacks which the Government has launched against Dr. Maniu...day and night.&quot;

The PNȚ finished a distant second in the November 1946 general election with 33 seats, well behind the Communist-dominated Bloc of Democratic Parties (BPD). After the fall of Communism in 1989, some authors went as far as to claim that the PNȚ had actually won the election but was denied victory because of widespread electoral fraud on the part of the pro-Communist Petru Groza government. Later, historian Petre Țurlea reviewed a confidential Communist Party report about the election that revealed the BPD had actually come up short of a majority. Țurlea concluded that had the election been conducted honestly, the PNȚ and the other opposition parties could have won enough votes between them to form a coalition government, albeit with far less than the 80 percent support long claimed by opposition supporters.

After 1946, the PNȚ was sidelined, with the PCR ensuring the collaboration of several former party members, such as Nicolae L. Lupu and .

In a telegram to the State Department, the US representative in Romania, Burton Y. Berry, wrote:

&quot;The Department well knows that Maniu has stood out boldly as a champion of pro-Allied action and sentiment in Rumania even during the dark days of the Antonescu dictatorship. He has an enormous political following in the country and I believe the respect in which all Rumanians hold him eclipses that held for any other Rumanian. Because of what he has been and what he is it seems important that he be preserved from slipping into sharing the general conviction that the dissolution of the Rumanian state is now in progress.&quot;

Christian Science Monitor correspondent Reuben Markham wrote that Maniu &quot;has become far more than a political leader--he is a national legend.&quot;

The party was outlawed in July 1947. That month, Ion Mihalache attempted to flee the country in an airplane, which landed at Tămădău, allegedly to establish a government-in-exile (&quot;see Tămădău affair&quot;). That was judged as an act of treason, and both Maniu and Mihalache faced a kangaroo court that sentenced them in November 1947 to life imprisonment at hard labour; given their advanced age, that amounted to a death sentence. The show trial signaled the beginning of the suppression of opposition groups in Romania.

==Death==
Iuliu Maniu died in 1953 in Sighet Prison, and his body was thrown into the common grave in the courtyard. The official death certificate listed his occupation as &quot;unemployed&quot;, and the death cause as circulatory failure and chronic myocarditis.

On November 12, 1998, the High Court of Cassation and Justice ordered the rehabilitation of Maniu and removed the additional punishment of confiscation of property, pronounced in 1947.

Christian minister Richard Wurmbrand, who also was a political prisoner in Romania, claims in his &quot;Tortured for Christ&quot; the last words of Iuliu Maniu were, &quot;If the Communists are overthrown in our country, it will be the most holy duty of every Christian to go into the streets and at the risk of his own life defend the Communists from the righteous fury of the multitudes whom they have tyrannized.&quot;

==Legacy==

A bust of Maniu was placed in Bucharest&#x27;s Revolution Square, in front of the building of the former Central Committee of the Romanian Communist Party (from where Nicolae Ceaușescu and his wife fled by helicopter on December 22, 1989). Sculpted in bronze by , the monument was inaugurated on December 1, 1998, on the 80th anniversary of Great Union Day. There are also busts of Maniu in Alba Iulia, Bădăcin, Baia Mare, Satu Mare, Șimleu Silvaniei, and Zalău.

One of the main thoroughfares in Bucharest is the Iuliu Maniu Boulevard, which runs from the A1 motorway to the Lion&#x27;s Plaza for a length of . There are also streets and boulevards named after him in Arad, Brașov, Bucharest, Cluj-Napoca, Deva, Oradea, Satu Mare, Timișoara, and Tulcea, 
as well as high schools that bear his name in Bucharest, Carei, Oradea, and Șimleu Silvaniei.

Maniu appears on two postage stamps emitted by Poșta Română, one from 1993 and one from 2018, both commemorating Great Union Day.

==References==

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q462164" start="0" end="11" title="Iuliu Maniu" label="Iuliu Maniu"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="55" end="63" title="Romanians" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220114" start="110" end="124" title="Romanian National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="128" end="140" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="145" end="150" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="168" end="179" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989779" start="214" end="248" title="Union of Transylvania with Romania" label="Union of Transylvania with Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304810" start="267" end="292" title="Prime Minister of Romania" label="Prime Minister of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779508" start="337" end="350" title="Ion Mihalache" label="Ion Mihalache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855102" start="367" end="396" title="National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862526" start="473" end="487" title="Tămădău affair" label="Tămădău affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q177253" start="522" end="532" title="show trial" label="show trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433242" start="545" end="558" title="Sighet Prison" label="Sighet Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="673" end="688" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16427371" start="694" end="701" title="Pericei" label="Bădăcin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190690" start="703" end="715" title="Sălaj County" label="Sălaj County"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="717" end="724" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580364" start="744" end="754" title="Ioan Maniu" label="Ioan Maniu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913910" start="759" end="770" title="Clara Maniu" label="Clara Maniu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515705" start="788" end="814" title="National College Silvania" label="Calvinist College in Zalău"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115639" start="843" end="866" title="Franz Joseph University" label="Franz Joseph University"/>
<link wikidata="Q100188" start="870" end="874" title="Cluj-Napoca" label="Cluj"/>
<link wikidata="Q390287" start="895" end="917" title="Eötvös Loránd University" label="University of Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="926" end="946" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="966" end="975" title="doctorate" label="doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="1145" end="1153" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q624236" start="1201" end="1205" title="Blaj" label="Blaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q856349" start="1238" end="1259" title="Romanian Church United with Rome, Greek-Catholic" label="Greek Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q701594" start="1324" end="1339" title="Simion Bărnuțiu" label="Simion Bărnuțiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43063" start="1418" end="1442" title="Archduke Franz Ferdinand" label="Archduke Franz Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="1501" end="1509" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q666670" start="1544" end="1576" title="United States of Greater Austria" label="United States of Greater Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q444912" start="1635" end="1655" title="Romanian Old Kingdom" label="Romanian Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q192050" start="1678" end="1702" title="Assassination in Sarajevo" label="assassinated in Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4687740" start="1763" end="1776" title="Vasile Goldiș" label="Vasile Goldiș"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556396" start="1778" end="1801" title="Gheorghe Pop de Băsești" label="Gheorghe Pop de Băsești"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="1807" end="1824" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Romanian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268352" start="1832" end="1845" title="Miron Cristea" label="Miron Cristea"/>
<link wikidata="Q622305" start="1851" end="1873" title="Alexandru Vaida-Voevod" label="Alexandru Vaida-Voevod"/>
<link wikidata="Q12734854" start="1939" end="1976" title="Great National Assembly of Alba Iulia" label="Great National Assembly of Alba Iulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="2010" end="2019" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="2171" end="2179" title="governor" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q252298" start="2209" end="2231" title="Hungarian–Romanian War" label="Hungarian–Romanian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788734" start="2248" end="2252" title="King of Romania" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="2253" end="2264" title="Ferdinand I of Romania" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q57666" start="2269" end="2280" title="Marie of Romania" label="Queen Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q93358" start="2307" end="2313" title="Oradea" label="Oradea"/>
<link wikidata="Q754725" start="2319" end="2324" title="Carei" label="Carei"/>
<link wikidata="Q178878" start="2369" end="2379" title="Békéscsaba" label="Békéscsaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q581325" start="2404" end="2419" title="Greater Romania" label="Greater Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="2454" end="2463" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779508" start="2514" end="2527" title="Ion Mihalache" label="Ion Mihalache"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158424" start="2535" end="2555" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Party (Romania)" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230371" start="2648" end="2670" title="National Liberal Party (Romania, 1875)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q462175" start="2692" end="2710" title="Ion I. C. Brătianu" label="Ion I. C. Brătianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813360" start="2757" end="2778" title="Parliament of Romania" label="Parliament of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="2807" end="2818" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788734" start="2827" end="2831" title="King of Romania" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="2832" end="2843" title="Ferdinand I of Romania" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710461" start="2955" end="2969" title="List of Prime Ministers of Romania" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q58285" start="2970" end="2988" title="Alexandru Averescu" label="Alexandru Averescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q174665" start="3208" end="3218" title="Alba Iulia" label="Alba Iulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25585330" start="3343" end="3357" title="Centralized government" label="centralization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995243" start="3373" end="3390" title="1923 Constitution of Romania" label="1923 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900755" start="3471" end="3491" title="Constituent Assembly" label="Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855102" start="3716" end="3745" title="National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="3925" end="3942" title="Royal Prerogative" label="Royal Prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q613397" start="4023" end="4036" title="Barbu Știrbey" label="Barbu Știrbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q336483" start="4239" end="4258" title="Harold Sidney Harmsworth, 1st Viscount Rothermere" label="Viscount Rothermere"/>
<link wikidata="Q181902" start="4285" end="4302" title="Treaty of Trianon" label="Treaty of Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="4394" end="4406" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Prince Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4648" end="4662" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390996" start="4856" end="4888" title="Romanian Social Democratic Party (1927-1948)" label="Romanian Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q831042" start="4897" end="4909" title="German Party (Romania)" label="German Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q927758" start="4983" end="5001" title="Gheorghe Mironescu" label="Gheorghe Mironescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="5063" end="5070" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q162177" start="5177" end="5188" title="Elena of Greece" label="Queen Elena"/>
<link wikidata="Q434493" start="5341" end="5354" title="Magda Lupescu" label="Magda Lupescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q555511" start="5406" end="5445" title="Lupeni strike of 1929" label="strike by coal miners in the Jiu Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q106092830" start="5499" end="5526" title="Great Depression in Romania" label="Great Depression in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="5625" end="5635" title="Carol II of Romania" label="King Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="5702" end="5715" title="Authoritarianism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="5783" end="5790" title="Fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="5791" end="5801" title="Iron Guard" label="Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q318105" start="5878" end="5901" title="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu" label="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377596" start="6078" end="6086" title="Ion Duca" label="Ion Duca"/>
<link wikidata="Q439903" start="6117" end="6133" title="Armand Călinescu" label="Armand Călinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q917134" start="6241" end="6262" title="Northern Transylvania" label="Northern Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="6264" end="6274" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="6276" end="6293" title="Bukovina" label="Northern Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q912868" start="6299" end="6315" title="Southern Dobruja" label="Southern Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507497" start="6397" end="6421" title="National Legionary State" label="National Legionary State"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="6433" end="6443" title="Iron Guard" label="Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q152030" start="6456" end="6469" title="Ion Antonescu" label="Ion Antonescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="6507" end="6519" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="6528" end="6532" title="Axis Powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q696662" start="6765" end="6769" title="History of the Jews in Romania" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6774" end="6808" title="Romania during World War II#Romania and the Holocaust" label="transports of Jews to Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="6905" end="6917" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="6954" end="6960" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q575347" start="6961" end="6971" title="King Michael&amp;#x27;s Coup" label="royal coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="7030" end="7054" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="Romanian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507074" start="7146" end="7160" title="Western Bloc" label="Western Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296124" start="7204" end="7231" title="Soviet occupation of Romania" label="Soviet influence in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827067" start="7795" end="7825" title="1946 Romanian general election" label="November 1946 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="7921" end="7938" title="Romanian Revolution" label="fall of Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q692209" start="8073" end="8088" title="electoral fraud" label="electoral fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q317313" start="8122" end="8133" title="Petru Groza" label="Petru Groza"/>
<link wikidata="Q592508" start="8689" end="8704" title="Nicolae L. Lupu" label="Nicolae L. Lupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="8733" end="8749" title="United States Department of State" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q283379" start="8785" end="8800" title="Burton Y. Berry" label="Burton Y. Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q284947" start="9349" end="9374" title="Christian Science Monitor" label="Christian Science Monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12292587" start="9389" end="9403" title="Reuben Markham" label="Reuben Markham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779508" start="9553" end="9566" title="Ion Mihalache" label="Ion Mihalache"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725229" start="9629" end="9636" title="Tămădău" label="Tămădău"/>
<link wikidata="Q678116" start="9663" end="9682" title="government-in-exile" label="government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862526" start="9694" end="9708" title="Tămădău affair" label="Tămădău affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="9746" end="9753" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q375727" start="9792" end="9806" title="kangaroo court" label="kangaroo court"/>
<link wikidata="Q68676" start="9847" end="9864" title="life imprisonment" label="life imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373376" start="9868" end="9879" title="Penal labour" label="hard labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q177253" start="9946" end="9956" title="show trial" label="show trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433242" start="10071" end="10084" title="Sighet Prison" label="Sighet Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q178061" start="10253" end="10272" title="circulatory collapse" label="circulatory failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q186235" start="10285" end="10296" title="myocarditis" label="myocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755230" start="10325" end="10360" title="High Court of Cassation and Justice" label="High Court of Cassation and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q504652" start="10504" end="10521" title="Richard Wurmbrand" label="Richard Wurmbrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3390456" start="10967" end="10984" title="Revolution Square, Bucharest" label="Revolution Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q190652" start="11025" end="11042" title="Central Committee" label="Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="11050" end="11074" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="Romanian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="11087" end="11104" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360641" start="11261" end="11276" title="Great Union Day" label="Great Union Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q174665" start="11311" end="11321" title="Alba Iulia" label="Alba Iulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16427371" start="11323" end="11330" title="Pericei" label="Bădăcin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185280" start="11332" end="11341" title="Baia Mare" label="Baia Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q185332" start="11343" end="11352" title="Satu Mare" label="Satu Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3846983" start="11354" end="11370" title="Șimleu Silvaniei" label="Șimleu Silvaniei"/>
<link wikidata="Q145292" start="11376" end="11381" title="Zalău" label="Zalău"/>
<link wikidata="Q429181" start="11477" end="11488" title="A1 motorway (Romania)" label="A1 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906897" start="11496" end="11513" title="Monument to the Heroes of the Engineer Arm" label="Lion&amp;#x27;s Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q173591" start="11589" end="11593" title="Arad, Romania" label="Arad"/>
<link wikidata="Q82174" start="11595" end="11601" title="Brașov" label="Brașov"/>
<link wikidata="Q100188" start="11614" end="11625" title="Cluj-Napoca" label="Cluj-Napoca"/>
<link wikidata="Q204850" start="11627" end="11631" title="Deva, Romania" label="Deva"/>
<link wikidata="Q93358" start="11633" end="11639" title="Oradea" label="Oradea"/>
<link wikidata="Q83404" start="11652" end="11661" title="Timișoara" label="Timișoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q11585" start="11667" end="11673" title="Tulcea" label="Tulcea"/>
<link wikidata="Q754725" start="11733" end="11738" title="Carei" label="Carei"/>
<link wikidata="Q283175" start="11818" end="11830" title="Poșta Română" label="Poșta Română"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405893" wikidata="Q533946" url="?curid=405893" title="Lambada">
<text>Lambada () is a dance from the state of Pará in Brazil. The dance briefly became internationally popular in the 1980s, especially in the Philippines, Latin America and Caribbean countries. It has adopted aspects of dances such as maxixe, carimbó, forró, salsa and merengue.

Lambada is generally a partner dance. The dancers generally dance with arched legs, with the steps being from side to side, turning or even swaying, and in its original form never front to back, with a pronounced movement of the hips. At the time when the dance became popular, short skirts for women were in fashion and men wore long trousers, and the dance has become associated with such clothing, especially for women wearing short skirts that swirl up when the woman spins around, typically revealing 90s-style thong underwear.

==Origins==

===&quot;Maxixe&quot;===

The association of Lambada and the idea of &#x27;dirty dancing&#x27; became quite extensive. The appellative &quot;forbidden dance&quot; was and is often ascribed to the Lambada. This was largely due to its links to Maxixe, a dance of the early 1920s, because of its spicy lyrics and close contact with the dance partner. This idea was further perpetuated by the 1990 movies &quot;Lambada&quot; and &quot;The Forbidden Dance&quot;, and the short skirts, typical to the Lambada dance, that were in fashion around 1988.

Lambada has many links with Maxixe and also with Forro. They have many figures in common. For example:
*&quot;Balão apagado&quot;, a figure in which the lady rotates her head while it hangs loose.
*&quot;Peão&quot; (also called &quot;boneca&quot; or &quot;toy doll&quot;), a figure in which the lady swings her head from side to side.

===&quot;Carimbó&quot;===

From the time that Brazil was a Portuguese colony, Carimbó was a common dance in the northern part of the country. Carimbó was a loose and very sensual dance which involved many spins by the female dancer, who typically wore a rounded skirt. The music was mainly to the beat of drums made of trunks of wood, thinned by fire.

Carimbó involved only side to side movements and many spins and hip movement, which has influenced lambada movements.

===Etymology===
After a while, a local radio station from Belém (Pará&#x27;s capital city) started to call this new type of music &quot;the strong-beated rhythm&quot; and &quot;the rhythms of &quot;lambada&quot;&quot;. The term &quot;lambada&quot; had a strong appeal and began to be associated with the new emerging face of an old dancing style.

The word &quot;lambada&quot; means &quot;strong slap&quot; or &quot;hit&quot; in Portuguese. However, as a dance form, &quot;lambada&quot; is of obscure etymology. In Portuguese it may refer to the wave-like motion of a whip. This flowing wave motion is reproduced by the dancers&#x27; bodies, and is one of the main elements that distinguish Lambada from other Latin dances.

===Two-beat dance style===
Around 1983, the Carimbó dance started again to be danced in couples, in a 2-beat style, something very close to Merengue, but with more spins.

===Music===
&quot;Aurino Quirino Gonçalves&quot;, or simply Pinduca, is a Brazilian musician and singer in the state of Pará, Brazil, where it is strongly believed he is the true father of the lambada music.

Pinduca is a musician and composer of mainly Carimbó. He is the singer and composer of the &quot;King of Carimbó&quot; (as it is affectionately known) and he created rhythms, such as: Sirimbó, Lári-Lári, Lambada and Lamgode. In 1976, he launched a song entitled &quot;Lambada (Sambão)&quot;, track number 6 of the LP &quot;No embalo of carimbó and sirimbó vol. 5.&quot; It is the first Brazilian recording of a song under the label of &quot;Lambada&quot;.

Some support the version that the guitarist and composer Master Vieira, the inventor of the &quot;guitarrada&quot;, would also be the creator of the Lambada music. His first official disc, &quot;Lambada of Quebradas&quot;, was recorded in 1976 but officially launched two years later, in 1978.

In the late 1980s, the fusion between the metallic and electronic music from Caribbean brought again a new face to the Carimbó. This style started to be played throughout north-eastern Brazil (a place well known for its tourist approach), although this new Carimbó went with the name of &quot;Lambada&quot;.

==Bahia==

===Four-beat dance style===
The Lambada spread along the coast until it reached Bahia (the elder Brazilian state) where it was influenced by the Forró, an old Brazilian style of dance which also had a strong beat. It became a four-beat dancing style, which was distinctive from the original Carimbó.

Although the music of lambada began in Pará, the dance of Lambada did not gain a recognizable form until the music reached Porto Seguro in Bahia. In Pará, people moved to what was then a new beat by adapting dance styles that were familiar at that time such as forró, cumbia, carimbó, maxixe and merengue. But it was in the Boca da Barra beach cabana that the dance of lambada began to acquire a specific form - first as a very simple stepping in place in a close partner embrace, and quickly becoming more and more complex. Leaders in that community included the brothers Braz and Didi Dos Santos and Rebeca Lang, who won many lambada competitions and created steps that are still danced today in all Lambada styles.

This form of Lambada was danced with arched legs, with the steps being from one side to the other, and never from front to back. At the time short skirts for girls were in fashion and men wore long trousers, and the dance became especially associated with girls wearing short skirts. This association has continued until today, and the tradition is common in some places, such as the Lambar night club of São Paulo.

===Carnival===

During the 1980s, the Carnival in Bahia was growing in popularity, and every summer a new kind of dance arose, only to disappear during the year after the tourists had left, with another dancing style and rhythm arising the following summer. A few years before the Lambada, there was the &quot;Fricote&quot; and the &quot;Ti-Ti-Ti&quot; among others dances, all of which disappeared never to be remembered again.

Among with the &quot;Trio-eletricos&quot; (big movable trucks covered with speakers, on top of which musicians would play during the Carnival in Bahia), in 1988 the Lambada started to become popular in Bahia, and established itself in the city of Porto Seguro. Still, in this first boom of the Lambada, the economically developed south-east region of Brazil despised the various rhythms which came from Bahia on a regular basis, and which were believed to be only summer hits.

Although it was recognized as a summer hit, the Lambada was not yet a true worldwide success. Many of the first &quot;lambaterias&quot; (a place to dance Lambada) which opened in 1988 couldn&#x27;t survive the low tourism of the winter season, and closed a few months later.

==Musicians==
Prior to Kaoma&#x27;s 1989 plagiarism of the Los Kjarkas song &quot;Llorando se fue&quot;, dozens of groups and several singers had already performed the song using a dance rhythm, such as in 1984 with Cuarteto Continental, Sexteto Internacional, and Puerto Rican singer Wilkins. Argentine singer Juan &quot;Corazón&quot; Ramón in 1985 and Brazilian singer-songwriter Márcia Ferreira, who wrote the translation in Portuguese as &quot;Chorando se foi&quot;, in 1986 were also widely successful with their covers. Other popular dance music groups, Tropicalisimo Apache from Mexico and Los Hermanos Rosario from the Dominican Republic covered the song in 1988. The song continues to be covered to this day; for example: Pastor López, Beto Barbosa, Manezinho do Sax, while others were increasing their careers, as was the case with Sidney Magal, Sandy e Júnior, Fafá de Belém and the group Trem da Alegria.

===Kaoma&#x27;s song &quot;Lambada&quot;===

In 1988, French entrepreneur, Olivier Lamotte d&#x27;Incamps (aka Olivier Lorsac), visited Porto Seguro, Brazil and discovered locals dancing the tightly syncopated lambada to a melody that turned out to be Bolivian. D&#x27;Incamps became involved in the lambada dance craze, largely by promoting a European tour of Kaoma, a band formed with several musicians from the Senegalese group Touré Kunda. To display the dance in Europe, he chose a team of the best dancers at the Boca Da Barra (a dance cabana on the beach in Porto Seguro where lambada dancers refined and developed the style and form of the dance). Most notable among these young dancers chosen for the Kaoma company was Braz Dos Santos, who has become the most celebrated lambada dancer in the world today (recipient of the 2015 Lifetime Achievement Award&#x27;s &quot;World’s Best LambaZouk Performer&quot; at the Los Angeles Zouk Festival), and his brother Didi Dos Santos. After Olivier Lamotte d&#x27;Incamps bought the musical rights to over 400 lambada songs with Jean Georgakarakos, he took the dancers back to France and created the Kaoma band. They were part of lambada&#x27;s worldwide known style, reaching all the way to Japan and Vietnam, where the dance is still popular.

The French group Kaoma recorded a number one worldwide summer hit &quot;Lambada&quot;, sung in Portuguese by Loalwa Braz, which sold 5 million singles in 1989. The song peaked at #46 in the United States in 1990 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart. In Portuguese, the &quot;Lambada&quot; song is called &quot;Chorando se foi&quot;, meaning &quot;In tears they went&quot;.

In the music video, there were two young children, named Chico and Roberta, performing the lambada dance. They shortly thereafter started their own musical career. Other music videos featured Loalwa Braz, Braz Dos Santos, Didi Dos Santos, and other dancers from the Kaoma European Tour. These videos were broadcast extensively worldwide and, capturing the imagination of audiences who were attracted to the sight of beautiful young people dancing sensuously in the sun, greatly boosted music sales.

The &quot;Lambada&quot; song was actually an unauthorized translation of the 1981 song &quot;Llorando se fue&quot; (meaning: &quot;In tears he/she left&quot;), by the Bolivian group Los Kjarkas. Also, the dance arrangements were an identical cover from the version of &quot;Llorando se fue&quot; recorded by the Peruvian group Cuarteto Continental and produced by Alberto Maravi. Kaoma&#x27;s &quot;Lambada&quot; was also a direct cover of Márcia Ferreira&#x27;s legally authorized Portuguese-translated version of &quot;Llorando se fue&quot;. Márcia Ferreira and José Ari wrote and adapted Los Kjarkas&#x27; song into Portuguese using an upbeat lambada rhythm as &quot;Chorando se foi&quot;, which was released on Ferreira&#x27;s third album in 1986. Due to Kaoma&#x27;s clear act of plagiarism and release of their single without Los Kjarkas&#x27; permission, Los Kjarkas successfully sued Kaoma.
Now Kaoma&#x27;s &quot;Lambada&quot; song is credited to the Hermosa brothers (authors), Márcia Ferreira (translation), José Ari (translation), and Alberto Maraví (original producer).

==Evolution==

===Early interpretations===
With world repercussion, the dance reached far distortions. Due to a lack of fine Lambada dancers to make films and shows, most professional dancers started changing the way it was danced. &quot;Rock spins&quot; and &quot;steps&quot; were added, like those from Jive and East Coast Swing. Also some acrobatic movements became more commonplace.

In contrast, Lambada contests at &quot;Lambateria UM&quot; (a place of Lambada) eliminated contestants if ever they became separated during the dance.

===Different styles of music===
After 1994 the Brazilian music style (also called Lambada), which gave birth to the dance, started to fade away, and the dancers began to use other musical sources to continue practicing the Lambada dance. Among these rhythms were the Flamenco Rumba (such as from the Gipsy Kings) and some Arabian music. Some very resistant dancers started to use other music styles to keep on dancing Lambada. Many of the Caribbean music like Soca, Merengue, Salsa, and Zouk were used to dance the Lambada.

Finally the dance recovered most of its original way and style, with less acrobatic moves, smoother, intimate and closer contact. Some people like Adílio Porto, Israel Szerman and Luís Florião (Brazilian teachers) regret that nowadays the dance changed its name to Zouk-Lambada in most parts of Brazil. This is mainly because of its musical orphanage.

=== Brazilian Zouk ===

Brazilian Zouk is a group of closely related dance styles based on or evolved from the lambada dance style and is typically danced to zouk music or other music containing the zouk beat. The name Brazilian Zouk is used to distinguish the dance from the Caribbean Zouk dance style, which is historically related to, but very different from the Lambada dance style. The three lines of Brazilian Zouk are LambaZouk, traditional (or Rio) Zouk and Zouk of different styles.

==Films==
*&quot;Lambada&quot; (1990) (&quot;Lambada: Set the Night on Fire&quot;)
*&quot;The Forbidden Dance&quot; (1990) (&quot;Lambada - The Forbidden Dance&quot;/&quot;The Forbidden Dance is Lambada&quot;)
*&quot;Lambada (Brazilian/Italian film)&quot; (1990) (&quot;Rhythm and Passion&quot;)

==References==
==External links==
*Loalwa Braz official website
*Lambada-Zouk dancing, international congresses &amp; dance holidays
*Overview page with links of Lambada-Zouk dancing scene websites
*History of Lambada by Luis Floriao
*History of Lambada - Hungarian language
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q533946" start="0" end="7" title="Lambada" label="Lambada"/>
<link wikidata="Q39517" start="40" end="44" title="Pará" label="Pará"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="48" end="54" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="137" end="148" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="150" end="163" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="168" end="187" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q430075" start="230" end="236" title="Maxixe (dance)" label="maxixe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036183" start="238" end="245" title="carimbó" label="carimbó"/>
<link wikidata="Q586110" start="247" end="252" title="forró" label="forró"/>
<link wikidata="Q189825" start="254" end="259" title="Salsa (dance)" label="salsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413211" start="264" end="272" title="Merengue (dance)" label="merengue"/>
<link wikidata="Q280336" start="298" end="311" title="partner dance" label="partner dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12955949" start="791" end="796" title="thong" label="thong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889403" start="1229" end="1236" title="Lambada (1990 American film)" label="Lambada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734730" start="1253" end="1272" title="The Forbidden Dance" label="The Forbidden Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036183" start="1781" end="1788" title="Carimbó" label="Carimbó"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829733" start="2233" end="2238" title="Belém" label="Belém"/>
<link wikidata="Q39517" start="2240" end="2244" title="Pará" label="Pará"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413211" start="3040" end="3048" title="Merengue (dance)" label="Merengue"/>
<link wikidata="Q39517" start="3192" end="3196" title="Pará" label="Pará"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="4433" end="4438" title="Bahia" label="Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q586110" start="4498" end="4503" title="Forró" label="Forró"/>
<link wikidata="Q39517" start="4693" end="4697" title="Pará" label="Pará"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="5778" end="5787" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734131" start="6353" end="6370" title="Bahian Carnival" label="Carnival in Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q499922" start="6467" end="6479" title="Porto Seguro" label="Porto Seguro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516791" start="7033" end="7044" title="Los Kjarkas" label="Los Kjarkas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119804" start="7056" end="7071" title="Llorando se fue" label="Llorando se fue"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002526" start="7259" end="7266" title="Wilkins Velez" label="Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582170" start="7571" end="7591" title="Los Hermanos Rosario" label="Los Hermanos Rosario"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="7601" end="7619" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q835656" start="7830" end="7844" title="Sandy e Júnior" label="Sandy e Júnior"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429355" start="7846" end="7859" title="Fafá de Belém" label="Fafá de Belém"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583937" start="7874" end="7889" title="Trem da Alegria" label="Trem da Alegria"/>
<link wikidata="Q499922" start="8028" end="8040" title="Porto Seguro" label="Porto Seguro"/>
<link wikidata="Q319526" start="8091" end="8101" title="Syncopation" label="syncopated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055141" start="8200" end="8211" title="Novelty and fad dances" label="dance craze"/>
<link wikidata="Q500613" start="8253" end="8258" title="Kaoma" label="Kaoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535582" start="8323" end="8334" title="Touré Kunda" label="Touré Kunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q28529474" start="8970" end="8988" title="Jean Georgakarakos" label="Jean Georgakarakos"/>
<link wikidata="Q701766" start="9259" end="9266" title="Lambada (Kaoma song)" label="Lambada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="9282" end="9292" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="9406" end="9435" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963407" start="9624" end="9641" title="Chico and Roberta" label="Chico and Roberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119804" start="10160" end="10175" title="Llorando se fue" label="Llorando se fue"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="10234" end="10241" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516791" start="10249" end="10260" title="Los Kjarkas" label="Los Kjarkas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10507" end="10522" title="Márcia Ferreira" label="Márcia Ferreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q17237" start="11456" end="11460" title="Jive (dance)" label="Jive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009578" start="11465" end="11481" title="East Coast Swing" label="East Coast Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321920" start="11958" end="11972" title="Rumba flamenca" label="Flamenco Rumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q40586" start="11991" end="12002" title="Gipsy Kings" label="Gipsy Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q624044" start="12013" end="12026" title="Arabian music" label="Arabian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051735" start="12151" end="12155" title="Soca music" label="Soca"/>
<link wikidata="Q227045" start="12178" end="12182" title="Zouk (musical movement)" label="Zouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q227045" start="12727" end="12731" title="Zouk (musical movement)" label="zouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889403" start="13079" end="13086" title="Lambada (1990 American film)" label="Lambada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734730" start="13152" end="13171" title="The Forbidden Dance" label="The Forbidden Dance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13279" end="13311" title="Lambada (Brazilian/Italian film)" label="Lambada (Brazilian/Italian film)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405900" wikidata="Q48193" url="?curid=405900" title="List of municipalities in Delaware">
<text>Delaware is a state located in the Southern United States. According to the 2016 United States Census estimate, Delaware is the 6th least populous state with inhabitants but the 2nd smallest by land area spanning of land. Delaware is divided into three counties and contains 57 incorporated places consisting of cities, towns, and villages. Of these, there are 10 cities, 3 villages, and 44 towns.

As of 2020, the largest municipality by population in Delaware is Wilmington with 70,898 residents, while the largest by area is Dover which spans . The smallest municipality by both measurements is Hartly with 73 residents in an area of .

==List of municipalities==


== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="0" end="8" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="14" end="19" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="35" end="57" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="128" end="152" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population" label="6th least populous state"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="178" end="203" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="2nd smallest by land area"/>
<link wikidata="Q174224" start="465" end="475" title="Wilmington, Delaware" label="Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q33518" start="528" end="533" title="Dover, Delaware" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q754320" start="598" end="604" title="Hartly, Delaware" label="Hartly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405902" wikidata="Q1426129" url="?curid=405902" title="Texinfo">
<text>Texinfo is a typesetting syntax used for generating documentation in both on-line and printed form (creating filetypes as , , , etc., and a specific hypertext format, ) with a single source file. It is implemented by a computer program released as free software of the same name, created and made available by the GNU Project from the Free Software Foundation.

The main purpose of Texinfo is to provide a way to easily typeset software manuals. Similar to the LaTeX syntax, all the normal features of a book, such as chapters, sections, cross references, tables and indices are available for use in documents. Using the various output generators that are available for Texinfo, it is possible to keep several documentation types up-to-date (such as on-line documentation provided via a Web site, and printed documentation, as generated using the TeX typesetting system) using only a single source file.

The official Texinfo documentation states that the first syllable of &quot;Texinfo&quot; is pronounced so as to rhyme with &quot;speck&quot;, not &quot;hex&quot;; this pronunciation is derived from the pronunciation of TeX, in which the X represents the Greek letter chi rather than the English letter x. The maintainers state that &quot;Texinfo&quot; should be written with only a capital &quot;T&quot; and the rest of the letters in lower case.

== Output formats ==

In order to make it possible for several documentation output formats to be updated all at once, upon changing the original Texinfo (.texi) source file, several syntax converters are available that can be used to generate translations of the Texinfo file into other formats. Most of these are created using the program, also known as , which is part of the GNU Texinfo distribution.

;HTML
:(Generated via .) As HTML is the standard language for documents presented on the World Wide Web, this output format can effectively be used to produce online documentation pages. The manual notes that the output is intentionally quite plain for maximum portability and accessibility. HTML output is highly customizable.
;DVI
:(Generated via .) The device independent file format is output by the TeX typesetting system, and can be used for generating device-specific commands that can be viewed or printed; for example, translation to PostScript ( files).
;PDF
:(Generated via or .) Based on the PostScript language, this format was developed by Adobe Systems for portable document interchange. It can represent the exact appearance of a document and supports arbitrary scaling. It is intended to be platform-independent and can be viewed with a large variety of software. By default, Texinfo uses the program, a variant of TeX, to output PDF.
;LaTeX
:(Generated via .) This is a typesetting system built on top of TeX. The LaTeX output can be further processed into DVI, PostScript, or PDF. 
;Docbook
:(Generated via .) This is an XML-based markup language for technical documentation that bears some resemblance to Texinfo, in broad outlines. It is also possible to convert Docbook files to Texinfo, using the program.
;EPUB
:(Generated via .) EPUB is a format designed for reading electronic books on portable devices. It is a derivative of HTML.
;XML
:(Generated via .) Unlike all the other output formats, is a transliteration of the Texinfo source, rather than finished output. The purpose of the Texinfo XML output is to allow further processing by XML tools.
;Info
:(Generated via .) This is a specific format which essentially is a plain text transliteration of the original Texinfo source, with the addition of a few control characters to separate nodes and provide navigational elements for menus, cross-references, indices, and so on. Files in Info format can be browsed with the program, which is distributed along with Texinfo, as well as with several third-party info viewers.
;Plain text
:(Generated via .) This is almost the same as Info output with the navigational control characters omitted.

=== Man output ===
Notably, man is not available as an output format from the standard Texinfo tools. While Texinfo is used for writing the documentation of GNU software, which typically is used in Unix-like environments such as Linux, where man pages are the traditional format for documentation, the rationale for this is that man pages have a strict conventional format, used traditionally as quick reference guides, whereas typical Texinfo applications are for tutorials as well as reference manuals. As such, no benefit is seen in expressing Texinfo content in man page format. Moreover, many GNU projects eschew man pages almost completely, referring the reader of the provided man page (which often describes itself as seldom maintained) to the Info document.

== Texinfo source file ==
Texinfo enables structuring a document like a book with chapters, sections, cross references and indices. The source is almost plain text, but technically it is formatted text marked up by commands that begin with &quot;codice_1&quot;. A sample of a part of a source file:

The commands mark structure such as chapters, mark words, examples, lists and tables or denote a part of the source to be processed only for certain types of output.

== History and status ==
Texinfo is used as the official documentation system for the GNU Project. The GNU Texinfo distribution is licensed under the GNU General Public License.

The Texinfo format was created by Richard M. Stallman, combining another system for print output in use at MIT called BoTeX, with the online Info hyperlinked documentation system, also created by Stallman on top of the TECO implementation of Emacs. BoTeX itself was based on an earlier system called Bolio (associated with David A. Moon, and used for documentation of the Lisp Machine), converted to use TeX for its output. Robert Chassell helped Stallman to create the first translator to create Info in Emacs Lisp. Texinfo is &quot;loosely based on Brian Reid&#x27;s Scribe and other formatting languages of the time&quot;.

The Texinfo software distribution development was led by Brian Fox (up to version 3.8), Karl Berry (through version 5.2), and by Gavin Smith (since Dec. 2014).

==See also==
* TeX
* List of TeX extensions

== Notes and references ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1426129" start="0" end="7" title="Texinfo" label="Texinfo"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="219" end="235" title="computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="248" end="261" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598" start="314" end="325" title="GNU Project" label="GNU Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q48413" start="335" end="359" title="Free Software Foundation" label="Free Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310" start="461" end="466" title="LaTeX" label="LaTeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301" start="847" end="850" title="TeX" label="TeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301" start="1124" end="1127" title="TeX" label="TeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1159" end="1164" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q14425" start="1172" end="1175" title="Chi (letter)" label="chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1192" end="1199" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9968" start="1207" end="1208" title="x" label="x"/>
<link wikidata="Q901031" start="2115" end="2145" title="device independent file format" label="device independent file format"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301" start="2163" end="2166" title="TeX" label="TeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="2302" end="2312" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="2413" end="2426" title="Adobe Systems" label="Adobe Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310" start="2712" end="2717" title="LaTeX" label="LaTeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q796483" start="2861" end="2868" title="DocBook" label="Docbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q475488" start="3089" end="3093" title="EPUB 3" label="EPUB"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3845" end="3857" title="Info (Unix)#List of Info readers" label="info viewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512572" start="4008" end="4011" title="Unix manual" label="man"/>
<link wikidata="Q44571" start="4137" end="4140" title="GNU" label="GNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="4178" end="4187" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="4209" end="4214" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264368" start="4282" end="4291" title="design rationale" label="rationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145976" start="4901" end="4911" title="plain text" label="plain text"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568869" start="4935" end="4949" title="formatted text" label="formatted text"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598" start="5301" end="5312" title="GNU Project" label="GNU Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="5365" end="5391" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439" start="5428" end="5447" title="Richard M. Stallman" label="Richard M. Stallman"/>
<link wikidata="Q709353" start="5535" end="5539" title="info (Unix)" label="Info"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547448" start="5613" end="5617" title="TECO (text editor)" label="TECO"/>
<link wikidata="Q189722" start="5636" end="5641" title="Emacs" label="Emacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237671" start="5717" end="5730" title="David A. Moon" label="David A. Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653376" start="5766" end="5778" title="Lisp machine" label="Lisp Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301" start="5798" end="5801" title="TeX" label="TeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938319" start="5818" end="5833" title="Robert Chassell" label="Robert Chassell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334586" start="5899" end="5909" title="Emacs Lisp" label="Emacs Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965115" start="5945" end="5955" title="Brian Reid (computer scientist)" label="Brian Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152598" start="5963" end="5969" title="Scribe (markup language)" label="Scribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924892" start="6078" end="6087" title="Brian Fox (computer programmer)" label="Brian Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301" start="6197" end="6200" title="TeX" label="TeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518538" start="6203" end="6225" title="List of TeX extensions" label="List of TeX extensions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405904" wikidata="Q1395049" url="?curid=405904" title="Christian Democratic Party (Chile)">
<text>The Christian Democratic Party (, PDC) is a Christian democratic political party in Chile. There have been three Christian Democrat presidents in the past, Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle, Patricio Aylwin, and Eduardo Frei Montalva.

Customarily, the PDC backs specific initiatives in an effort to bridge socialism and laissez-faire capitalism. This economic system has been called &quot;social capitalism&quot; and is heavily influenced by Catholic social teaching or, more generally, Christian ethics. In addition to this objective, the PDC also supports a strong national government while remaining more conservative on social issues. However, after Pinochet&#x27;s military regime ended the PDC embraced more classical economic policies compared to before the dictatorship. The current Secretary-General of the PDC is Gonzalo Duarte. In their latest &quot;Ideological Congress&quot;, the Christian Democrats criticized Chile&#x27;s current economic system and called for a shift toward a social market economy (&quot;economía social de mercado&quot;). The PDC had cooperated with centre-left parties after the end of Pinochet rule.

Except during the military dictatorship (1973–1990) when the congress was shut down the Christian Democrat Party was the largest party in parliament from 1965 to 2001. In 2022, the party has faced a severe internal crisis, with many prominent politicians leaving it.
==History==
The origins of the party go back to the 1930s, when the Conservative Party split between traditionalist and social-Christian sectors. In 1935, the social-Christians split from the Conservative Party to form the &quot;Falange Nacional&quot; (National Phalanx), a more socially oriented and centrist group.

The Falange Nacional showed their centrist policies by supporting leftist Juan Antonio Ríos (Radical Party of Chile) in the 1942 presidential elections but Conservative Eduardo Cruz-Coke in the 1946 elections. Despite the creation of the Falange Nacional, many social-Christians remained in the Conservative Party, which in 1949 split into the Social Christian Conservative Party and the Traditionalist Conservative Party. On July 28, 1957, primarily to back the presidential candidacy of Eduardo Frei Montalva, the Falange Nacional, Social Christian Conservative Party, and other like-minded groups joined to form the Christian Democratic Party. Frei lost the elections, but presented his candidacy again in 1964, this time also supported by the right-wing parties. That year, Frei triumphed with 56% of the vote. Despite right-wing backing for his candidacy, Frei declared his planned social revolution would not be hampered by this support.

In 1970, Radomiro Tomic, leader of the left-wing faction of the party, was nominated to the presidency, but lost to socialist Salvador Allende. The Christian Democrat vote was crucial in the Congressional confirmation of Allende&#x27;s election, since he had received less than the necessary 50%. Although the Christian Democratic Party voted to confirm Allende&#x27;s election, they declared themselves as part opposition because of Allende&#x27;s economic policy. By 1973, Allende had lost the support of most Christian Democrats (except for Tomic&#x27;s left-wing faction), some of whom even began calling for the military to step in. By the time of Pinochet&#x27;s coup, most Christian Democrats applauded the military takeover, believing that the government would quickly be turned over to them by the military. Once it became clear that Pinochet had no intention of relinquishing power, the Christian Democrats went into opposition. During the 1981 plebiscite where Chilean voted to extend Pinochet&#x27;s term for eight more years, Eduardo Frei Montalva led the only authorized opposition rally. When political parties were legalized again, the Christian Democratic Party, together with most left-wing parties, agreed to form the Coalition of Parties for the No, which opposed Pinochet&#x27;s reelection on the 1988 plebiscite. This coalition later became Coalition of Parties for Democracy once Pinochet stepped down from power and held together until 2010s.

===Transition to democracy===

During the first years of the return to democracy, the Christian Democrats enjoyed wide popular support. Presidents Patricio Aylwin and Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle were both from that party, and it was also the largest party in Congress. However, the Christian Democrat Andrés Zaldívar lost the Coalition of Parties for Democracy 1999 primaries to socialist Ricardo Lagos. In the parliamentary elections of 2005, the Christian Democrats lost eight seats in Congress, and the right-wing Independent Democratic Union became the largest party in the legislative body. The Christian Democrats lost its influence to the socialists after Michelle Bachelet became president.

For much of the 1990s and 2000s the party contained three main factions; &quot;Guatones&quot;, &quot;Chascones&quot; and &quot;Colorines&quot; (lit. Fatsos, Disheveleds and Redheads).
 The Colorines owed their name to the hair color of Adolfo Zaldívar and were the right-wing faction of the party. The Chascones led by Gabriel Silber and Gabriel Ascencio were the left-wing faction and the Guatones owed their label for being &quot;close to power&quot; through the figures of Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle and Patricio Aylwin, both of them Presidents of Chile.

In recent years, the Christian Democrats have favored abortion in three cases (when a pregnancy threatens the mother&#x27;s life, when the fetus has little chance of survival, and when the pregnancy is a result of rape), but not in any other instances, and opposes elective abortion.

The Christian Democrats left the Nueva Mayoría coalition on 29 April 2017 and nominated then-party president Carolina Goic as their candidate for the 2017 presidential election. The Nueva Mayoria has struggled to remain united as differences have opened up within the coalition over approaches to a government reform drive, including changes to the labour code and attempted reform of Chile&#x27;s strict abortion laws. In 2020, all Christian Democrats senators voted in favour of same-sex marriage.

In 2020, the party gave its support for &quot;Approve&quot; in the 2020 Chilean national plebiscite.

After the 2019–2021 Chilean protests most of La Nueva Mayoria including the PDC regrouped to form Constituent Unity and participated in the 2021 constitutional convention election (as The Approval List) and the 2021 gubernatorial elections.

After those elections the group renamed to New Social Pact to participate in the 2021 general election, PDC senator Yasna Provoste was chosen as the coalition&#x27;s candidate, coming in 5th place with 11.6% of the vote. After she lost the first round the PDC supported Gabriel Boric for the second round, in which Boric won the election.

After Boric won the election, most of the New Social Pact parties supported joining Boric&#x27;s government, on the other hand the Christian Democrat&#x27;s president, Ximena Rincon, said that the party would be a &quot;constructive opposition&quot; and said that any member joining the government should have to resign to the party. After this the PDC was excluded from the new coalition &quot;Democratic Socialism&quot;.

===2022 crisis===
The official support of the party for the &quot;Approve&quot; option in the 2022 Chilean national plebiscite has led a severe internal division, with various members openly supporting the &quot;Reject&quot; option and subsequent calls for them to be expelled. Some historic figures, like René Cortázar, Soledad Alvear, Gutenberg Martínez and José Pablo Arellano left the party by their own initiative to join Cristián Warnken&#x27;s Amarillos movement. Ximena Rincón and Matías Walker left the party in October 2022 to form the political movement Demócratas together with Carlos Maldonado and others. Also in October, Governor of Santiago Metropolitan Region Claudio Orrego left the party. 

Fuad Chahín, who was president of the party from 2018 to 2021, was suspended from the party in early November 2022.

==Presidents elected under Christian Democratic Party==
* Eduardo Frei Montalva (1964–1970)
* Patricio Aylwin (1990–1994)
* Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle (1994–2000)

==Presidential candidates==
The following is a list of the presidential candidates supported by the Christian Democratic Party. (Information gathered from the Archive of Chilean Elections).

*1958: Eduardo Frei Montalva (lost)
*1964: Eduardo Frei Montalva (won)
*1970: Radomiro Tomic (lost)
*1988 plebiscite: &quot;No&quot; (won)
*1989: Patricio Aylwin (won)
*1993: Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle (won)
*1999: Ricardo Lagos (won)
*2005: Michelle Bachelet (won)
*2009: Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle (lost)
*2013: Michelle Bachelet (won)
*2017: Carolina Goic (lost) Second round support: Alejandro Guillier (lost)
*2021: Yasna Provoste (lost) Second round support: Gabriel Boric Font (won)

== Election results ==
==References==
== Further reading ==

==External links==

*Official web site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1395049" start="4" end="30" title="Christian Democratic Party (Chile)" label="Christian Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="44" end="64" title="Christian democratic" label="Christian democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="65" end="80" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="84" end="89" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q326" start="156" end="179" title="Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle" label="Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q335" start="181" end="196" title="Patricio Aylwin" label="Patricio Aylwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q475" start="202" end="223" title="Eduardo Frei Montalva" label="Eduardo Frei Montalva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="297" end="306" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="311" end="335" title="laissez-faire capitalism" label="laissez-faire capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334344" start="433" end="457" title="Catholic social teaching" label="Catholic social teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665156" start="478" end="494" title="Christian ethics" label="Christian ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704093" start="645" end="676" title="Pinochet dictatorship" label="Pinochet&amp;#x27;s military regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q271857" start="705" end="723" title="classical economic" label="classical economic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="814" end="828" title=":es:Gonzalo Duarte" label="Gonzalo Duarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="984" end="1005" title="social market economy" label="social market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q639673" start="1464" end="1482" title="Conservative Party (Chile)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q820" start="1788" end="1805" title="Juan Antonio Ríos" label="Juan Antonio Ríos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759368" start="1807" end="1829" title="Radical Party (Chile)" label="Radical Party of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q639673" start="1870" end="1882" title="Conservative Party (Chile)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340576" start="1883" end="1900" title="Eduardo Cruz-Coke" label="Eduardo Cruz-Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q475" start="2203" end="2224" title="Eduardo Frei Montalva" label="Eduardo Frei Montalva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550472" start="2248" end="2283" title="Social Christian Conservative Party" label="Social Christian Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025395" start="2668" end="2682" title="Radomiro Tomic" label="Radomiro Tomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q440" start="2785" end="2801" title="Salvador Allende" label="Salvador Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q475" start="3698" end="3719" title="Eduardo Frei Montalva" label="Eduardo Frei Montalva"/>
<link wikidata="Q943126" start="4022" end="4056" title="Coalition of Parties for Democracy" label="Coalition of Parties for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q335" start="4274" end="4289" title="Patricio Aylwin" label="Patricio Aylwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q326" start="4294" end="4317" title="Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle" label="Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600525" start="4424" end="4439" title="Andrés Zaldívar" label="Andrés Zaldívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q943126" start="4449" end="4483" title="Coalition of Parties for Democracy" label="Coalition of Parties for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q331" start="4512" end="4525" title="Ricardo Lagos" label="Ricardo Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q602131" start="4640" end="4668" title="Independent Democratic Union" label="Independent Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q320" start="4786" end="4803" title="Michelle Bachelet" label="Michelle Bachelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q152357" start="4996" end="5004" title="Red hair" label="Redheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q930844" start="5059" end="5074" title="Adolfo Zaldívar" label="Adolfo Zaldívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873569" start="5142" end="5156" title="Gabriel Silber" label="Gabriel Silber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873208" start="5161" end="5177" title="Gabriel Ascencio" label="Gabriel Ascencio"/>
<link wikidata="Q326" start="5299" end="5322" title="Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle" label="Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q335" start="5327" end="5342" title="Patricio Aylwin" label="Patricio Aylwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044837" start="5773" end="5786" title="Carolina Goic" label="Carolina Goic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28754222" start="5814" end="5840" title="2017 Chilean general election" label="2017 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="6145" end="6162" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q75072406" start="6232" end="6264" title="2020 Chilean national plebiscite" label="2020 Chilean national plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q71500435" start="6277" end="6303" title="2019–2021 Chilean protests" label="2019–2021 Chilean protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q14539865" start="6315" end="6328" title="Nueva Mayoría" label="Nueva Mayoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q100144514" start="6365" end="6382" title="Constituent Unity" label="Constituent Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q85868031" start="6407" end="6446" title="2021 Chilean Constitutional Convention election" label="2021 constitutional convention election"/>
<link wikidata="Q100144514" start="6451" end="6468" title="Constituent Unity" label="The Approval List"/>
<link wikidata="Q76763582" start="6478" end="6506" title="2021 Chilean gubernatorial elections" label="2021 gubernatorial elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q109623759" start="6552" end="6567" title="New Social Pact" label="New Social Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q60823510" start="6590" end="6611" title="2021 Chilean general election" label="2021 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571936" start="6625" end="6639" title="Yasna Provoste" label="Yasna Provoste"/>
<link wikidata="Q16297876" start="6779" end="6792" title="Gabriel Boric" label="Gabriel Boric"/>
<link wikidata="Q110638946" start="7238" end="7270" title="Democratic Socialism (Chile)" label="&amp;quot;Democratic Socialism&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q100951960" start="7367" end="7399" title="2022 Chilean national plebiscite" label="2022 Chilean national plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426034" start="7579" end="7592" title="René Cortázar" label="René Cortázar"/>
<link wikidata="Q434756" start="7594" end="7608" title="Soledad Alvear" label="Soledad Alvear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5889966" start="7610" end="7628" title="Gutenberg Martínez" label="Gutenberg Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944460" start="7633" end="7652" title="José Pablo Arellano" label="José Pablo Arellano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5791640" start="7700" end="7716" title="Cristián Warnken" label="Cristián Warnken"/>
<link wikidata="Q114582673" start="7724" end="7742" title="Amarillos por Chile" label="Amarillos movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6169262" start="7744" end="7757" title="Ximena Rincón" label="Ximena Rincón"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006757" start="7762" end="7775" title="Matías Walker" label="Matías Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577323" start="7863" end="7879" title="Carlos Maldonado Curti" label="Carlos Maldonado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131" start="7921" end="7949" title="Santiago Metropolitan Region" label="Santiago Metropolitan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5772063" start="7950" end="7964" title="Claudio Orrego" label="Claudio Orrego"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869979" start="7983" end="7994" title="Fuad Chahín" label="Fuad Chahín"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553195" start="8004" end="8026" title="party leader" label="president of the party"/>
<link wikidata="Q475" start="8158" end="8179" title="Eduardo Frei Montalva" label="Eduardo Frei Montalva"/>
<link wikidata="Q335" start="8194" end="8209" title="Patricio Aylwin" label="Patricio Aylwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q326" start="8224" end="8247" title="Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle" label="Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722543" start="8453" end="8457" title="1958 Chilean presidential election" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q475" start="8459" end="8480" title="Eduardo Frei Montalva" label="Eduardo Frei Montalva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722546" start="8489" end="8493" title="1964 Chilean presidential election" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q475" start="8495" end="8516" title="Eduardo Frei Montalva" label="Eduardo Frei Montalva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115165" start="8524" end="8528" title="1970 Chilean presidential election" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025395" start="8530" end="8544" title="Radomiro Tomic" label="Radomiro Tomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454843" start="8553" end="8568" title="1988 Chilean national plebiscite" label="1988 plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722547" start="8592" end="8596" title="1989 Chilean presidential election" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q335" start="8598" end="8613" title="Patricio Aylwin" label="Patricio Aylwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722548" start="8621" end="8625" title="1993 Chilean presidential election" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q326" start="8627" end="8650" title="Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle" label="Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722551" start="8658" end="8662" title="1999–2000 Chilean presidential election" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q331" start="8664" end="8677" title="Ricardo Lagos" label="Ricardo Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q878748" start="8685" end="8689" title="2005–06 Chilean presidential election" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q320" start="8691" end="8708" title="Michelle Bachelet" label="Michelle Bachelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318815" start="8716" end="8720" title="2009–10 Chilean presidential election" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q326" start="8722" end="8745" title="Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle" label="Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2792011" start="8754" end="8758" title="2013 Chilean presidential election" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q320" start="8760" end="8777" title="Michelle Bachelet" label="Michelle Bachelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28754222" start="8785" end="8789" title="2017 Chilean presidential election" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044837" start="8791" end="8804" title="Carolina Goic" label="Carolina Goic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5665082" start="8834" end="8852" title="Alejandro Guillier" label="Alejandro Guillier"/>
<link wikidata="Q60823510" start="8861" end="8865" title="2021 Chilean presidential election" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571936" start="8867" end="8881" title="Yasna Provoste" label="Yasna Provoste"/>
<link wikidata="Q16297876" start="8911" end="8929" title="Gabriel Boric" label="Gabriel Boric Font"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405905" wikidata="Q1759292" url="?curid=405905" title="Party for Democracy (Chile)">
<text>The Party for Democracy (, PPD), also known as For Democracy () is a centre-left political party in Chile. It states to stand in the traditions of liberal progressivism. It was founded in December 1987 by Ricardo Lagos, who aimed at forming a legal social-democratic party, as the Socialist Party of Chile (PS) remained illegal at the time. The PPD continued to function after the defeat of Pinochet. Until 1997, double membership of PPD and the PS was allowed.

The party nominated, as part of the &quot;Concertación&quot; (Coalition of Parties for Democracy), in the 1999/2000 presidential elections, Ricardo Lagos Escobar, the main leader of the party. He would later win 48.0% of the vote in the first round and was ultimately elected with 51.3% in the second round. At the 2001 legislative election, the party ran as part of the Coalition of Parties for Democracy and won 20 out of 120 seats in the Chamber of Deputies and 3 out of 38 elected seats in the Senate. This changed at the 2005 elections to 21 and 3. In the 2009 elections, it won 18 seats in the Chamber of Deputies and 4 in the Senate.

== Ideology ==
The party&#x27;s ideology can be variously defined as liberal, progressive, liberal-progressive, and social-democrat.

In the first few years of the party, it had difficulty establishing a well-defined ideology, due to the political diversity of its founders, who ranged from communist militants to members of the National Party. Eventually it converged on a combination of social democracy and social liberalism (called progressive liberalism in the early years of the party). Currently, according to its &quot;Declaration of Principles,&quot; the PPD describes itself as &quot;a left[ist] political party, democratic, progressive and [in favor of] parity&quot;.

In 2007, a large part of the party&#x27;s social-liberal wing broke off to form ChilePrimero, which would eventually become the Liberal Party.

== History ==
The Party for Democracy (PPD) was founded on 15 December 1987 as an instrumental political organization whose primary objective was to finish with the military regime and achieve again democracy in Chile by peaceful, political means, taking advantage of the opportunity to mobilize the Chileans who represented the plebiscite by means of which the dictator Augusto Pinochet sought to extend its mandate.

Its founder, Ricardo Lagos, later President of Chile (2000-2006), said in the ceremony of constitution of the party that the only requirements to integrate the ranks of the PPD were: &quot;to be against the institutional system of the regime of the dictator Pinochet because it does not lead to democracy, and in addition want to defeat it by political means&quot;.

People were admitted to the party of various ideologies including socialism, radicalism, social democrats, liberal progressives, left-wing Christians, Mapucists, communists, and young people up to the national student movement of the 1980s opponents of Augusto Pinochet, among them the Movement G-80.

The PPD vigorously pushed to ensure that the &quot;No&quot; option won the 1988 plebiscite, which restored free elections to the nation. Participated in the formation of the &quot;Concertación&quot;, political alliance that has dominated the Chilean government since the end of the military government until 2010, when Sebastián Piñera representing the Coalition for change came to power.

==Election results==

Due to its membership in the Concert of Parties for Democracy, the party has endorsed the candidates of other parties on several occasions, as well as due to the fact that presidential elections in Chile are held using a two-round system.

===Presidential elections===
==See also==
*:Category:Party for Democracy (Chile) politicians

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1759292" start="4" end="23" title="Party for Democracy (Chile)" label="Party for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759292" start="27" end="30" title="Party for Democracy (Chile)" label="PPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759292" start="47" end="60" title="Party for Democracy (Chile)" label="For Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="69" end="80" title="centre-left politics" label="centre-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576379" start="81" end="105" title="list of political parties in Chile" label="political party in Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="147" end="154" title="Social liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="155" end="168" title="progressivism" label="progressivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q331" start="205" end="218" title="Ricardo Lagos" label="Ricardo Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q823648" start="281" end="305" title="Socialist Party of Chile" label="Socialist Party of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q943126" start="525" end="559" title="Concertación" label="Coalition of Parties for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q466956" start="579" end="591" title="president of Chile" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q331" start="603" end="624" title="Ricardo Lagos Escobar" label="Ricardo Lagos Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886244" start="778" end="803" title="2001 Chilean parliamentary election" label="2001 legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q943126" start="834" end="868" title="Coalition of Parties for Democracy" label="Coalition of Parties for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119518" start="904" end="923" title="Chamber of Deputies of Chile" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119458" start="961" end="967" title="Senate of Chile" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q878748" start="989" end="1003" title="2005 Chilean parliamentary election" label="2005 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318815" start="1024" end="1038" title="2009 Chilean parliamentary election" label="2009 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="1174" end="1181" title="Liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="1183" end="1194" title="Progressivism" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="1221" end="1236" title="social-democrat" label="social-democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366524" start="1434" end="1448" title="National Party (Chile, 1966–94)" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="1494" end="1510" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="1515" end="1532" title="social liberalism" label="social liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1865" end="1877" title=":es:ChilePrimero" label="ChilePrimero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885147" start="1913" end="1926" title="Liberal Party of Chile (2013)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q368" start="2300" end="2316" title="Augusto Pinochet" label="Augusto Pinochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q331" start="2361" end="2374" title="Ricardo Lagos" label="Ricardo Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q466956" start="2382" end="2400" title="President of Chile" label="President of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080800" start="2844" end="2864" title="Christian left" label="left-wing Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138554" start="2866" end="2875" title="Popular Unitary Action Movement" label="Mapucists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3001" end="3014" title="Movement G-80" label="Movement G-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q943126" start="3197" end="3209" title="Concertación" label="Concertación"/>
<link wikidata="Q306" start="3336" end="3352" title="Sebastián Piñera" label="Sebastián Piñera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140651" start="3370" end="3390" title="Alliance (Chile)" label="Coalition for change"/>
<link wikidata="Q943126" start="3458" end="3490" title="Concert of Parties for Democracy" label="Concert of Parties for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q645225" start="3601" end="3632" title="Elections in Chile" label="presidential elections in Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="3650" end="3666" title="two-round system" label="two-round system"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3712" end="3761" title=":Category:Party for Democracy (Chile) politicians" label=":Category:Party for Democracy (Chile) politicians"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405908" wikidata="Q117815" url="?curid=405908" title="FUNCINPEC">
<text>The National United Front for an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful and Cooperative Cambodia, commonly referred to as FUNCINPEC, is a royalist political party in Cambodia. Founded in 1981 by Norodom Sihanouk, it began as a resistance movement against the People&#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea (PRK) government. In 1982, it formed a resistance pact with the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea (CGDK), together with the Khmer People&#x27;s National Liberation Front (KPNLF) and the Khmer Rouge. It became a political party in 1992.

FUNCINPEC was one of the signatories of the 1991 Paris Peace Accords, which paved the way for the formation of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC). The party participated in the 1993 general elections organised by UNTAC. It won the elections, and formed a coalition government with the Cambodian People&#x27;s Party (CPP), with which it jointly headed. Norodom Ranariddh, Sihanouk&#x27;s son who had succeeded him as the party president, became First Prime Minister while Hun Sen, who was from the CPP, became Second Prime Minister.

In July 1997, violent clashes occurred between factional forces separately allied to FUNCINPEC and the CPP, leading to Ranariddh&#x27;s ouster from his position as First Prime Minister. Ranariddh subsequently returned from exile in March 1998 and led the party to the 1998 general elections, which was won by CPP with FUNCINPEC as the first runner-up. Subsequently, FUNCINPEC joined CPP again, this time as a junior partner in a coalition government. Ranariddh was appointed as the President of the National Assembly, a post which he held until 2006 when he was ousted from FUNCINPEC by the party&#x27;s former secretary-general Nhek Bun Chhay.

FUNCINPEC saw its share of voters and seats in the national assembly drop over the general elections of 2003, 2008 and 2013, with the party failing to win a single seat in the National Assembly at the 2013 general elections. In January 2015, Ranariddh returned to FUNCINPEC, and was reappointed as the party&#x27;s president. The current acting president is Norodom Ranariddh&#x27;s son, Prince Norodom Chakravuth.

==Name==

&quot;FUNCINPEC&quot; is a French acronym for &quot;Front uni national pour un Cambodge indépendant, neutre, pacifique, et coopératif&quot;, which translates as &quot;National United Front for an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful, and Cooperative Cambodia&quot; in English. It is commonly known by its acronym, used in the form of a word.

==History==

===1980s===

On 21 March 1981, Sihanouk founded FUNCINPEC, a royalist resistance movement, from Pyongyang, North Korea. Over the next few months, Sihanouk forged closer ties with the Chinese government as he saw the need of gathering resistance armies sympathetic to FUNCINPEC, such as MOULINAKA (Movement for the National Liberation of Kampuchea). He had resisted earlier attempts between 1979 till 1981 by the Chinese government for him to forge political alliances with the Khmer Rouge, whom he had accused of killing his own family members during the Cambodian genocide. He reconsidered his position over allying with the Khmer Rouge, with whom they shared a common goal of ousting the People&#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea (PRK) government, which was under Vietnam&#x27;s influence. In September 1981, Sihanouk met with Khmer People&#x27;s National Liberation Front (KPNLF) leader Son Sann and Khmer Rouge leader Khieu Samphan to establish the framework for a coalition government-in-exile. Subsequently, on 22 June 1982, the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea (CGDK) was formed, and Sihanouk was made its President.

In September 1982, (ANS) was formed by the merger of several pro-FUNCINPEC resistance armies, including MOULINAKA. Ties between FUNCINPEC with the KPNLF and Khmer Rouge remained tenuous. On the one hand, Son Sann publicly criticised Sihanouk on several occasions, while on the other hand, the Khmer Rouge army periodically attacked the ANS, prompting Sihanouk in threatening to quit as CGDK&#x27;s president on at least two occasions in June 1983 and July 1985. In December 1987, Sihanouk met with the Prime Minister of the PRK government, Hun Sen in France. The following year in July 1988, the first informal meeting was held in Jakarta, Indonesia between the four warring Cambodian factions consisting of FUNCINPEC, Khmer Rouge, KPNLF and the PRK government. The meetings were held with a view to end the Cambodian–Vietnamese War, and two additional meetings were later held which became known as the Jakarta Informal Meetings (JIM).

In August 1989, Sihanouk stepped down as the President of FUNCINPEC and was succeeded by Nhiek Tioulong. At the same time, Ranariddh was made the Secretary-General of the party. In September 1990, the four warring Cambodian factions reached an agreement to form the Supreme National Council (SNC), an organisation designed to oversee Cambodia&#x27;s sovereign affairs in the United Nations on an interim basis. The SNC consisted of twelve members from the four warring Cambodian factions, with two seats going to FUNCINPEC. Sihanouk negotiated to become the 13th member of the SNC, a proposal which Hun Sen initially rejected, but later acceded after Sihanouk relinquished his FUNCINPEC party membership in July 1991. Sihanouk was elected as the chairman of the SNC, and the SNC seats under FUNCINPEC&#x27;s quota were filled up by Ranariddh and Sam Rainsy. When the Paris Peace Accords were signed in October 1991, Ranariddh represented the party as its signatory.

===1993 elections===
Ranariddh was elected as FUNCINPEC&#x27;s president in February 1992. Subsequently, in August 1992, FUNCINPEC formally registered itself as a political party under the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) administration, and started opening party offices across Cambodia the following month. Party offices and officials were harassed and attacked by State of Cambodia (SOC) secret police and military intelligence officials. Between November 1992 and January 1993, 18 FUNCINPEC officials were killed and another 22 officials wounded, prompting Ranariddh to call on UNTAC to intervene and end the violence. UNTAC responded by setting up a special prosecutor&#x27;s office to investigate cases of political violence, but faced resistance from the SOC police in arresting and prosecuting offenders. Most of the violent attacks occurred in the Kampong Cham and Battambang provinces, whereby the governor in the latter province, Ung Sami was found to have been directly involved in the attacks. When UNTAC allowed election campaigns to start in April 1993, FUNCINPEC held few election rallies due to intimidations from SOC police. They campaigned through low-key methods, such as using pick-up trucks to travel around the country and broadcast political messages as well as sending party workers to visit villages in the countryside.

FUNCINPEC had 400,000 members by the time UNTAC allowed political parties to start election campaigns on 7 April 1993. They campaigned on the party&#x27;s historical relations with Sihanouk as well as Ranariddh&#x27;s blood ties to his father. Party supporters wore yellow T-shirts depicting Sihanouk, and made rallying calls that &quot;a vote for FUNCINPEC was a vote for Sihanouk&quot;. Sihanouk remained popular with the majority of the Cambodian electorate, and the Cambodian People&#x27;s Party (CPP), the successor party to the PRK and SOC governments, was aware of such voter sentiments. In their editorials, the CPP emphasised their efforts to bring about Sihanouk&#x27;s return to the country in 1991, as well as policy parallels between the CPP and the Sangkum, the political organisation which Sihanouk had led in the 1950s and 1960s.

Voting was carried out between 23 and 28 May 1993 and FUNCINPEC secured 45.47% of all valid votes cast, which entitled them to take up 58 out of 120 seats in the constituent assembly FUNCINPEC obtained the most seats in Kampong Cham, Kandal and Phnom Penh. The CPP came in second place and secured 38.23% of valid votes, and were unhappy with the outcome of the elections. On 3 June 1993, CPP leaders Chea Sim and Hun Sen met with Sihanouk to propose that he should lead a new interim government, and also demanding power-sharing for the CPP with FUNCINPEC on a fifty-fifty basis. Sihanouk agreed to the CPP&#x27;s proposal and announced the formation of an interim government that evening. Ranariddh and other FUNCINPEC leaders were not consulted over Sihanouk&#x27;s proposal, and the announcement caught them by surprise. Ranariddh sent a fax to his father to disapprove of the CPP&#x27;s proposal, and the United States expressed a similar stance. Sihanouk publicly rescinded his earlier announcement of the interim government&#x27;s formation the following day.

On 10 June 1993, Chakrapong led a secession movement and threatened to form a breakaway state consisting of seven eastern Cambodian provinces. Chakrapong had by then joined the CPP was supported by the interior minister, General Sin Song and Hun Sen&#x27;s older brother, Hun Neng. The secession movement pressured Ranariddh to accede to CPP&#x27;s request for power-sharing, and Hun Sen subsequently persuaded his brother to drop the secession movement. Four days later, the first constituent assembly meeting was held which saw an interim government being formed, with Hun Sen and Ranariddh serving as co-Prime Ministers in a dual Prime Ministership arrangement. There were a total of thirty-three cabinet posts available, while the CPP got sixteen, FUNCINPEC got thirteen and the other coalition partners got the four remaining posts available. When Sihanouk was re-instated as the King of Cambodia on 24 September 1993, he formalised the power-sharing arrangement by appointing Ranariddh as the First Prime Minister and Hun Sen as the Second Prime Minister in the new government.

===Ranariddh&#x27;s co-premiership===

The new government shrunk the number of cabinet portfolios to 23, equally divided between FUNCINPEC and CPP. Each took eleven ministries under their charge while the BLDP was allocated one cabinet post. The CPP gave away half of all provincial governor posts available to FUNCINPEC, but kept most of the local government posts consisting of district and commune chiefs as well as civil service positions to its party appointees. Ranariddh developed a good working relationship with Hun Sen, which was maintained until March 1996. The UN secretary-general&#x27;s representative to Cambodia, Benny Widyono noted that while both of them appeared together in public functions, Hun Sen held more political sway as compared to Ranariddh in the government. In October 1994, Ranariddh and Hun Sen sacked Sam Rainsy as FUNCINPEC&#x27;s finance minister after he repeatedly leaked confidential documents and corruption in a public manner. Rainsy&#x27;s sacking upset Norodom Sirivudh, the secretary-general for FUNCINPEC and Minister of Foreign Affairs to resign from his ministerial post at the same time. Rainsy continued to criticise the government in his capacity as a Member of Parliament (MP), and Ranariddh introduced a motion to expel Rainsy from the National Assembly and FUNCINPEC.

In October 1995, Sirivudh talked about his desire to assassinate Hun Sen during an interview with So Naro, who was the secretary-general of the Khmer Journalists Association. A few days later Ung Phan, a FUNCINPEC minister who had close ties with Hun Sen, called Sirivudh and accused him of getting involved in receiving kickbacks for printing Cambodian passports. Sirivudh angrily denied the accusations and threatened to kill Hun Sen over the phone. The phone conversation was recorded, and Ung Phan passed the recorded phone conversation to CPP co-minister of the interior Sar Kheng. Hun Sen learnt of the conversation and became enraged at Sirivudh&#x27;s comments, and pressured Ranariddh and other FUNCINPEC ministers to strip his parliamentary immunity so that he could be arrested. Sirivudh was arrested and briefly placed in detention, but subsequently exiled to France when Sihanouk intervened in the case.

The following January, FUNCINPEC held a closed-door seminar at Sihanoukville, attended by selected party members close to Ranariddh. The attendees expressed concern of CPP&#x27;s attempts to dominate over FUNCINPEC, and a resolution was adopted to build up the military strength of pro-FUNCINPEC forces within the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces (RCAF). At the same time, party members had become increasingly resentful at Ranariddh for not getting party posts despite campaigning for the party in the 1993 elections. When the party congress was held on 22 March 1996, Ranariddh criticized the CPP, complaining over a range of issues that ranged from delays in allocating local government posts to FUNCINPEC officials, to the lack of executive authority of FUNCINPEC cabinet ministers vis-a-vis their CPP counterparts. Ranariddh threatened to dissolve the National Assembly and hold elections, should FUNCINPEC&#x27;s concerns be ignored. Subsequently, the CPP issue an official statement to protest Ranariddh&#x27;s criticisms.

Hun Sen developed a belligerent attitude toward Ranariddh and FUNCINPEC, calling him a &quot;real dog&quot; at a CPP party meeting in June 1996. Several months later in January 1997, Ranariddh led FUNCINPEC to forge a political alliance, the National United Front (NUF), with the Khmer Nation Party, Buddhist Liberal Democratic Party and the Khmer Neutral Party. The CPP condemned NUF&#x27;s formation, and proceeded to form a rival political coalition consisting of political parties ideologically aligned to the former Khmer Republic. Tensions between FUNCINPEC and the CPP worsened even further when armed clashes between Royal Cambodian Armed Forces (RCAF) troops separately aligned to FUNCINPEC and CPP broke out at Battambang Province on 10 February 1997. On that day, troops under the command of the FUNCINPEC provincial deputy governor, Serey Kosal encountered a convoy of 200 pro-CPP troops who were travelling en route to Samlout. After Serey Kosal&#x27;s troops disarmed the pro-CPP troops, news of the incident spread to nearby areas and fighting soon broke out between troops from both rival factions, leaving at least 21 troops dead.

On 14 April 1997, Ung Phan announced that he and twelve other FUNCINPEC MPs had decided to break away from the party. Hun Sen applauded the move, pledging support for any initiative within the party to oust Ranariddh as its president. Subsequently, FUNCINPEC&#x27;s steering committee quickly moved to woo back the defecting MPs, successfully getting back eight of them. At the same time, they expelled the five remaining MPs who refused to comply, including Ung Phan. Subsequently, on 1 June 1997, the renegade MPs convened a rival party congress dubbed as &quot;FUNCINPEC II&quot;, which was attended by 800 people. At the congress, the attendees voted for Toan Chhay, the governor of Siem Reap province, as its new president. At the same time, the attendees accused Ranariddh of gross incompetence, who in return declared the congress as illegal and accused the CPP of interfering in the party&#x27;s affairs.

===Ranariddh&#x27;s ouster and 1998 elections===
On 5 July 1997, RCAF troops separately aligned to CPP and FUNCINPEC fought in Phnom Penh, leading to the latter&#x27;s defeat the following day. Ranariddh, who had sought refuge in France just two days before the fighting was labelled as a &quot;criminal&quot; and &quot;traitor&quot; by Hun Sen for attempting to &quot;destabilise Cambodia&quot;. Subsequently, on 11 July 1997, Loy Sim Chheang, FUNCINPEC&#x27;s First Vice President of the National Assembly, proposed for another FUNCINPEC MP to replace Ranariddh as the First Prime Minister. Five days later, FUNCINPEC&#x27;s foreign minister Ung Huot was nominated to take his place. When a National Assembly session was held on 6 August 1997, Ung Huot&#x27;s appointment was endorsed by 90 MPs, consisting of CPP MPs and FUNCINPEC MPs who have switched allegiances to Hun Sen. At the same time, 29 FUNCINPEC MPs who remained loyal to Ranariddh, boycotted the session.

Shortly after Ung Huot&#x27;s appointment, Toan Chhay who had proclaimed himself as the president of the FUNCINPEC at a rival congress in June 1997, jockeyed for control over the party leadership with Nady Tan, another FUNCINPEC leader who remained sympathetic to Ranariddh. In October 1997, FUNCINPEC supporters allied to Nady Tan proposed renaming the party to &quot;Sangkum Thmei&quot;, hoping to capitalise on the electorate&#x27;s popularity with the Sangkum Reastr Niyum, Sihanouk&#x27;s political party when he was in power. While FUNCINPEC did not adopt a new name, the name &quot;Sangkum Thmei&quot; was adopted by a splinter party, led by Loy Sim Chheang who later left FUNCINPEC by February 1998. At the same time, Ung Huot followed suit, and formed another splinter party known as &quot;Reastr Niyum&quot;.

In early March 1998, a military court convicted Ranariddh guilty of smuggling weapons and causing instability to the country, sentencing him to a total of 35 years of imprisonment. After ASEAN and the European Union stepped in to condemn the sentences, Ranariddh was pardoned of all charges, allowing him to return to Cambodia on 30 March 1998 to prepare for the general elections scheduled to be held in July 1998, allowing Ranariddh to spearhead FUNCINPEC&#x27;s election campaign. When campaigning for started in late June 1998, FUNCINPEC focused on pro-monarchial sentiments, improving living standards and anti-Vietnamese rhetoric. The party faced numerous obstacles, including loss of access to television and radio channels which had come under CPP&#x27;s exclusive control following the 1997 clashes, and the difficulties of its supporters in getting to party rallies. When the results were announced on 5 August 1998, FUNCINPEC secured 31.7% of all valid votes, which translates to 43 seats in the National Assembly, lagging behind the CPP which polled 41.4% of the votes and secured 64 seats.

As the CPP required a two-thirds majority in the National Assembly to form a government, it offered FUNCINPEC and the Sam Rainsy Party (SRP), which had come in third place in the elections, to become joint partners of a coalition government. Both Ranariddh and Rainsy, now the leader of his eponymous party refused, and filed complaints against election irregularities to the National Election Committee (NEC). When the NEC turned down their complaints, they organised public protests between 24 August until 7 September 1998, when riot police stepped in to break them up. Subsequently, Sihanouk meditated two meetings in September and November 1998, leading to a political deal being struck between CPP and FUNCINPEC in the second meeting. The deal provided for another coalition government between CPP and FUNCINPEC, with the latter as a junior coalition partner controlling the tourism, justice, education, health, culture and women&#x27;s-cum-veteran&#x27;s affairs portfolios. In exchange for FUNCINPEC&#x27;s support for Hun Sen to become the sole Prime Minister, Ranariddh was made the President of the National Assembly.

===Continued co-operation with CPP and Ranariddh&#x27;s sacking===
After becoming the President of the National Assembly, Ranariddh supported the creation of the Cambodian Senate, which was formally established in March 1999. The senate had a total of 61 seats, of which 21 seats were allocated to FUNCINPEC, based on proportional representation vis-a-vis the National Assembly. Over the next few years until 2002, FUNCINPEC maintained cordial ties with the CPP, to which Ranariddh described it as an &quot;eternal partner&quot; during FUNCINPEC&#x27;s party congress in March 2001. Subsequently, in July 2001, Ranariddh welcomed Sirivudh back into the FUNCINPEC and reappointed him as its secretary-general. The following month, FUNCINPEC replaced several cabinet ministers, governors, and deputy governors from its party. As the deputy secretary general of FUNCINPEC, Nhek Bun Chhay saw it, the reshuffles were done to increase the voters&#x27; confidence in the party and prepare for the commune council elections and general elections, which were scheduled to take place in 2002 and 2003 respectively.

When the commune elections were held in February 2002, FUNCINPEC performed poorly, winning control over 10 out of a total of 1,621 communes across Cambodia. Subsequently, rifts within the party boiled into the open as Khan Savoeun, a Deputy Commander-in-chief of the RCAF, accused its co-Minister of the Interior, You Hockry of practising nepotism and corruption. At the same time, Hang Dara and Norodom Chakrapong – the latter had returned to FUNCINPEC in March 1999 – formed their own splinter parties and took along a large number of FUNCINPEC party members. A year later in July 2003, The general elections were held, and took 20.8% of the votes, which entitled them to 26 seats in the National Assembly. While the CPP won the election, it still lacked the constitutional requirement of having a two-thirds majority on its own in forming a new government without the support of other coalition partners.

Subsequently, in August 2003, Ranariddh and Rainsy joined hands once again, forming a political alliance known as the &quot;Alliance of Democrats&quot;. While the AD agreed to the idea of a coalition government between the CPP, FUNCINPEC and Rainsy&#x27;s SRP, they also called for Hun Sen to step down as Prime Minister, and reforming the NEC, which the AD claimed that it was filled with CPP&#x27;s appointees. Hun Sen balked at accepting AD&#x27;s demands, leading to several months of political stalemate. During this time, several party activists from FUNCINPEC and SRP were killed, purportedly by henchmen linked to the CPP. At the same time, several FUNCINPEC officials have obtained loans from CPP-linked businessmen which they had used for financing their own election campaigns. These officials lobbied Ranariddh into accepting the idea of a CPP-FUNCINPEC coalition government so as to secure government positions and repay their loans.

Ranariddh eventually acceded in June 2004, walking out of his political alliance with Rainsy and agreed to the idea of a CPP-FUNCINPEC coalition government with Hun Sen remaining in his position as Prime Minister. At the same time, Hun Sen coaxed Ranariddh into supporting a constitutional amendment known as a &quot;package vote&quot;, which required MPs to support legislation and ministerial appointments by an open show of hands. While Ranariddh acquiesced to Hun Sen&#x27;s demand, the &quot;package vote&quot; amendment was opposed by the SRP, Sihanouk and CPP President Chea Sim. Ranariddh&#x27;s decision to join hands with the CPP was criticised by many FUNCINPEC leaders such as Mu Sochua, subsequently leading to their resignation from the party. On 2 March 2006, the National Assembly passed a constitutional amendment which required only a simple majority of parliamentarians to support a government, instead of the two-thirds majority that was previously stipulated. After the amendment was passed, Hun Sen abruptly fired Norodom Sirivudh and Nhek Bun Chhay, who were FUNCINPEC&#x27;s co-minister of interior and co-minister of defense. Ranariddh protested the dismissals, resigning as the President of the National Assembly and left Cambodia for France.

After Ranariddh&#x27;s departure, FUNCINPEC splintered into two camps – one camp by members loyal to Ranariddh, while another camp consisted of members that were allied to Nhek Bun Chhay, who by now had become the party&#x27;s secretary-general and closely associated with Hun Sen. Hun Sen started attacking Ranariddh, accusing the latter of eloping with Ouk Phalla, a former Apsara dancer in getting her own friends and family members into government posts. At the same time, party leaders from both rival camps started quarreling publicly, with Serey Kosal, a FUNCINPEC minister seen to be allied to Ranariddh, accusing Nhek Bun Chhay of attempting to topple Ranariddh. When an extraordinary congress was held on 18 October 2006, Ranariddh was dismissed as FUNCINPEC&#x27;s president, who was in turn replaced by his brother-in-law, Keo Puth Rasmey. Nhek Bun Chhay justified Ranariddh&#x27;s ouster on the grounds of his deteriorating relations with Hun Sen as well as his practice of spending prolonged periods of time overseas.

===Interregnum years===

On 9 November 2006, Nhek Bun Chhay filed a lawsuit accusing Ranariddh of pocketing $3.6 million from the sale of its headquarters to the French embassy in 2005. Within days, Ranariddh returned to Cambodia, and announced the formation of the Norodom Ranariddh Party (NRP) which he positioned it as an opposition party vis-a-vis the CPP and FUNCINPEC. In March 2007 Ranariddh, who feared the prospect of imprisonment from the embezzlement suit, left Cambodia. Subsequently, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court ruled in Nhek Bun Chhay&#x27;s favour, ruling Ranariddh guilty and sentencing the latter to 18 months of imprisonment. In October 2007, FUNCINPEC endorsed Norodom Arunrasmy, the wife of Keo Puth Rasmey, as the party&#x27;s candidate for the post of Prime Minister in the general elections slated to be held in 2008. At the same time, Nhek Bun Chhay mooted the possibility of getting back Ranariddh into FUNCINPEC, fearing that the party might have lost its popularity following Ranariddh&#x27;s ouster.

When the general elections were held in July 2008, FUNCINPEC won 2 seats in the National Assembly as most of the party&#x27;s supporters voted for the CPP, which won the elections and secured 90 seats in the National Assembly. As a result of its losses incurred in the general election, the CPP took over ministerial positions which were formerly held by FUNCINPEC MPs since 2004, although it still allowed Nhek Bun Chhay to remain in his position as Deputy Prime Minister, while 32 senior party members were appointed as secretary-of-state and undersecretary-of-state positions. In the next few months after the elections, the &quot;Phnom Penh Post&quot; reported that at least 10 percent of its members defected to the CPP, including its former ministers Pou Sothirak and Sun Chhanthol. In February 2009, FUNCINPEC signed an agreement with the NRP to cooperate for the commune council elections that was slated to take place in May 2009. When the elections took place in that month, the FUNCINPEC-NRP alliance only secured less than 0.1% of all votes cast for the provincial, municipal and district-level seats.

Both FUNCINPEC and NRP held tentative discussions on the possibility of a party merger in June 2009 and April 2010, with both parties agreeing an electoral alliance in June 2010 as a first step toward an eventual merger. In December 2010, Ranariddh publicly for FUNCINPEC and NRP to merge, suggesting that the new party borne out of the merger be named &quot;FUNCINPEC 81&quot;, with &quot;81&quot; as a reference point to the year which Sihanouk founded FUNCINPEC in 1981. Sihanouk quickly distanced himself from any association with the party, and posted a website on his website iterating his unequivocal support for Hun Sen and the CPP government. In response, Ranariddh pledged that he would similarly support Hun Sen should the party merger be realised. Nhek Bun Chhay balked at Ranariddh&#x27;s suggestion, saying that the party merger would cause &quot;difficulties&quot; with the party&#x27;s continued partnership with the CPP, while the party issued an official statement rejecting Ranariddh&#x27;s proposal.

In April 2011, Nhek Bun Chhay was elected as the party&#x27;s president, replacing Keo Puth Rasmey who in turn was appointed the party&#x27;s chairperson. Thirteen months later, Nhek Bun Chhay and Ranariddh signed an agreement to merge NRP into FUNCINPEC, which provided for Ranariddh to become FUNCINPEC&#x27;s president with Nhek Bun Chhay as his deputy. The agreement was brokered by Hun Sen, who wanted both parties to reunite. The merger agreement fell apart as Nhek Bun Chhay and Ranariddh accused each other of thinking about supporting other opposition parties. Subsequently, in March 2013, Nhek Bun Chhay was succeeded by Norodom Arunrasmy as the party&#x27;s president, who in turn resumed his former role as the party&#x27;s secretary-general. When general elections were held in July 2013, FUNCINPEC suffered defeat as it lost its remaining two seats which it held in the National Assembly. In turn, Nhek Bun Chhay relinquished his Deputy Prime Minister position and was made a government adviser, although the CPP-led government appointed 28 FUNCINPEC members as undersecretaries of state.

===Ranariddh&#x27;s return===

In early January 2015, Ranariddh expressed his intent to return to FUNCINPEC. At the party congress held on 19 January 2015, Ranariddh was reappointed as FUNCINPEC president, succeeding Arunrasmy who was appointed as its first vice-president, while Nhek Bun Chhay was appointed as second vice-president. Rifts between Nhek Bun Chhay and Ranariddh quickly surfaced as the both of them sparred with each other over the right to use the party stamp and the appointment of Say Hak as the party&#x27;s secretary general. Ranariddh eventually gained the upper hand, and Say Hak&#x27;s appointment was reaffirmed at another party congress held in March 2015. He also managed to convince party delegates present at the congress to adopt a new party logo. At the same time, Ranariddh appointed four more vice-presidents to the party&#x27;s executive committee, namely You Hockry, Por Bun Sreu, Nuth Sokhom and Nhep Bun Chin.

In July 2015, FUNCINPEC announced the formation of the Cambodian Royalist Youth Movement, a youth organisation aimed at garnering electoral support for the party from younger voters. Meanwhile, tension persisted between Nhek Bun Chhay and Ranariddh, which erupted into a public spat, as Ranariddh threatened to expelled Nhek Bun Chhay who in turn, accused the party president of holding a grudge against him. Subsequently, on 3 February 2016, Nhek Bun Chhay announced that he was quitting the party, and went on to form his new party, the Khmer National United Party (KNUP). The KNUP adopted a logo which was similar to a former logo of FUNCINPEC, featuring the Cambodian Independence Monument. The secretary-general, Say Hak accepted Nhek Bun Chhay&#x27;s resignation, while at the same time challenged KNUP&#x27;s use of its new logo as he lodged a successful complaint with the interior ministry.

FUNCINPEC declared on 1 June 2017 that it is open to legalizing same-sex marriage. The party came runners-up to the Cambodian People&#x27;s Party in the 2018 general election but did not win any seats in a vote described by multiple observers as a &quot;formality&quot;.

==Military==
FUNCINPEC had its own military forces, which was first known as the (ANS) when it was formed on 4 September 1982. The ANS was an amalgamation of several armed resistance movements that have pledged alliances with Sihanouk. They consisted of MOULINAKA, Kleang Moeung, Oddar Tus and Khmer Angkor, giving the ANS a combined strength of 7,000 troops. In Tam, a former Prime Minister of the Khmer Republic, was appointed as the Commander-in-chief of the ANS in its founding year. In the initial years of after its formation, the ANS received weapons and equipment from China, as well as medical supplies and combat training for its troops from Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand. At the same time, the ANS regularly faced attacks from the Khmer Rouge forces until 1987, suffering heavy casualties as a result.

In March 1985, Sihanouk appointed one of his sons, Norodom Chakrapong as the deputy chief-of-staff of ANS. The following January, Sihanouk appointed another son, Norodom Ranariddh as the ANS chief-of-staff. Ranariddh was also made the Commander-in-chief of the ANS, replacing In Tam. When the Paris Peace Accords were signed in 1991, the ANS had a total of 17,500 troops under its command, although it was reduced to 14,000 after the UNTAC attempted a demobilisation exercise that lasted between May and September 1992. In 1993, the ANS was amalgamated into the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces (RCAF), together with the Cambodian People&#x27;s Armed Forces (CPAF) and KPNLF armed forces, under UNTAC supervision. Troops from each of the three armies retained respective factional loyalties to their former resistance affiliations. The ex-ANS troops came under the command of General Nhek Bun Chhay, who served as the deputy chief of staff for the RCAF between 1993 and 1997.

In the years between 1993 till 1996, the Cambodian defence ministry attempted to integrate the different factions together, but were unsuccessful. In a dossier written by Nhek Bun Chhay around mid-1997, there were 80,800 pro-FUNCINPEC troops, which were divided into 11 battalions across the country. Nhek also express concern of the inferior troop strength of the pro-FUNCINPEC forces, as they were slightly outnumbered compared to 90,000 pro-CPP troops. In November 1996, armed skirmishes occurred between RCAF troops separately aligned to CPP and FUNCINPEC, after a pro-CPP general, Keo Pong accused a pro-FUNCINPEC general, Serey Kosal of attempting to kill him, who in turn accused Keo Pong of recruiting Khmer Rouge defectors into his ranks. More armed skirmishes broke out until February 1997, leaving 14 pro-CPP and 2 pro-FUNCINPEC troops wounded. Subsequently, Ke Kim Yan, the chief-of-staff of the RCAF stepped in to meditate the conflict, and a directive was issued to prohibit movement of troops without the explicit permission of the government. In late March 1997, the two co-defense ministers, Tea Banh of the CPP and Tea Chamrath of FUNCINPEC, together with Ke Kim Yan and Nhek Bun Chhay formed a bipartisan defence committee was formed to prevent the RCAF from getting embroiled into the political conflict between Ranariddh and Hun Sen.

While the defence committee formed, the Cambodian media reported continued unusual troop movements positioning themselves in Phnom Penh, and minor skirmishes between troops from both sides occurred sporadically until June 1997. On 4 July 1997, Nhek Bun Chhay signed a military pact with the Khmer Rouge at Anlong Veng, prompting pro-CPP troops to strike their pro-FUNCINPEC counterparts the following day. Violent clashes erupted between pro-CPP and pro-FUNCINPEC forces at FUNCINPEC headquarters, Pochentong Airport and Ranariddh&#x27;s residence in Phnom Penh. The pro-FUNCINPEC forces, led by Nhek Bun Chhay initially gained an advantage as they were able to control up to half of the city, but were soon overwhelmed and defeated the following day after pro-CPP forces sent in additional troops. Over the next three days, pro-CPP troops arrested and several at least 33 pro-FUNCINPEC senior military officers. Among those who were executed included Ly Seng Hong, deputy chief-of-staff of RCAF; Ho Sok, secretary of state of the Interior Ministry and Chao Sambath, deputy chief of the espionage and military intelligence department of RCAF.

In subsequent days after the clashes, pro-CPP troops continued their military offensives against pro-FUNCINPEC troops in the northwestern parts of Cambodia, which controlled the towns of Sisophon, Banteay Meanchey and Poipet. The pro-FUNCINPEC troops, who were outmatched against their pro-CPP counterparts, retreated to O Smach in Oddar Meanchey Province, where they held out against pro-CPP troops which continued military offensives against them. At O Smach, pro-FUNCINPEC forces met the Khmer Rouge forces led by Khieu Samphan, who proclaimed Nhek Bun Chhay as the chief-of-staff of the resistance forces. Fighting continued between pro-CPP and pro-FUNCINPEC troops until February 1998, when both sides agreed to a ceasefire brokered by the Japanese government. After general elections were held in July 1998, Nhek Bun Chhay called for the 20,000 pro-FUNCINPEC forces to be reintegrated into the RCAF. Subsequently, Nhek Bun Chhay left O Smach, returned to Phnom Penh and was appointed as a senator. Khan Savoeun, a former subordinate of Nhek Bun Chhay, was subsequently appointed as one of the four deputy commander-in-chief of the RCAF in February 1999.

==List of party presidents==

==Select election results==

===General===
===Communal===
===Senatorial===
==See also ==
*:Category:FUNCINPEC politicians

==References==

==Bibliography==
===Books===
*
*
*
*
*

===Reports===
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q117815" start="4" end="88" title="FUNCINPEC" label="National United Front for an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful and Cooperative Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117815" start="114" end="123" title="FUNCINPEC" label="FUNCINPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q943197" start="130" end="138" title="royalist" label="royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="158" end="166" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160318" start="187" end="203" title="Norodom Sihanouk" label="Norodom Sihanouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q138796" start="219" end="238" title="resistance movement" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q867778" start="251" end="286" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785731" start="351" end="395" title="Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea" label="Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051895" start="422" end="467" title="Khmer People&amp;#x27;s National Liberation Front" label="Khmer People&amp;#x27;s National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="484" end="495" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15092854" start="579" end="603" title="1991 Paris Peace Accords" label="1991 Paris Peace Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q593662" start="650" end="699" title="United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia" label="United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025150" start="739" end="761" title="1993 Cambodian general election" label="1993 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q769308" start="847" end="876" title="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q381817" start="914" end="931" title="Norodom Ranariddh" label="Norodom Ranariddh"/>
<link wikidata="Q57788" start="1033" end="1040" title="Hun Sen" label="Hun Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002716" start="1109" end="1124" title="1997 clashes in Cambodia" label="violent clashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025194" start="1363" end="1385" title="1998 Cambodian general election" label="1998 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q108739843" start="1577" end="1611" title="List of Presidents of the National Assembly of Cambodia" label="President of the National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023348" start="1724" end="1738" title="Nhek Bun Chhay" label="Nhek Bun Chhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234896" start="1917" end="1934" title="National Assembly of Cambodia" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586971" start="1942" end="1964" title="2013 Cambodian general election" label="2013 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="2201" end="2208" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="2613" end="2622" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="2624" end="2635" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326802" start="2803" end="2812" title="Moulinaka" label="MOULINAKA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="2994" end="3005" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885072" start="3072" end="3090" title="Cambodian genocide" label="Cambodian genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q867778" start="3207" end="3242" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051895" start="3340" end="3385" title="Khmer People&amp;#x27;s National Liberation Front" label="Khmer People&amp;#x27;s National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q160027" start="3401" end="3409" title="Son Sann" label="Son Sann"/>
<link wikidata="Q379203" start="3433" end="3446" title="Khieu Samphan" label="Khieu Samphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785731" start="3546" end="3590" title="Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea" label="Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q57788" start="4188" end="4195" title="Hun Sen" label="Hun Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="4279" end="4286" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="4288" end="4297" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q635533" start="4456" end="4480" title="Cambodian–Vietnamese War" label="Cambodian–Vietnamese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339377" start="4675" end="4689" title="Nhiek Tioulong" label="Nhiek Tioulong"/>
<link wikidata="Q656817" start="5432" end="5442" title="Sam Rainsy" label="Sam Rainsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15092854" start="5453" end="5472" title="1991 Paris Peace Accords" label="Paris Peace Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q593662" start="5742" end="5791" title="United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia" label="United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5945" end="5962" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea#Transition" label="State of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142258" start="6435" end="6447" title="Kampong Cham Province" label="Kampong Cham"/>
<link wikidata="Q748336" start="6452" end="6462" title="Battambang" label="Battambang"/>
<link wikidata="Q769308" start="7395" end="7424" title="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401103" start="7688" end="7695" title="Sangkum" label="Sangkum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234896" start="7934" end="7954" title="National Assembly of Cambodia" label="constituent assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q466031" start="8006" end="8012" title="Kandal Province" label="Kandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850" start="8017" end="8027" title="Phnom Penh" label="Phnom Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068666" start="8173" end="8181" title="Chea Sim" label="Chea Sim"/>
<link wikidata="Q42298246" start="9725" end="9741" title="King of Cambodia" label="King of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="10268" end="10284" title="local government" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234896" start="11213" end="11230" title="National Assembly of Cambodia" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150274" start="11823" end="11832" title="Sar Kheng" label="Sar Kheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207676" start="12228" end="12241" title="Sihanoukville (city)" label="Sihanoukville"/>
<link wikidata="Q928226" start="12479" end="12507" title="Royal Cambodian Armed Forces" label="Royal Cambodian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="12834" end="12850" title="local government" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984256" start="13492" end="13525" title="Buddhist Liberal Democratic Party" label="Buddhist Liberal Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054184" start="13713" end="13727" title="Khmer Republic" label="Khmer Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q928226" start="13817" end="13845" title="Royal Cambodian Armed Forces" label="Royal Cambodian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q810923" start="13913" end="13932" title="Battambang Province" label="Battambang Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385818" start="14124" end="14131" title="Samlout District" label="Samlout"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002716" start="15372" end="15378" title="1997 clashes in Cambodia" label="fought"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884430" start="15899" end="15907" title="Ung Huot" label="Ung Huot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401103" start="16683" end="16703" title="Sangkum Reastr Niyum" label="Sangkum Reastr Niyum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="17234" end="17239" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="17248" end="17262" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640181" start="18269" end="18285" title="Sam Rainsy Party" label="Sam Rainsy Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q108739843" start="19244" end="19278" title="List of Presidents of the National Assembly of Cambodia" label="President of the National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055339" start="19443" end="19459" title="Senate of Cambodia" label="Cambodian Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153989" start="20272" end="20287" title="Commune Council (Cambodia)" label="commune council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057295" start="20702" end="20712" title="You Hockry" label="You Hockry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025197" start="20981" end="20998" title="2003 Cambodian general election" label="general elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21188" end="21207" title="Supermajority#Two-thirds vote" label="two-thirds majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068666" start="22822" end="22830" title="Chea Sim" label="Chea Sim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539074" start="22934" end="22943" title="Mu Sochua" label="Mu Sochua"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382648" start="23098" end="23113" title="Majority" label="simple majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924007" start="24350" end="24365" title="Keo Puth Rasmey" label="Keo Puth Rasmey"/>
<link wikidata="Q120538" start="24814" end="24837" title="Norodom Ranariddh Party" label="Norodom Ranariddh Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488976" start="25231" end="25248" title="Norodom Arunrasmy" label="Norodom Arunrasmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749375" start="25347" end="25364" title="2008 Cambodian general election" label="general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488976" start="28347" end="28364" title="Norodom Arunrasmy" label="Norodom Arunrasmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586971" start="28476" end="28493" title="2013 Cambodian general election" label="general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q822921" start="29935" end="29949" title="Youth politics" label="younger voters"/>
<link wikidata="Q23777558" start="30307" end="30334" title="Khmer National United Party" label="Khmer National United Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108673" start="30430" end="30461" title="Independence Monument (Cambodia)" label="Cambodian Independence Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="30733" end="30750" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q769308" start="30785" end="30814" title="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353153" start="30822" end="30843" title="2018 Cambodian general election" label="2018 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028702" start="31301" end="31307" title="In Tam" label="In Tam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054184" start="31340" end="31354" title="Khmer Republic" label="Khmer Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923558" start="31809" end="31827" title="Norodom Chakrapong" label="Norodom Chakrapong"/>
<link wikidata="Q381817" start="31920" end="31937" title="Norodom Ranariddh" label="Norodom Ranariddh"/>
<link wikidata="Q928226" start="32320" end="32348" title="Royal Cambodian Armed Forces" label="Royal Cambodian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023348" start="32638" end="32652" title="Nhek Bun Chhay" label="Nhek Bun Chhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922569" start="33840" end="33848" title="Tea Banh" label="Tea Banh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054163" start="34585" end="34603" title="Pochentong Airport" label="Pochentong Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q855717" start="35418" end="35426" title="Sisophon" label="Sisophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817" start="35428" end="35444" title="Banteay Meanchey" label="Banteay Meanchey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015146" start="35449" end="35455" title="Poipet" label="Poipet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347804" start="35552" end="35559" title="O Smach" label="O Smach"/>
<link wikidata="Q629538" start="35563" end="35586" title="Oddar Meanchey Province" label="Oddar Meanchey Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="35976" end="35981" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36512" end="36543" title=":Category:FUNCINPEC politicians" label=":Category:FUNCINPEC politicians"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405909" wikidata="Q769308" url="?curid=405909" title="Cambodian People's Party">
<text>The Cambodian People&#x27;s Party (CPP; , UNGEGN: ) is a Cambodian political party which has ruled the country since 1979. Founded in 1951, it was originally known as the Kampuchean People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party (KPRP).

During the Cold War it allied itself with Vietnam and the Soviet Union, in contrast to the pro-Chinese Communist Party of Kampuchea led by Pol Pot. After toppling the Khmer Rouge&#x27;s Democratic Kampuchea regime with the Vietnamese-backed liberation of Phnom Penh, it became the ruling party of the People&#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea (1979–1989), which was later renamed the State of Cambodia (1989–1991). The party&#x27;s current name was adopted during the final year of the State of Cambodia, when the party abandoned the one-party system and Marxism–Leninism.

Originally rooted in communist and Marxist–Leninist ideologies, the party took on a more reformist outlook in the mid-1980s under Heng Samrin. In 1991, the CPP officially dropped its commitment to socialism, and has since embraced a mixed economy. Along with some major parties of the European centre-right, the CPP is a member of the Centrist Democrat International. It presents itself as a big tent of supporters of the Prime Minister Hun Sen. Nevertheless, the party has ties with the Socialist International and remains a close ally of the Communist Party of Vietnam, and has been described as left-wing by Deutsche Welle and Green Left.

The party&#x27;s rule has been described as authoritarian.

== History ==

=== Forerunner organizations and early history ===
Nationalists in Cambodia, Vietnam and Laos held the belief that to successfully liberate themselves from France they needed to work together; the nationalists formed the supranational Indochinese Communist Party (ICP) to oppose the French in 1930.

However, the triumph of the Japanese during the early stage of World War II crippled French rule and helped to nurture nationalism in all three Indochinese countries. Consequently, the idea of an Indochinese-wide party was submerged in the rhetoric of fierce nationalism. In Cambodia, growing nationalist sentiment and national pride married historical mistrust and fear of neighbouring countries, which turned out to be a stumbling block for the ICP. On 28 June 1951, the Cambodian nationalists who struggled to free Cambodia from French colonial rule split from the ICP to form the Kampuchean People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party (KPRP).

In 1955, the KPRP established a subsidiary party named the Pracheachon in order to run in the national election that year. The name of the party was changed to the Workers&#x27; Party of Kampuchea (WPK) on 28 September 1960 and then to the Communist Party of Kampuchea (CPK) in 1966. Members of the CPK moved the party&#x27;s headquarters to Ratanakiri Province, where they were termed &quot;Khmer Rouge&quot; by Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

=== Pen Sovan&#x27;s leadership (1979–1981) ===
In early 1979, the Cambodian communists who overthrew the Khmer Rouge&#x27;s regime to end the genocide held a congress. At this gathering, they declared themselves the true successors of the original KPRP founded in 1951 and labelled the congress as the Third Party Congress, thus not recognizing the 1963, 1975 and 1978 congresses of CPK as legitimate. The party considered 28 June 1951 as its founding date. A national committee led by Pen Sovan and Roh Samai was appointed by the Congress. The women&#x27;s wing of the party, the National Association of Women for the Salvation of Kampuchea, was also established in 1979 with a vast national network of members that extended to the district level.

The existence of the party was kept secret until its 4th congress in May 1981, when it appeared publicly and assumed the name KPRP. The name-change was stated to be carried out &quot;to clearly distinguish it from the reactionary Pol Pot party and to underline and reassert the continuity of the party&#x27;s best traditions&quot;.

=== Heng Samrin&#x27;s leadership (1981–1991) ===
As of 1990, members of the Politburo were Heng Samrin (General Secretary), Chea Sim, Hun Sen, Chea Soth, Math Ly, Tea Banh, Men Sam An, Nguon Nhel, Sar Kheng, Bou Thang, Ney Pena, Say Chhum and alternate members included Sing Song, Sim Ka and Pol Saroeun. Members of the Secretariat were Heng Samrin, Say Phouthang, Bou Thang, Men Sam An and Sar Kheng.

=== Hun Sen&#x27;s leadership (1991–2023) ===
In 1991, the party was renamed to the Cambodian People&#x27;s Party (CPP) during a United Nations-sponsored peace and reconciliation process. Politburo and the Secretariat to enter into the new Standing Committee, Chea Sim as President and Hun Sen as Vice-president. Despite being rooted in socialism, the party adopted a pragmatic approach in order to keep power. For instance, the CPP played a major role in Cambodian peace negotiation process, which led to the signing of the Paris Peace Accords on 23 October 1991 and the creation of the second Kingdom of Cambodia. The CPP ousted Nodorom Ranariddh in a coup in 1997, leaving the party with no serious opposition. Thirty-two people died in the coup.

Under CPP rule, Cambodia transitioned into a lower-middle-income economy in 2016. The party aims to turn Cambodia into a higher-middle-income country by 2030 and high-income country by 2050. Ideologically, an increasing number of CPP senior leaders claim that the Cambodian ruling party has adopted a centrist position. They believe that the CPP presents a middle path between capitalism and communism, with emphasis on the values and principles of social market economy along with social and environmental protection, and Buddhist humanism. However, academics such as John Ciorciari have observed that the CPP still continues to maintain its communist-era party structures and that many of its top-ranking members were derived from KPRP. Also, despite Hun Sen being only the deputy leader of the party until 2015, he had de facto control of the party.

Political scientists Radek Buben, Elvin Franisco Rodríguez Fabilena and Karel Kouba classify the CPP under Hun Sen as left-wing, comparing it to the Sandinista National Liberation Front in terms of both authoritarian governance and representing formerly far-left revolutionary organizations that transitioned into a more reformist type of governance. The party has also been described as left-wing by Deutsche Welle, and Green Left. Sreinith Ten also argues that the party &quot;had embedded the legacy of communism based on Marxist-Leninist ideology&quot;, and continues to cling onto socialist-oriented rhetoric and policies to maintain legitimacy, such as through promoting gender egalitarianism and establishing state-backed organizations such as the Kampuchea Revolutionary Women&#x27;s Association. The CPP hosts Socialist International meetings, remains a close ally of the Communist Party of Vietnam, and most of the party members are former communists. The CPP also retains socialist party organisation.

It won 64 of the 123 seats in the National Assembly in the 1998 elections, 73 seats in the 2003 elections and 90 seats in the 2008 elections, winning the popular vote by the biggest margin ever for a National Assembly election with 58% of the vote. The CPP also won the 2006 Senate elections. The party lost 22 seats in the 2013 elections, with opposition gained. Since 2018 Cambodian general election, the party commands all 125 seats in the National Assembly, and 58 of 62 seats in the Senate. The main opposition, the Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), was banned before the election. Hun Sen, the former Prime Minister of Cambodia, has served as the CPP&#x27;s President since 2015.

== Party leadership (1979–1993) ==
* Heng Samrin: 
** General Secretary of the KPRP (1981–1991)
** Chairman of the Revolutionary Council (later the Council of State) (1979–1992)
* Chea Sim: 
** Minister of the Interior (1979–1981)
** President of the National Assembly (1981–92), 
** Chairman of the Council of State (1992–1994)
* Pen Sovan: 
** Minister of Defense (1979–1981); 
** General Secretary of the KPRP (1979–81); 
** Prime Minister (1981)
* Hun Sen: 
** Minister of Foreign Affairs (1979–1986; 1987–1990); 
** Deputy Prime Minister (1981–85), 
** Prime Minister (1985–1993)
* Chan Sy: 
** Minister of defense (1981–1982), 
** Prime Minister (1981–1984)
* Say Phouthang: 
** Vice President of the State Council (1979–1993)
* Chea Soth: 
** Minister of Planning (1982–1986), 
** Deputy Prime Minister (1982–1992)
* Bou Thang: 
** Deputy Prime Minister (1982–1992), 
** Minister of Defense (1982–1986)
* Math Ly: 
** Vice President of the National Assembly
* Kong Korm: 
** Minister of Foreign Affairs (1986–1987)
* Hor Namhong: 
** Minister of Foreign Affairs (1990–1993)

==List of party leaders==
 KPRP (General Secretary) CPP (President)
== Organization ==
The party is headed by a 34-member Permanent Committee, commonly referred to as the Politburo (after its former Communist namesake). The current members are (with their party positions in brackets):
# Hun Sen (Chairman)
# Heng Samrin (Honorary Chairman)
# Sar Kheng (Deputy Chairman)
# Say Chhum (Chairman of the Standing Committee)
# Say Phouthang 
# Bou Thang
# Tea Banh
# Men Sam An
# Nguon Nhel 
# Ney Pena
# Sim Ka
# Ke Kim Yan
# Pol Saroeun
# Kong Sam Ol
# Im Chhun Lim
# Dith Munty
# Chea Chanto
# Uk Rabun
# Cheam Yeap
# Ek Sam Ol
# Som Kim Suor
# Khuon Sudary
# Pen Pannha
# Chhay Than
# Hor Nam Hong
# Bin Chhin
# Keat Chhon
# Yim Chhay Ly
# Tep Ngorn
# Kun Kim
# Meas Sophea
# Neth Savoeun
== Recent electoral history ==

=== General election ===
=== Communal elections ===
=== Senate elections ===
== See also ==
* Kampuchean United Front for National Salvation
* Modern Cambodia
* People&#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea
* Politics of Cambodia

== References ==
===Notes===
=== Citations ===
=== Bibliography ===
*Guo, Sujian (2006). &quot;The Political Economy of Asian Transition from Communism&quot;. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. .

==External links==
*CPP website
*List of incidents attributed to the Cambodian Peoples Party on the START database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q769308" start="4" end="33" title="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q769308" start="35" end="38" title="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="CPP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42" end="48" title="Romanization of Khmer#UNGEGN" label="UNGEGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="57" end="65" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389871" start="67" end="82" title="List of political parties in Cambodia" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q635533" start="117" end="121" title="Cambodian–Vietnamese War" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q769308" start="171" end="215" title="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Kampuchean People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q769308" start="217" end="221" title="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="KPRP"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="236" end="244" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="267" end="274" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="283" end="295" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8711543" start="328" end="356" title="Communist Party of Kampuchea" label="Communist Party of Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q39464" start="364" end="371" title="Pol Pot" label="Pol Pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="392" end="403" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q330988" start="411" end="438" title="Democratic Kampuchea" label="Democratic Kampuchea regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850" start="480" end="490" title="Phnom Penh" label="Phnom Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q867778" start="526" end="561" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="753" end="769" title="One-party state" label="one-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="774" end="790" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="814" end="823" title="Communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q878445" start="882" end="891" title="Reformism" label="reformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q379197" start="923" end="934" title="Heng Samrin" label="Heng Samrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="990" end="999" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="1026" end="1039" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128064" start="1128" end="1159" title="Centrist Democrat International" label="Centrist Democrat International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030814" start="1185" end="1193" title="big tent" label="big tent"/>
<link wikidata="Q57788" start="1230" end="1237" title="Hun Sen" label="Hun Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q159454" start="1281" end="1304" title="Socialist International" label="Socialist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q427325" start="1337" end="1363" title="Communist Party of Vietnam" label="Communist Party of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q153770" start="1404" end="1418" title="Deutsche Welle" label="Deutsche Welle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116101" start="1423" end="1433" title="Green Left (Australian newspaper)" label="Green Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="1480" end="1493" title="authoritarian" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1667" end="1673" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658619" start="1746" end="1773" title="Indochinese Communist Party" label="Indochinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1874" end="1886" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173090" start="2343" end="2363" title="French Protectorate of Cambodia" label="French colonial rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919247" start="2508" end="2519" title="Pracheachon" label="Pracheachon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8711543" start="2689" end="2717" title="Communist Party of Kampuchea" label="Communist Party of Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q747846" start="2791" end="2810" title="Ratanakiri Province" label="Ratanakiri Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="2841" end="2852" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q160318" start="2869" end="2885" title="Norodom Sihanouk" label="Norodom Sihanouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q330988" start="2994" end="3019" title="Democratic Kampuchea" label="Khmer Rouge&amp;#x27;s regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q379197" start="4064" end="4075" title="Heng Samrin" label="Heng Samrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068666" start="4097" end="4105" title="Chea Sim" label="Chea Sim"/>
<link wikidata="Q57788" start="4107" end="4114" title="Hun Sen" label="Hun Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088785" start="4116" end="4125" title="Chea Soth" label="Chea Soth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786763" start="4127" end="4134" title="Math Ly" label="Math Ly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922569" start="4136" end="4144" title="Tea Banh" label="Tea Banh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816221" start="4146" end="4156" title="Men Sam An" label="Men Sam An"/>
<link wikidata="Q16190921" start="4158" end="4168" title="Nguon Nhel" label="Nguon Nhel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150274" start="4170" end="4179" title="Sar Kheng" label="Sar Kheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949211" start="4181" end="4190" title="Bou Thang" label="Bou Thang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4192" end="4200" title="Ney Pena" label="Ney Pena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428913" start="4202" end="4211" title="Say Chhum" label="Say Chhum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191271" start="4254" end="4260" title="Sim Ka" label="Sim Ka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4265" end="4276" title="Pol Saroeun" label="Pol Saroeun"/>
<link wikidata="Q379197" start="4310" end="4321" title="Heng Samrin" label="Heng Samrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q61302371" start="4323" end="4336" title="Say Phouthang" label="Say Phouthang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949211" start="4338" end="4347" title="Bou Thang" label="Bou Thang"/>
<link wikidata="Q494792" start="5484" end="5495" title="Third Way" label="middle path"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="5576" end="5597" title="social market economy" label="social market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27389" start="6130" end="6166" title="Sandinista National Liberation Front" label="Sandinista National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q153770" start="6382" end="6396" title="Deutsche Welle" label="Deutsche Welle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116101" start="6402" end="6412" title="Green Left (Australian newspaper)" label="Green Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="6658" end="6679" title="gender equality" label="gender egalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q159454" start="6800" end="6823" title="Socialist International" label="Socialist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q427325" start="6862" end="6888" title="Communist Party of Vietnam" label="Communist Party of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025194" start="7054" end="7068" title="1998 Cambodian general election" label="1998 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025197" start="7086" end="7100" title="2003 Cambodian general election" label="2003 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749375" start="7121" end="7135" title="2008 Cambodian general election" label="2008 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586971" start="7319" end="7333" title="2013 Cambodian general election" label="2013 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353153" start="7365" end="7396" title="2018 Cambodian general election" label="2018 Cambodian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025162" start="7516" end="7546" title="Cambodia National Rescue Party" label="Cambodia National Rescue Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q309118" start="8940" end="8949" title="Politburo" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q57788" start="9057" end="9064" title="Hun Sen" label="Hun Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q379197" start="9078" end="9089" title="Heng Samrin" label="Heng Samrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150274" start="9112" end="9121" title="Sar Kheng" label="Sar Kheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428913" start="9142" end="9151" title="Say Chhum" label="Say Chhum"/>
<link wikidata="Q61302371" start="9191" end="9204" title="Say Phouthang" label="Say Phouthang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949211" start="9208" end="9217" title="Bou Thang" label="Bou Thang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922569" start="9220" end="9228" title="Tea Banh" label="Tea Banh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816221" start="9231" end="9241" title="Men Sam An" label="Men Sam An"/>
<link wikidata="Q16190921" start="9244" end="9254" title="Nguon Nhel" label="Nguon Nhel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9258" end="9266" title="Ney Pena" label="Ney Pena"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191271" start="9269" end="9275" title="Sim Ka" label="Sim Ka"/>
<link wikidata="Q111745856" start="9278" end="9288" title="Ke Kim Yan" label="Ke Kim Yan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9291" end="9302" title="Pol Saroeun" label="Pol Saroeun"/>
<link wikidata="Q16190676" start="9305" end="9316" title="Kong Sam Ol" label="Kong Sam Ol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6001780" start="9319" end="9331" title="Im Chhun Lim" label="Im Chhun Lim"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728583" start="9334" end="9344" title="Dith Munty" label="Dith Munty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9347" end="9358" title="Chea Chanto" label="Chea Chanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7878253" start="9361" end="9369" title="Uk Rabun" label="Uk Rabun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9372" end="9382" title="Cheam Yeap" label="Cheam Yeap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350238" start="9385" end="9394" title="Ek Sam Ol" label="Ek Sam Ol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9397" end="9409" title="Som Kim Suor" label="Som Kim Suor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730825" start="9412" end="9424" title="Khuon Sudary" label="Khuon Sudary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9427" end="9437" title="Pen Pannha" label="Pen Pannha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094851" start="9440" end="9450" title="Chhay Than" label="Chhay Than"/>
<link wikidata="Q58287" start="9453" end="9465" title="Hor Nam Hong" label="Hor Nam Hong"/>
<link wikidata="Q28969538" start="9468" end="9477" title="Bin Chhin" label="Bin Chhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382284" start="9480" end="9490" title="Keat Chhon" label="Keat Chhon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9493" end="9505" title="Yim Chhay Ly" label="Yim Chhay Ly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701211" start="9508" end="9517" title="Tep Ngorn" label="Tep Ngorn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9520" end="9527" title="Kun Kim" label="Kun Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804149" start="9530" end="9541" title="Meas Sophea" label="Meas Sophea"/>
<link wikidata="Q22007154" start="9544" end="9556" title="Neth Savoeun" label="Neth Savoeun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278067" start="9683" end="9729" title="Kampuchean United Front for National Salvation" label="Kampuchean United Front for National Salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919387" start="9732" end="9747" title="Modern Cambodia" label="Modern Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q867778" start="9750" end="9785" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154154" start="9788" end="9808" title="Politics of Cambodia" label="Politics of Cambodia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405910" wikidata="Q823648" url="?curid=405910" title="Socialist Party of Chile">
<text>The Socialist Party of Chile (, or PS) is a centre-left political party founded in 1933. Its historic leader was President of Chile Salvador Allende, who was deposed in a coup d&#x27;état by General Augusto Pinochet in 1973. The military junta immediately banned socialist, Marxist and other leftist political parties. Members of the Socialist party and other leftists were subject to violent suppression, including torture and murder, under the Pinochet dictatorship, and many went into exile. Twenty-seven years after the 1973 coup, Ricardo Lagos Escobar won the Presidency as the Socialist Party candidate in the 1999–2000 Chilean presidential election. Socialist Michelle Bachelet won the 2005–06 Chilean presidential election. She was the first female president of Chile and was succeeded by Sebastián Piñera in 2010. In the 2013 Chilean general election, she was again elected president, leaving office in 2018. 

== History ==
=== Beginnings ===
The Socialist Party of Chile was co-founded on 19 April 1933, by Colonel Marmaduque Grove, who had already led several governments, Oscar Schnake, Carlos Alberto Martínez, future President Salvador Allende, and other personalities. After the Chilean coup of 1973 it was proscribed (along with the other leftist parties constituting the Popular Unity coalition) and the party split into several groups which would not reunite until after the return to civilian rule in 1990.

Socialist thought in Chile goes back to the mid-19th century, when Francisco Bilbao and Santiago Arcos opened a debate on civil rights and social equality in Chile. These ideas took hold in the labour movement at the beginning of the 20th century and, along with them, the various communist, anarchist, socialist, and mutualist ideals of the time were diffused by writers and leaders such as Luis Emilio Recabarren. The impact of the 1917 October Revolution in Russia imparted new vigor to Chile&#x27;s revolutionary movements, which in the 1920s were mostly identified with the global Communist movement; the Communist Party of Chile was formed.

The Great Depression in the 1930s plunged the country&#x27;s working and middle classes into a serious crisis that led them to sympathize with socialist ideas, which found expression in the establishment of the short-lived Socialist Republic of Chile in 1932. The idea of founding a political party to unite the different movements identified with socialism took shape in the foundation of the Socialist Party of Chile, on 19 April 1933. At a conference in Santiago, at 150 Serrano, 14 delegates from the Socialist Marxist Party led by Eduardo Rodriguez Mazer; 18 from the New Public Action, headed by the lawyer Eugenio Matte Stolen; 12 delegates of the Socialist Order, whose main exponent was the architect Arturo Bianchi Gundian; and 26 representatives of the Revolutionary Socialist Action of Óscar Schnake formulated the new party&#x27;s founding document and its short-term action plan, and elected Óscar Schnake as its first executive Secretary General.

The Party&#x27;s Statement of Principles was:

* The Socialist Party embodies Marxism, enriched by scientific and social progress. 
* The Capitalist exploitation based on the doctrine of private property regarding land, industry, resource, and transportation, necessarily must be replaced by an economically socialist state in which said private property be transformed into collective.
* During the process of total transformation of the system of government, a representative revolutionary government of the manual and intellectual labourers&#x27; class is necessary. The new socialist state only can be born of the initiative and the revolutionary action of the proletariat masses.
* The socialist doctrine is of an international character and requires the support of all the workers of the world. The Socialist Party will support their revolutionary goals in economics and politics across Latin America in order to pursue a vision of a Confederacy of the Socialist Republics of the Continent, the first step toward the World Socialist Confederation.

The Party quickly obtained popular support. Its partisan structure exhibits some singularities, such as the creation of &quot;brigades&quot; that group their militants according to environment of activity; brigades that live together organically, and brigades of militant youths such as the Confederacy of the Socialist Youth, and the Confederacy of Socialist Women. In the later 1930s they included the &quot;Left Communist&quot; faction, formed by a split of the Communist Party of Chile, headed by Manuel Noble Plaza and comprising the journalist Oscar Waiss, the lawyer Tomás Chadwick and the first secretary of the PS, Ramón Sepúlveda Loyal, among others.

In 1934, the Socialists, along with the Radical-Socialist Party and the Democratic Party, formed the &quot;Leftist Bloc&quot;. In the first parliamentary election (March 1937) they obtained 22 representatives (19 representatives and 3 senators), among them its Secretary general Oscar Schnake Vergara, elected senator of Tarapacá-Antofagasta, placed by the PS in a noticeable place inside the political giants of the epoch. For the 1938 presidential election, the PS participated in the formation of the Popular Front, withdrawing its presidential candidate, the colonel Marmaduque Grove, and supporting the Radical Party&#x27;s candidate, Pedro Aguirre Cerda, who narrowly defeated the right-wing candidate following an attempted coup by the National Socialist Movement of Chile. In the government of Aguirre Cerda the socialists obtained the Ministries of Public Health, Forecast and Social Assistance, given to Salvador Allende, the Minister of Promotion, trusted to Oscar Schnake, and the Ministers of Lands and Colonization, handed out to Rolando Merino.

The participation of the Socialist Party in the government of Aguirre Cerda reached an end on 15 December 1940, due to internal conflicts among the Popular Front coalition, in particular with the Communist Party. In the parliamentary elections of March 1941 the PS advanced outside of the Popular Front and obtained 17,9% of the votes, 17 representatives and 2 senators. The PS integrated into the new leftist coalition following Cerda&#x27;s death, now named Democratic Alliance, which supported the candidacy of the Radical Juan Antonio Ríos, who was triumphantly elected. The Socialists participated in his cabinet, alongside Radicals, members of the Democratic Party and of the Liberal Party and even of the Falange. Oscar Schnake occupied once again the post of Promotion and the socialist Pedro Populate Vera and Eduardo Escudero Forrastal assumed the positions of Lands and Colonization and Social Assistance, respectively.

The youth of the party assumed a very critical attitude toward these changes and mergers, which caused the expulsion of all the Central Committee of the FJS, among them Raúl Vásquez (its secretary general), Raúl Ampuero, Mario Palestro and Carlos Briones. In the IX Congress of the PS of the year 1943 Salvador Allende displaced Marmaduque Grove as Secretary General and withdrew his party from the government of Ríos. Grove did not accept this situation, and was expelled from the PS and formed the Authentic Socialist Party. These conflicts caused the PS to drop violently to only 7% of the votes in the parliamentary elections of March 1945, diminishing significantly its parliamentary strength.

=== After World War II ===
There was complete confusion in the Socialist Party for the presidential election of 1946. The PS decided to put up its own candidate; its secretary general Bernardo Ibáñez. However, many militants supported the radical candidate Gabriel González Videla, while the Authentic Socialist Party of Grove stopped supporting the liberal Fernando Alessandri.

After the failure of the candidacy of Ibáñez (who obtained barely a 2.5% of the votes), the purges continued. In the XI Ordinary Congress the current &quot;revolution&quot; of Raúl Ampuero was imposed and he assigned to academic Eugenio González the making of the Program of the Socialist Party which defined its north; the Democratic Republic of Workers.

The promulgation, in 1948, of the Law 8.987 &quot;Defense of Democracy Law&quot; that banned the communists, was again a factor of division among the socialists. Bernardo Ibáñez, Oscar Schnake, Juan Bautista Rosseti and other anticommunist socialists supported it with enthusiasm; while the board of directors of the party directed by Raúl Ampuero and Eugenio González rejected it. The anticommunist group of Ibáñez was expelled from the PS and they constituted the Socialist Party of the Workers; nevertheless the Conservative of the electoral Roll assigned to the group of Ibáñez the name Socialist Party of Chile, forcing the group of Ampuero to adopt the name Socialist Popular Party.

The Socialist Popular Party proclamation, in its XIV Congress, carried out in Chillán in May 1952, as its presidential standard bearer to Carlos Ibáñez del Campo, despite the refusal of the senators Salvador Allende and Tomás Chadwick. Allende abandoned the party and united the Socialist Party of Chile, which, as a group with the Communist Party (outlawed), raised the candidacy of Allende for the Front of the People. The triumph of Ibáñez permitted the popular socialists to have important departments such as that of Work (Clodomiro Almeyda) and Estate (Felipe Herrera).

After the parliamentary elections of 1953; where the Socialist Popular Party obtained 5 senators and 19 representatives, the popular socialists abandoned the government of Carlos Ibáñez del Campo and proclaimed the need to establish a Front of Workers, in conjunction with the Democratic Party of the People, the socialists of Chile and the outlawed communists.

Finally, on 1 March 1956, the two socialist parties (Socialist Party of Chile and Socialist Popular Party), the Party of the Workers (communist outlawed), Democratic Party of the People and the Democratic Party all signed the minutes of constitution of the Front of Popular Action (FRAP) with Salvador Allende Gossens as the president of the coalition, which participated successfully in the municipal elections of April 1956.

After the parliamentary elections of March 1957 the &quot;Congress of Unity&quot; was carried to power, formed from the Popular Socialist Party directed by Rául Ampuero and the Socialist Party of Chile of Salvador, directed by Allende Gossens. These chose the secretary general of the unified Socialist Party; Salomón Corbalán.

On 31 July 1958, the Law of Permanent Defense of Democracy was derogated by the National Congress, therefore the ban of the Communist Party was repealed. In the presidential elections of 1958, the standard bearer of the Front of Popular Action (FRAP), the socialist Salvador Allende, lost the presidential election narrowly to Jorge Alessandri. In spite of the loss, the unification of the socialist parties had a new leader, and Chile was one of the few countries of the world in which a Marxist had clear possibilities to win the presidency of the Republic through democratic elections.

The overwhelming triumph of Eduardo Frei Montalva over the candidate of the FRAP Salvador Allende Gossens in the presidential elections of September 1964 caused demoralization among the followers of the &quot;Chilean way to socialism&quot;. The National Democratic Party (PADENA) abandoned the coalition of left; and the influence of the Cuban revolution and above all of the &quot;guerrilla way of Ernesto Guevara&quot; they were left to feel the heart of the Socialist Party. The discrepancies of the party were perceived clearly. In July from 1967 the senators Raúl Ampuero and Tomás Chadwick and the representatives Ramón Silva Ulloa, Eduardo Osorio Pardo and Oscar Naranjo Arias were expelled, and founded the popular socialist union (USOPO).
In the XXII Congress, which took place in Chillán in November 1967, the political became more radical, under the influence of Carlos Altamirano Orrego and the leader of the Ranquil Rural Confederation, Rolando Calderón Aránguiz. The party now officially adhered to Marxism-Leninism, declared itself in favour of revolutionary, anticapitalist and anti-imperialist changes.

=== Popular Unity government ===

In 1969, skepticism about the &quot;Chilean way to socialism&quot; prevailed in the Central Committee of the Socialist Party. Salvador Allende Gossens was proclaimed as the party&#x27;s presidential candidate, with 13 votes in favor and 14 abstentions, among them that of its secretary general, Aniceto Rodriguez, of Carlos Altamirano Orrego, and of Clodomiro Almeyda Medina. Nevertheless, the candidacy of Allende galvanized the forces of the left, who formed, in October 1969, the Popular Unity coalition including the Socialist Party, Communist Party, Radical Party, Popular Unitary Action Movement (which had split from the Christian Democrat Party), and Independent Popular Action, consisting of former supporters of Carlos Ibáñez. Popular Unity triumphed in the presidential election of September 1970.

On 24 October 1970 Salvador Allende Gossens was officially proclaimed President of the Republic of Chile. There was world expectation; he agreed to manage the coalition and to be a Marxist president with the explicit commitment to build socialism, while respecting the democratic and institutional mechanisms.

The position of the PS on joining the government of the UP became more radical when senator Carlos Altamirano Orrego took over as party leader, having been elected at the XXIII Congress in La Serena in January 1971. He proclaimed that the party should become &quot;the Chilean vanguard in the march toward socialism&quot;.

In the municipal elections of April 1971, the leftist coalition achieved an absolute majority in the election of local councillors, which caused growing polarization due to the alliance of the Christian Democrats with the sectors of the right in the country. The withdrawal of the Party of Radical Left from the government, with its 6 representatives and 5 senators, meant that the government of Allende was left with less than one third of both houses of the parliament.
In the parliamentary elections of March 1973, the Popular Unity ruler coalition managed to block a move by the opposing Democratic Confederation to impeach Allende. This initiative did not attain the required two-thirds majority.

=== Coup d&#x27;état and political suppression ===
The serious economic problems facing the government only deepened the country&#x27;s political divisions. The Socialist Party, which had posted its highest electoral showing in history, was opposed, along with MAPU, to any dialogue with the right-wing opposition. Meanwhile, from the United States, a concerted plan was underway to prevent socialists from gaining power around the world, including CIA backing for the right wing in Chile. On 11 September 1973, Augusto Pinochet led the military coup against Allende&#x27;s government, putting an end to the Presidential Republic Era begun in 1924. President Salvador Allende refused to relinquish power to the Armed Forces, and ultimately committed suicide in his office at the Palace of La Moneda, during an intensive air bombardment of the historic edifice.

The military coup d&#x27;état was devastating to the organization of the Chilean Socialist Party. Within a few weeks of the coup, four members of their Central Committee and seven regional secretaries of the Partido Social had been murdered. A further twelve members of the Central Committee were imprisoned, while the remaining members took refuge in various foreign embassies. The Socialist Party&#x27;s Secretary General, Carlos Altamirano, managed to escape from Chile, appearing in Havana on 1 January 1974, during the anniversary of the Cuban Revolution.

Lack of experience working &#x27;underground&#x27; during the ban led to the breakup of the Party&#x27;s Secret Directorate. The secret services of the military state managed to infiltrate the organization and, one by one, arrested its principal leaders. The bodies of Exequiel Ponce Vicencio, Carlos Lorca Tobar (disappeared 1975), Ricardo Lagos Salinas and Víctor Zerega Ponce were never found.

Other victims of repression were the former home Secretary, José Tohá González and the former Minister of National Defense, Orlando Letelier del Solar. Having reviewed the consequences of the defeat of the Unidad Popular, and observed the experiences of refugees of &quot;true socialism&quot; in Eastern Europe, and seeing the lack of a cohesive strategy to continue against Pinochet&#x27;s regime, there was deep dissent within its exterior organization, whose central management was in the German Democratic Republic.

In April 1979, the Tercer Pleno Exterior, the majority sector of the party, named Clodomiro Almeyda as the new Secretary General, Galo Gómez as the Assistant Secretary and expelled Carlos Altamirano, Jorge Arrate, Jaime Suaréz, Luis Meneses and Erich Schnake from the party, charging them with being &quot;remnants of a past which is in the process of being overcome who testify to the survival of a nucleus which is irreducible and resistant to the superior qualitative development of a true revolutionary vanguard&quot;.

Altamirano, not accepting this, declared a re-organization of the party and called a Conference. The XXIV Conference took place in France in 1980 and Altamirano declared there that, &quot;Only a very deep and rigorous renewal of definitions and proposals for action, language, style and methods of &quot;doing politics&quot; will make our revolutionary action effective (...) It does not force us to &quot;relaunch&quot; the Partido Social (Socialist Party) of Chile. Yes, it means we must &quot;renew it&quot;, understand it as our most precious instrument of change, as an option for power, as an alternative to transformation.&quot; 

=== 1980s reemergence under dictatorship === 
In the 1980s socialist factions reemerged as active opponents to the Pinochet government. A sector, from among the so-called &quot;renewed socialist&quot;, founded the Convergencia Socialista (the Socialist Convergence), which contributed to the Movimiento de Acción Popular Unitaria – MAPU (Unified Movement of Popular Action), the peasant worker MAPU, and the Christian Leftists. They aimed, in conjunction with the Christian Democracy, to end dictatorship through &quot;non-disruptive methods&quot;. The other sector (majority from among the socialist militants in the interior of the country) formed the &quot;popular rebellion&quot; alliance – an agreement with the Communist Party, the Leftist Revolutionary Movement and the Radical Party of Anselmo Sule. The objectives were the same. After the First National Protest against the Pinochet regime, which occurred on 11 May 1983, the efforts of the different factions of the Socialist Party intensified.

The XXIV (&quot;renewed&quot;) Socialist Party Congress, directed by Ricardo Ñúnez, decided to form the Democratic Alliance. This was a coalition of Christian Democrats, Silva Cimma radicals, and sectors from the republican and democratic right wing. They convened the Fourth National Protest Day (11 August 1983) and proposed, in September 1983, the formation of the Socialist Bloc, the first attempt at a unification of Chilean socialism under the slogan &quot;Democracy Now!&quot;.

In the meantime, the &quot;Almeyda&quot; Partido Social, in conjunction with the Communist Party, Aníbal Palm radicals and the Leftist Revolutionary Movement, founded the &quot;Movimiento Democrático Popular&quot; (MDP) (Popular Democratic Movement) on 6 September 1983, which caused the Fifth Day of National Protest.

The signing of the National Accord in late August 1985, between the Democratic Alliance and sectors of the right wing aligned to the military regime, deepened divisions among the Chilean left wing. The most radical politico-military arm opposed the method of gradual transition towards democracy. Their primary exponent was the Frente Patriótico Manuel Rodríguez (FPMR) (the Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front).

The MAPU-OC, whose main figures were Jaime Gazmuri, Jorge Molina and Jaime Estévez, was added to the &quot;renewed&quot; Partido Social, now directed by Carlos Briones.

In September 1986, the politico-military method of &quot;mass violent insurrectionist uprisings&quot; was finally aborted after the failure of &quot;Operation 20th century&quot;, as the assassination attempt on Pinochet by the FPMR was called. Some of the top leaders from among the revolutionary sectors of the &quot;Almeyda&quot; Partido Social, along with conciliators and opportunists, on realizing that the idea of overthrowing the dictatorship was not a viable strategy, began to take control of the party and distance themselves from the Communist Party. As a result, the socialist left wing realized that a &quot;negotiated solution&quot; to the conflict could not be found outside of the provisions of the 1980 Constitution.

In March 1987, Clodomiro Almeyda entered Chile secretly and presented himself before the court to rectify his situation. He was deported to Chile Chico, condemned and deprived of his civic rights. 

In April 1987, Ricardo Núñez, new leader of the &quot;renewed&quot; Partido Social, announced, at the 54th Anniversary of the party, &quot;We are not going to remove Pinochet from the political scene using weapons. We shall defeat him with the ballot boxes (..) We are convinced that the town is going to stop Pinochet with the ballot boxes. We are going to build that army of seven million citizens to embrace different alternatives to the Chilean political landscape.&quot;

In December 1987 the &quot;renewed&quot; Partido Social founded the Partido por la Democracia (PPD) (Party for Democracy), an &quot;instrumental&quot; party serving as a tool to enable legally democratic forces to participate in the 1988 Plebiscite (Referendum) and in subsequent elections. Ricardo Lagos was appointed as the president. Some radicals, dissident communists, and even democratic liberals joined this party.

In February 1988 the &quot;Concertación de Partidos por el No&quot; (Coalition of Parties for the &#x27;No&#x27;) was formed. 17 political parties and movements in Chile joined this coalition. Among them were the members of the Alianza Democrática (the Democratic Alliance), the Almeyda Partido Social, and the Christian Left. The political direction of the campaign fell on the Christian Democratic leader, Patricio Aylwin, and Ricardo Lagos from the PPD. They achieved successful results in the 5 October 1988, Plebiscite, where close to 56% of the valid votes cast rejected the idea that Pinochet would continue as the President of the Republic.

After the October 1988 Plebiscite, the &quot;Concertación&quot; called for constitutional reform to remove the &quot;authoritarian clauses&quot; of the 1980 Constitution. This proposal by the democratic opposition was partly accepted by the authoritarian government via the 30 July 1989, Plebiscite, where 54 reforms to the existing Constitution were approved. Among these reforms were the revocation of the controversial article 8, which served as the basis for the exclusion of the socialist leader, Clodomiro Almeyda, from political involvement.

In November 1988 the Almeyda Partido Social, the Christian Left and the Communist Party, among other left wing organizations, formed an &quot;instrumental&quot; party called Partido Amplio de Izquierda Socialista (PAIS) (the Broad Left Socialist Party), with Luis Maira as the president and Ricardo Solari as the secretary general.

=== &quot;Concertación&quot; ===

In May 1989, the &quot;renewed&quot; PS held internal elections by secret ballot by its nationwide membership, for the first time in the history of Chilean socialism. The list composed of Jorge Arrate and Luis Alvarado won, against the competing lists of Erich Schnake and Akím Soto, and of Heraldo Muñoz (supported by Ricardo Lagos&#x27; faction within the party).

The winning list of Jorge Arrate represented the tendency of the &quot;socialist renewal&quot;, upholding a permanent alliance with the Christian Democrats within the &quot;Concertación&quot;, and strongly defending the unity of the party, in contrast to other internal tendencies. After the elections the XXV Congress was convoked at Costa Azul, which took the momentous decision for Chilean socialism to abandon its traditional isolationism and join the Socialist International.

In June 1989, the &quot;Concertación&quot; appointed the Christian Democrat Patricio Aylwin as its standard bearer for the presidential elections. Aylwin had beaten Gabriel Valdés and Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle in the party&#x27;s internal elections, and a few weeks before the election he received the support of the radicals of Silva Cimma and even of the former Almeyda supporters (PS-Almeyda). Finally the PS-Arrate (or &quot;renewal&quot; PS) dropped its candidate Ricardo Lagos and added itself to the candidacy of Aylwin, who as president of the Christian Democratic Party was one of the main opponents of the Popular Unity government.

Aylwin won easily in the presidential elections of 1989, gaining more than the 55% of the valid votes. &quot;Renewal Socialism&quot; was strengthened as 16 representatives of the PPD were elected, 13 of whom were members of the PS-Arrate. In the matter of senators, three of their members were chosen (Ricardo Núñez Muñoz, Jaime Gazmuri and Hernán Vodanovic), but there was regret over the rout of Ricardo Lagos in his candidacy of Santiago West.

PS-Almeyda obtained seven representatives, two of them standing for the PAIS, and the other five elected as independents within the &quot;Concertación&quot; list. Rolando Calderon Aránguiz was elected as senator in Magallanes.

The fall of the wall of Berlin, on 9 November 1989, deeply affected the Chilean left, especially in its more orthodox sector. This accelerated the process of unification within the party, which was finalized on 27 December 1989. The Movimiento de Acción Popular Unitaria, led by Oscar Guillermo Garretón, took this chance to join the united PS.

Between 22 and 25 November 1990 the &quot;Salvador Allende Unity Congress&quot; was held, with past leaders such as Raúl Ampuero and Aniceto Rodriguez and the Christian Left headed by its president Luis Maira and its two representatives (Sergio Aguiló and Jaime Naranjo) joining the party. In that Congress Jorge Arrate was chosen as president, Ricardo Núñez Muñoz as vice president and Manuel Almeyda Medina as secretary general.

Hortensia Bussi, the widow of Allende, sent a message to the Congress from Mexico:

The first challenges for the unified socialists were the exercise of power and the &quot;double membership&quot; status of the &quot;renewal socialists&quot; as members of both the PS and the PPD. Finally, the Socialist Party decided to have itself recorded under its own name and symbols in the electoral rolls, and gave a two-year time limit to its members to opt for the PS or the PPD. A significant number of &quot;renewal socialists&quot; did not return to the PS; among them Erich Schnake, Sergio Bitar, Guido Girardi, Jorge Molina, Vicente Sotta, Víctor Barrueto and Octavio Jara.

In power, the socialists Enrique Correa (as the minister General Secretary of Government), Carlos Ominami (Economy), Germán Correa (Transportation), Ricardo Lagos and Jorge Arrate (Education) and Luis Alvarado (National Resources) entered the cabinets of President Aylwin, while in the House of Representatives, the socialists José Antonio Viera-Gallo and Jaime Estevéz exercised its presidency.

In the elections of 1992, Germán Correa was chosen as president of the PS, supported by the &quot;renewal&quot; group around Ricardo Núñez Muñoz and the &quot;third way&quot; faction within the Almeyda tendency. They prevailed against Camilo Escalona, Clodomiro Almeyda and Jaime Estevez, representing an alliance between the traditional supporters of Clodomiro Almeyda and one faction of Jorge Arrate&#x27;s &quot;renewal&quot; tendency.

==== &quot;Concertación&quot; under Christian Democrat leadership (1990–2000) ====
The left (PS-PPD) backed Ricardo Lagos as the &quot;Concertación&quot; candidate for the 1993 presidential elections, but he was defeated by the Christian Democrat Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle, gaining only 36.6% of the vote in the primary on 23 May. After Frei became president, the Socialists took up senior posts in his first cabinet: Interior (Germán Correa), Planining (Luis Maira), Labor (Jorge Arrate), and Public Works (Ricardo Lagos).

In the parliamentary elections of December 1997, the PS did badly: its deputies decreased from 16 to 11, and its senators from 5 to 4. Its senatorial candidate Camilo Escalona obtained a mere 16% of the vote in Santiago West.

The detention of Pinochet in London in October 1998 caused tensions within the PS. The Socialist foreign affairs ministers José Miguel Insulza and Juan Gabriel Valdés pressed to have the ex-dictator returned to Chile, while a group of leading Socialists including Isabel Allende Bussi, Juan Pablo Letelier, Fanny Pollarolo and Juan Bustos Ramírez travelled to London to support judge Baltasar Garzón&#x27;s proceedings for extradition to Spain.

Leading up to the 1999 presidential elections, the PS, PPD and Radical Social-Democratic Party again supported Lagos as candidate. This time Lagos won the primary on 30 May, with 70.2% of votes. In the general election, he won 48.0% in the first round of voting and was elected with 51.3% in the second round. 

Despite the party having been reunified in 1990 the Socialist Party had five internal factions; Nueva Izquierda, Generacional, Tercerismo, Arratismo and Nuñismo. By 1998 Arratismo and Nuñismo had merged into Megatendencia while Generacional, a brief tendency called Almeydismo and elements of Nueva Izquierda had merged into Colectivo de Identidad Socialista. Nueva Izquierda and Tercerismo remained as relatively stable factions by 1998. 

==== &quot;Concertación&quot; under Socialist governments (2000–2010) ====

Lagos was elected president in 1999, defeating the rightwing candidate Joaquín Lavín with 51.3% of the vote, thus becoming the first president in thirty years to have Socialist support – even though Lagos himself was a PD member. Socialist ministers in his first cabinet were José Miguel Insulza (Interior), Ricardo Solari (Labor), Carlos Cruz (Public Works), and Michelle Bachelet (Health).

In the 2001 Chilean parliamentary election, as part of the Coalition of Parties for Democracy, the party won 10 out of 117 seats in the Chamber of Deputies of Chile and 5 out of 38 elected seats in the Senate. The 2001 parliamentary elections were a setback for the Socialists and for the &quot;Concertación&quot; as a whole. The PS increased its representation by only one deputy and one senator, while the &quot;Concertación&quot; vote sank below 50% for the first time in its existence.

In September 2003, marking 30 years since the coup against Allende, the Socialist Party issued a document accepting responsibility for the events:


The outcome of the 2005 parliamentary elections was favorable both for the Socialists and for the &quot;Concertación&quot;: the PS increased its deputies from 12 to 15, and its senators from 5 to 8, giving it the largest block it had ever had in the Senate. Moreover, Michelle Bachelet was elected as president of Chile. For its part, the &quot;Concertación&quot; regained its electoral hegemony, with an absolute majority in both chambers of parliament.

Bachelet took over as president on 11 March 2006. She was the first woman president in the country&#x27;s history, and the fourth successive president from the &quot;Concertación&quot;. Her initially high popularity dropped considerably as a result of the 2006 student mobilization known as the &quot;Penguin Revolution&quot;, the Transantiago crisis, and various conflicts within the governing coalition. Described as a &quot;social contract&quot;, her government reformed pensions and the social security system, aiming to help thousands of Chileans to improve their quality of life. Her government had to confront the world economic crisis of 2008, but her popularity figures recovered as Chileans formed a positive opinion of her leadership, and her final approval rating of 84% had never before been attained by any Chilean head of state on leaving their post.

Within the Party, divisions widened, with dissident factions opposing the policy of Camilo Escalona. Prominent figures including Jorge Arrate, senator Alejandro Navarro and deputy Marco Enriquez-Ominami quit the party in 2008 and 2009.

In the 2009 parliamentary elections, the PS led by Escalona suffered a serious defeat: it lost its dominance of the Senate, holding just 5 seats, and its deputies reduced in number form 15 to 11. Meanwhile, in new presidential elections, the &quot;Concertación&quot; candidate Eduardo Frei lost to the rightwinger Sebastián Piñera, putting an end to twenty years of &quot;Concertación&quot; rule.

=== &quot;Nueva Mayoría&quot; ===

Michelle Bachelet won the second round of the 2013 Chilean presidential election with 62% of the votes. She was the candidate of &quot;Nueva Mayoría&quot; (&quot;New Majority&quot;), a broadened version of the &quot;Concertación&quot; now including the Communist Party and others.

==Presidents elected==
* 1970 – Salvador Allende
* 2000 – Ricardo Lagos (with dual membership in the Party for Democracy)
* 2006 – Michelle Bachelet
* 2014 – Michelle Bachelet

==Election results==
Due to its membership in the Concert of Parties for Democracy, the party has endorsed the candidates of other parties on several occasions. Presidential elections in Chile are held using a two-round system, the results of which are displayed below.

===Presidential elections===

==See also==
*Government Junta of Chile (1973)
*Human rights violations in Pinochet&#x27;s Chile
*Víctor Olea Alegria, disappeared in 1974
*Carlos Lorca, disappeared in 1975
*Carlos Altamirano, general secretary between 1971 and 1979


== References ==
==External links==

*Partido Socialista de Chile 
*Declaración de Principios del Partido Socialista de Chile </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q823648" start="4" end="28" title="Socialist Party of Chile" label="Socialist Party of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="44" end="55" title="centre-left" label="centre-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q466956" start="113" end="131" title="President of Chile" label="President of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q440" start="132" end="148" title="Salvador Allende" label="Salvador Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q856670" start="171" end="187" title="1973 Chilean coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q368" start="199" end="215" title="Augusto Pinochet" label="Augusto Pinochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886342" start="229" end="243" title="Government Junta of Chile (1973)" label="military junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="360" end="368" title="left-wing politics" label="leftists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704093" start="446" end="467" title="Military dictatorship of Chile (1973–1990)" label="Pinochet dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q331" start="535" end="556" title="Ricardo Lagos Escobar" label="Ricardo Lagos Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722551" start="616" end="655" title="1999–2000 Chilean presidential election" label="1999–2000 Chilean presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q320" start="667" end="684" title="Michelle Bachelet" label="Michelle Bachelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q878748" start="693" end="730" title="2005–06 Chilean presidential election" label="2005–06 Chilean presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q306" start="797" end="813" title="Sebastián Piñera" label="Sebastián Piñera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2792011" start="830" end="859" title="2013 Chilean general election" label="2013 Chilean general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026955" start="1026" end="1042" title="Marmaduque Grove" label="Marmaduque Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174944" start="1085" end="1098" title="Oscar Schnake" label="Oscar Schnake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1100" end="1123" title="Carlos Alberto Martínez (Socialist)" label="Carlos Alberto Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q440" start="1142" end="1158" title="Salvador Allende" label="Salvador Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q856670" start="1195" end="1215" title="Chilean coup of 1973" label="Chilean coup of 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="1256" end="1263" title="left-wing politics" label="leftist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279966" start="1289" end="1302" title="Popular Unity (Chile)" label="Popular Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q748015" start="1394" end="1425" title="Chilean transition to democracy" label="return to civilian rule in 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081816" start="1495" end="1511" title="Francisco Bilbao" label="Francisco Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472857" start="1516" end="1530" title="Santiago Arcos" label="Santiago Arcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="1622" end="1637" title="labour movement" label="labour movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361881" start="1820" end="1842" title="Luis Emilio Recabarren" label="Luis Emilio Recabarren"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="1867" end="1885" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q317952" start="2038" end="2062" title="Communist Party of Chile" label="Communist Party of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2080" end="2096" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022804" start="2299" end="2326" title="Socialist Republic of Chile" label="Socialist Republic of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2581" end="2604" title="Socialist Marxist Party" label="Socialist Marxist Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2612" end="2635" title="Eduardo Rodriguez Mazer" label="Eduardo Rodriguez Mazer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2649" end="2666" title="New Public Action" label="New Public Action"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2689" end="2709" title="Eugenio Matte Stolen" label="Eugenio Matte Stolen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2731" end="2746" title="Socialist Order" label="Socialist Order"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2786" end="2808" title="Arturo Bianchi Gundian" label="Arturo Bianchi Gundian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2840" end="2870" title="Revolutionary Socialist Action" label="Revolutionary Socialist Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174944" start="2874" end="2887" title="Óscar Schnake" label="Óscar Schnake"/>
<link wikidata="Q317952" start="4559" end="4583" title="Communist Party of Chile" label="Communist Party of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4595" end="4613" title="Manuel Noble Plaza" label="Manuel Noble Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4644" end="4655" title="Oscar Waiss" label="Oscar Waiss"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4668" end="4682" title="Tomás Chadwick" label="Tomás Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4718" end="4739" title="Ramón Sepúlveda Loyal" label="Ramón Sepúlveda Loyal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5035" end="5056" title="Oscar Schnake Vergara" label="Oscar Schnake Vergara"/>
<link wikidata="Q641559" start="5188" end="5214" title="1938 Chilean presidential election" label="1938 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q641540" start="5260" end="5273" title="Popular Front (Chile)" label="Popular Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026955" start="5327" end="5343" title="Marmaduque Grove" label="Marmaduque Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q845" start="5396" end="5415" title="Pedro Aguirre Cerda" label="Pedro Aguirre Cerda"/>
<link wikidata="Q672306" start="5499" end="5535" title="National Socialist Movement of Chile" label="National Socialist Movement of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q440" start="5670" end="5686" title="Salvador Allende" label="Salvador Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174944" start="5726" end="5739" title="Oscar Schnake" label="Oscar Schnake"/>
<link wikidata="Q973024" start="6037" end="6074" title="1945 Chilean parliamentary election" label="parliamentary elections of March 1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038265" start="6277" end="6296" title="Democratic Alliance (Chile)" label="Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q820" start="6343" end="6360" title="Juan Antonio Ríos" label="Juan Antonio Ríos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559969" start="6471" end="6487" title="Democratic Party (Chile)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027776" start="6499" end="6512" title="Liberal Party (Chile, 1849–1966)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6529" end="6536" title="Falange (Chile)" label="Falange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174944" start="6538" end="6551" title="Oscar Schnake" label="Oscar Schnake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5858343" start="8850" end="8873" title="Socialist Popular Party of Chile" label="Socialist Popular Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q576" start="10900" end="10916" title="Jorge Alessandri" label="Jorge Alessandri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399616" start="11878" end="11901" title="Popular Socialist Union (Chile)" label="popular socialist union"/>
<link wikidata="Q541117" start="12037" end="12061" title="Carlos Altamirano Orrego" label="Carlos Altamirano Orrego"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12113" end="12138" title="Rolando Calderón Aránguiz" label="Rolando Calderón Aránguiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="12176" end="12192" title="Marxism-Leninism" label="Marxism-Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q389647" start="12238" end="12252" title="anticapitalist" label="anticapitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144178" start="12257" end="12273" title="anti-imperialist" label="anti-imperialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q440" start="12444" end="12468" title="Salvador Allende Gossens" label="Salvador Allende Gossens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279966" start="12801" end="12814" title="Popular Unity (Chile)" label="Popular Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138554" start="12888" end="12919" title="Popular Unitary Action Movement" label="Popular Unitary Action Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q541117" start="13531" end="13555" title="Carlos Altamirano Orrego" label="Carlos Altamirano Orrego"/>
<link wikidata="Q14467" start="13628" end="13637" title="La Serena, Chile" label="La Serena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138554" start="14727" end="14731" title="MAPU" label="MAPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q156017" start="14915" end="14926" title="Operation Condor" label="CIA backing"/>
<link wikidata="Q368" start="14978" end="14994" title="Augusto Pinochet" label="Augusto Pinochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q856670" start="15003" end="15016" title="1973 Chilean coup" label="military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897795" start="15074" end="15099" title="Presidential Republic Era" label="Presidential Republic Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146881" start="15245" end="15264" title="Palace of La Moneda" label="Palace of La Moneda"/>
<link wikidata="Q541117" start="15753" end="15770" title="Carlos Altamirano" label="Carlos Altamirano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="15815" end="15821" title="Havana, Cuba" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264" start="15871" end="15887" title="Cuban Revolution" label="Cuban Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042283" start="16184" end="16202" title="Carlos Lorca" label="Carlos Lorca Tobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q918756" start="16891" end="16908" title="Clodomiro Almeyda" label="Clodomiro Almeyda"/>
<link wikidata="Q541117" start="16990" end="17007" title="Carlos Altamirano" label="Carlos Altamirano"/>
<link wikidata="Q662966" start="17009" end="17021" title="Jorge Arrate" label="Jorge Arrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430306" start="19046" end="19059" title="Ricardo Núñez Muñoz" label="Ricardo Ñúnez"/>
<link wikidata="Q676714" start="20111" end="20145" title="Frente Patriótico Manuel Rodríguez" label="Frente Patriótico Manuel Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935636" start="20246" end="20258" title="Jorge Molina Valdivieso" label="Jorge Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q918756" start="21114" end="21131" title="Clodomiro Almeyda" label="Clodomiro Almeyda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770" start="21239" end="21250" title="Chile Chico" label="Chile Chico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759292" start="21843" end="21868" title="Party for Democracy (Chile)" label="Partido por la Democracia"/>
<link wikidata="Q335" start="22606" end="22621" title="Patricio Aylwin" label="Patricio Aylwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q918756" start="23350" end="23367" title="Clodomiro Almeyda" label="Clodomiro Almeyda"/>
<link wikidata="Q335" start="24690" end="24705" title="Patricio Aylwin" label="Patricio Aylwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356230" start="24779" end="24793" title="Gabriel Valdés" label="Gabriel Valdés"/>
<link wikidata="Q326" start="24798" end="24821" title="Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle" label="Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q331" start="25081" end="25094" title="Ricardo Lagos" label="Ricardo Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443186" start="26709" end="26724" title="Hortensia Bussi" label="Hortensia Bussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5833194" start="27407" end="27421" title="Enrique Correa" label="Enrique Correa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5751198" start="27473" end="27487" title="Carlos Ominami" label="Carlos Ominami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878653" start="27499" end="27512" title="Germán Correa" label="Germán Correa"/>
<link wikidata="Q331" start="28327" end="28340" title="Ricardo Lagos" label="Ricardo Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q326" start="28466" end="28489" title="Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle" label="Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="28529" end="28536" title="Partisan primary" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983840" start="28672" end="28682" title="Luis Maira" label="Luis Maira"/>
<link wikidata="Q662966" start="28692" end="28704" title="Jorge Arrate" label="Jorge Arrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628673" start="28902" end="28917" title="Camilo Escalona" label="Camilo Escalona"/>
<link wikidata="Q11679964" start="28973" end="29004" title="Indictment and arrest of Augusto Pinochet" label="detention of Pinochet in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357872" start="29092" end="29111" title="José Miguel Insulza" label="José Miguel Insulza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810840" start="29116" end="29135" title="Juan Gabriel Valdés" label="Juan Gabriel Valdés"/>
<link wikidata="Q451359" start="29233" end="29253" title="Isabel Allende Bussi" label="Isabel Allende Bussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5951802" start="29255" end="29274" title="Juan Pablo Letelier" label="Juan Pablo Letelier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29276" end="29291" title="Fanny Pollarolo" label="Fanny Pollarolo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29296" end="29315" title="Juan Bustos Ramírez" label="Juan Bustos Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q318808" start="29353" end="29368" title="Baltasar Garzón" label="Baltasar Garzón"/>
<link wikidata="Q662966" start="29866" end="29875" title="Jorge Arrate" label="Arratismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430306" start="29880" end="29887" title="Ricardo Núñez Muñoz" label="Nuñismo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29993" end="30003" title="Manuel Almeyda" label="Almeydismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274258" start="30315" end="30328" title="Joaquín Lavín" label="Joaquín Lavín"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357872" start="30520" end="30539" title="José Miguel Insulza" label="José Miguel Insulza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108485" start="30552" end="30566" title="Ricardo Solari" label="Ricardo Solari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750097" start="30576" end="30587" title="Carlos Cruz Lorenzen" label="Carlos Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q320" start="30608" end="30625" title="Michelle Bachelet" label="Michelle Bachelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886244" start="30644" end="30679" title="2001 Chilean parliamentary election" label="2001 Chilean parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q943126" start="30696" end="30730" title="Coalition of Parties for Democracy" label="Coalition of Parties for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119518" start="30773" end="30801" title="Chamber of Deputies of Chile" label="Chamber of Deputies of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119458" start="30839" end="30845" title="Senate of Chile" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274804" start="32034" end="32052" title="Penguin Revolution" label="Penguin Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q954223" start="32064" end="32076" title="Transantiago" label="Transantiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326430" start="32160" end="32175" title="social contract" label="social contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="32354" end="32383" title="Great Recession" label="world economic crisis of 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628673" start="32684" end="32699" title="Camilo Escalona" label="Camilo Escalona"/>
<link wikidata="Q662966" start="32729" end="32741" title="Jorge Arrate" label="Jorge Arrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714618" start="32751" end="32768" title="Alejandro Navarro (politician)" label="Alejandro Navarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q966522" start="32780" end="32802" title="Marco Enriquez-Ominami" label="Marco Enriquez-Ominami"/>
<link wikidata="Q306" start="33151" end="33167" title="Sebastián Piñera" label="Sebastián Piñera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2792011" start="33316" end="33350" title="2013 Chilean general election" label="2013 Chilean presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q440" start="33584" end="33600" title="Salvador Allende" label="Salvador Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q331" start="33610" end="33623" title="Ricardo Lagos" label="Ricardo Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759292" start="33653" end="33672" title="Party for Democracy (Chile)" label="Party for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q320" start="33683" end="33700" title="Michelle Bachelet" label="Michelle Bachelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q320" start="33710" end="33727" title="Michelle Bachelet" label="Michelle Bachelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q943126" start="33779" end="33811" title="Concert of Parties for Democracy" label="Concert of Parties for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q645225" start="33890" end="33921" title="Elections in Chile" label="Presidential elections in Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="33939" end="33955" title="two-round system" label="two-round system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886342" start="34044" end="34076" title="Government Junta of Chile (1973)" label="Government Junta of Chile (1973)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9284801" start="34078" end="34126" title="Human rights violations in Pinochet&amp;#x27;s Chile" label="Human rights violations in Pinochet&amp;#x27;s Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q16145607" start="34128" end="34147" title="Víctor Olea Alegría" label="Víctor Olea Alegria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042283" start="34170" end="34182" title="Carlos Lorca" label="Carlos Lorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q541117" start="34205" end="34222" title="Carlos Altamirano" label="Carlos Altamirano"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405911" wikidata="Q1308807" url="?curid=405911" title="Computer-aided dispatch">
<text>Computer-aided dispatch (CAD), also called computer-assisted dispatch, is a method of dispatching taxicabs, couriers, field service technicians, mass transit vehicles or emergency services assisted by computer. It can either be used to send messages to the dispatchee via a mobile data terminal (MDT) and/or used to store and retrieve data (i.e. radio logs, field interviews, client information, schedules, etc.). A dispatcher may announce the call details to field units over a two-way radio. Some systems communicate using a two-way radio system&#x27;s selective calling features. CAD systems may send text messages with call-for-service details to alphanumeric pagers or wireless telephony text services like SMS. The central idea is that persons in a dispatch center are able to easily view and understand the status of all units being dispatched. CAD provides displays and tools so that the dispatcher has an opportunity to handle calls-for-service as efficiently as possible.

CAD typically consists of a suite of software packages used to initiate public safety calls for service, dispatch, and maintain the status of responding resources in the field. It is generally used by emergency communications dispatchers, call-takers, and 911 operators in centralized, public-safety call centers, as well as by field personnel utilizing mobile data terminals (MDTs) or mobile data computers (MDCs). 

CAD systems consist of several modules that provide services at multiple levels in a dispatch center and in the field of public safety. These services include call input, call dispatching, call status maintenance, event notes, field unit status and tracking, and call resolution and disposition. CAD systems also include interfaces that permit the software to provide services to dispatchers, call takers, and field personnel with respect to control and use of analog radio and telephone equipment, as well as logger-recorder functions.

==Methodology==
Computer-assisted dispatch systems use one or more servers located in a central dispatch office, which communicate with computer terminals in a communications center or with mobile data terminals installed in vehicles. There are a multitude of CAD programs that suit different department needs, but the fundamentals of each system are the same. They include:

* Log on/off times of police personnel (sworn/non-sworn)
* Generating and archiving incidents that begin with a phone call from a citizen or originate from personnel in the field
* Assigning field personnel to incidents
* Updating Incidents and logging those updates
* Generating case numbers for incidents that require an investigation
* Timestamping every action taken by the dispatcher at the terminal

In an ideal setting, a call is received by a call-taker and information about the call is inputted into the CAD template. Simply, location, reporting party and incident are the main fields that have to be populated by type-codes. For example, if there was a burglary in progress, the type-code for that incident could be &quot;BURG&quot;; when BURG is typed out, then the program will spell out &quot;BURGLARY (in progress)&quot;. If the location was at the 1400 block of Madison, the type-code could be &quot;14MAD.&quot; The reporting party information would be populated by the call-taker including last name, first name, call-back number, etc.

A typical CAD printout looks something like this based on the example above:
 LOCATION - 1400 Madison
 RP - Doe, John, 555-5555, 1404 Madison
 INCIDENT - BURGLARY (in progress)
 SYNOPSIS - &quot;Caller reports a possible burglary in progress based on seeing individuals 
 inside the residence/Caller advises 2 persons inside the location and call advises 
 the current residents are on vacation.&quot;

Again, granted as it can be seen that the fields are spelled out, the call-taker uses those abbreviations that are already predetermined in order to quickly gather and transmit the information.

The dispatcher then receives the call from the call-taker and is able to dispatch the call to those available. The dispatcher&#x27;s screen would show the available personnel that are dispatchable. A typical setting can be exemplified by this:
 INCIDENT # - 110001
 LOCATION - 1400 Madison
 RP - Doe, John, 555-5555
 INCIDENT - BURGLARY (In Progress)
 SYNOPSIS - &quot;Caller reports a possible burglary in progress based on seeing individuals 
 inside the residence/Caller advises 2 persons inside the location and call advises 
 the current residents are on vacation.&quot;
 UNITS - 746 (Pri), 749 (Cov)
 Units available - (3)
 Units out of service - (2)
 745 - Avail.
 746 - Not Avail. Inc # 554121
 747 - Avail.
 748 - Avail.
 749 - Not Avail. Inc # 554122

Everything that is gathered, dispatched and disposed is usually stored in a central server in which the type codes reside, or possibly another server. All of these calls which have incident numbers attached to them can be recalled by an internal search engine. For example, a request for a printout of all calls to Madison in the past hour could be gathered by querying the CAD program by location:

 Search by: Location
 LOCATION [ ]
 Result:
 (Now filled in)
 Search by: Location
 LOCATION [14MAD ]
 Result: (1) Incidents

CAD can be used in a multitude of ways, whether it is for radio logs, call logs or statistical analysis.

==Consoles==


Typical of local government dispatching facilities, the Denver RTD&#x27;s facility is one example of a transit dispatch center. Communications consoles are mounted in desk-style electronics racks. Features include multi-line telephones. Modern facilities usually include a variety of computing systems for operational and administrative purposes. 

Consoles serve as a human interface and connect to push-to-talk dispatch radio systems. Audio from all channels is processed through audio level compression circuits and is routed to two separate speakers identified as &quot;select&quot; and &quot;unselect&quot;. Each has a volume control. The select channel or channels carry the highest priority communications. To prevent missed messages on critical channels, the select volume may be configured so it cannot be set to an inaudible level. Unselect channels may be used for special events, other agencies, or purposes that do not involve dispatch and may be inaudible. By pressing a button, any channel on the console can be toggled between select and unselect status. Each channel has an independent push-to-talk button, allowing the dispatcher to talk over one channel at a time. For broadcast messages, a single button transmits over all selected channels at the same time. A digital clock and an LED bar-graph or VU meter are included. 

Each channel has a label identifying it and indicator lights and buttons to control settings. A typical channel has a busy light, a call light, select light, select button, and a transmit button. The steady, red busy light indicates another dispatch position is transmitting on the channel. The flashing yellow call light indicates a field unit is talking on the channel. The call light usually blinks for several seconds after a transmission ends allowing a busy dispatcher to look up from a telephone call and determine which channel the last message came from.

Some console dispatch panels are actually a PC-based application. Such is the case of Zetron&#x27;s Acom system and Avtec&#x27;s Scout system. This allows for easy customization and modification of the dispatch key layout.

==Service levels and geographic information==

Computerized mapping, automatic vehicle location, automatic number identification and caller-identification technology are often used to enhance the service by pinpointing the locations of both the client and the most suitable vehicle for serving the client.

Some CAD systems allow several sources of information to be combined. For example, adding automatic vehicle location (AVL) and geographic information (GIS) could improve service by getting units to a service call location faster. Ideally, CAD is connected to monitor vehicle locations provided by an AVL system. This information is used to suggest the closest vehicle to an event. How is the closest unit determined?

===Basic zone system===

The simplest system is a beat or zone map system. For example, in a community with four fire stations, a grid is overlaid on a community map. Each zone of the grid is identified with a progression of police beats, ambulance zones, transit zones, or fire stations. One grid might be labeled: AB241. This means fire station 2, then 4, then 1, then 3 would respond to a fire call occurring inside this zone. The predefined order is created by persons with expertise in the service being provided, local geography, traffic, and patterns in calls for service. 

Since only basic GIS information is included, if AVL was available, it would simply display service vehicle locations on a map. The closest unit would be interpreted by the dispatcher looking at vehicle locations projected on the map.

Where detailed geographic data are not available, units may be assigned based on the center of a district. To make the computing problem easier, the CAD system may use &quot;centroids&quot; to evaluate service vehicle locations. Centroids are estimated center points within a zone. The system calculates a distance from a fire station or AVL location to a centroid point. The closest fire station, according to CAD system rules, would be assigned. Systems may use centroids that are not exactly centered in order to skew or weight system decisions. Staff based at a fire station that is physically closer by drawing a straight line on the map may be slower to reach a zone. This can occur because responding units must drive around freeways, lakes, or terrain obstructions in order to reach a zone. A centroid may be moved because 200-car freight trains often block a railroad crossing used to access a particular zone.

This is the cheapest system to develop because it requires the least detailed geographic information and the simplest calculations. Another problem occurs where several services use the same system. Police and transit, for example, may have different ideas about what boundaries define the ideal zone or how centroids should be weighted.

=== CAD using geocoding===

Geocoding is a translation system allowing addresses to be converted to X- and Y-coordinates. Someone placing a call for service has an address attached to a wired phone number or tells the dispatcher their address. For example, suppose the caller&#x27;s address is &quot;123 Main Street&quot;. 

The GIS or CAD system includes a look-up table. The table may identify odd-numbered addresses in the community as being on the north and east sides of streets. Addresses from 113 to 157 Main Street are identified as being along Main Street&#x27;s center line between Broadway and Washington. 123 is estimated to be on the north side of Main Street somewhere closer to 113 than 157. This estimate produces a latitude and longitude, or a set of Universal Transverse Mercator coordinates. The coordinates are close enough to identify the closest service vehicle. This system may automatically append the name of the nearest cross-street or intersecting street.

Again, the system uses a straight-line distance to determine which service vehicle is closest to a call for service. If an AVL system is used, the CAD system will look through a list of most recent reported vehicle positions. Next, the positions are compared to the service vehicle status. The CAD system may identify several of the closest units that have a status of &quot;available&quot;. The dispatcher makes an ideal choice from the CAD system shortlist.

This type of system is significantly more expensive than a zone system. The basic system may start with maps from the US Census Bureau or a county assessor&#x27;s office. The quality of these maps may be good but will not be ideal for dispatching. There would normally be one or more persons on staff who would deal with data changes from new development, new streets, or data quality problems. The person would compile addresses and generate street centerlines in mapping software. Geocoding varies in accuracy depending on data sources and vendors. It normally takes years of work and planning before a system is implemented. Modern geocoded systems will often display service vehicle locations, the location of service calls, and the locations of callers on a map. This helps to disambiguate calls for service and reduces the likelihood of dispatching two reports of a single call for service as two separate calls.

Another problem comes from technologies using differing datums or coordinate systems. For example, suppose your AVL system uses degrees-decimal degrees format. The AVL display for a vehicle at the Heart Butte Post Office in Montana shows a latitude and longitude of 48.28333 N, -112.83583 W. The CAD system uses degrees-minutes-seconds format data and shows the same location as 481700N, 1125009W. How do you translate? This is sometimes a problem with neighboring CAD systems. Ideally, you should be able to send and receive calls to and from CAD systems in neighboring areas. What if the state or provincial government has standardized on a different coordinate system?

===Full GIS/AVL integration===

The most expensive and technically challenging systems fully utilize the capabilities of geographic information systems (GIS) and automatic vehicle location (AVL). In these systems, the street centerlines are described as &quot;routable&quot;. In addition to geocoding and accurate street centerlines, intersections have attributes or scores. Can a service vehicle turn left from eastbound Carnegie Street onto northbound Hooligan Boulevard? A scoring system is used to assess the difficulty of making the turn. At one end of the scoring system there might be an interchange where service vehicles had unrestricted access in making the turn. Perhaps both streets are one-way, making it relatively easy to turn from one onto another. In the middle scores, a left turn might be blocked occasionally by heavy traffic, a draw bridge, or street cars. At the most difficult score, the two streets may cross but the lack of any interchange does not allow service vehicles to get from one to the other.

To calculate the closest service vehicles, the CAD system does a network analysis of the road system based on these routable street centerlines. It assesses the path from the service call to the AVL location of available vehicles. The system recommends the service vehicles with the shortest path. 

Routable street centerlines take into account differences between northbound and southbound lanes on a freeway or turnpike. For example, to reach a point in the southbound lanes of a turnpike, service vehicles may need to drive north to the next exit then return on the southbound side. The analysis of a routable street network takes this into account so long as the event location is accurately reported. Routable systems account for barriers like lakes by calculating the distance of the driven route rather than a straight-line distance. It is assumed the service vehicle driver knows the shortest path or that all drivers make similar numbers of wrong turns.

===Concentration===
CAD systems require support staff with special skills. This can lead to concentration of dispatch facilities, particularly where there is population growth or where automation is required to meet defined service objectives. 

In any system, concentration of facilities increases risks of outages or massive failures. In a system where the call traffic is so high that advanced technology is needed to handle routine levels of day-to-day calls, relatively minor failures can have major effects on service levels. For example, where everyone is used to the convenience of automatic vehicle location (AVL), an AVL outage can suddenly increase staff workloads. Suppose a failure causes a condition where CAD cannot recommend a closest unit. How will the dispatcher efficiently assess which unit to assign?

==Data exchange (EDI)==

In public safety systems, standards are under discussion to allow disparate systems to exchange call information. For example, a call taker at the county fire department receives a call for an auto accident inside a city limit. Evolving standards will allow CAD systems to send messages to one another for calls originating outside local jurisdiction. Some entities have arrangements that already support data exchange between systems, but standards aim to make these interconnections more common. Because of auditing trail and fail-safe needs, the problem is more complex than it sounds.

The usage of EDI applied to CAD is specific to the law enforcement community and should not be confused with Electronic Document Interchange (EDI) standards for eCommerce. Within law enforcement EDI is used as a buzzword to represent all electronic automated messaging. 

More mature efforts to interconnect CAD can be found in the standards developed for the Intelligent Transportation Initiatives program of Department of Transportation. This initiative sponsored the IEEE 1512 series of protocols for emergency management which provides sophisticated means to coordinate incidents across operations centers using CAD software.

Additional work is occurring under the National Information Exchange Model to link homeland security with CAD. Also the OASIS international standards body has produced standards funded in part by the DHS and the disaster management e-gov initiative to communicate in emergencies.

Other interoperability technologies can bridge disparities between the data-format, software, and hardware that constitute various computer-aided dispatch systems in various jurisdictions. &quot;Middleware&quot;, software and servers (data brokers), can translate and integrate various systems into a seamless automated dispatch system. One example of such middleware (provided by Utah-based FATPOT Technologies/CII) exists in Orange County, Calif., where the Fire Authority has integrated different emergency service answering points into a seamless dispatching network. A similar project was completed for the Silicon Valley Regional Interoperability Project (SVRIP), and is part of the Dept. of Homeland Security&#x27;s CADIP report.

Australia and New Zealand use the ICEMS protocol for messaging between different CAD systems operated by various emergency services organisations.

==Part of business enterprise computing system==

In business use of CAD, the dispatch system may be a module or part of a larger enterprise computing system. Rather than having multiple infrastructures, being able to have a single infrastructure with many applications running on it is important.

At the high end of enterprise integration for CAD there is SOS. SOS or &quot;systems of systems&quot; is a methodology and a set of technology for linking distributed independent applications into one meta-system or system of systems. These methods were originally being used at DOD for command and control (C2) but have now been applied to dispatch in efforts like the Department of Transportation Intelligent Transportation System at the Transportation Management Centers and other efforts involving DHS counterterrorism or fusion centers. Some local jurisdictions have also integrated their dispatch systems using EAI (Electronic Application Integration) software.

==Recent developments==
Computer aided call handling (CACH) is built on the premise that effective call handling is the foundation for an efficient dispatch response. By using structured call handling and a series of risk calculations, such systems can make objective dispatch recommendations based on information provided by the caller.

==See also==
* Emergency medical dispatcher
* EDXL Sharp
* Incident Command System
* Logistics
* Resource Ordering Status System
* Selective calling
* Public safety answering point

==References==
===Original article===
* Horn, D. W., (2005). &quot;An Integrated Public-Safety Computer-Aided Dispatch System.&quot; In-press Master&#x27;s Thesis Project, Regis University, Denver, CO.

===Notes===

12.^ https://www.intrado.com/life-safety# is an example of an Emergency Call Handling system that feeds CADs

== External links ==
* California Highway Patrol Online CAD Logs.
* NASA research into future console designs.
* Modern Private Security Dispatch System.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1308807" start="0" end="23" title="Computer-aided dispatch" label="Computer-aided dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308807" start="25" end="28" title="Computer-aided dispatch" label="CAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308807" start="43" end="69" title="Computer-aided dispatch" label="computer-assisted dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="98" end="105" title="taxicab" label="taxicab"/>
<link wikidata="Q848466" start="108" end="115" title="courier" label="courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q814610" start="170" end="187" title="emergency service" label="emergency service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498347" start="274" end="294" title="mobile data terminal" label="mobile data terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474418" start="479" end="492" title="two-way radio" label="two-way radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447757" start="555" end="572" title="selective calling" label="selective calling"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="712" end="715" title="Short message service" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="1020" end="1028" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="2006" end="2012" title="Server (computing)" label="server"/>
<link wikidata="Q18433212" start="5858" end="5881" title="audio level compression" label="audio level compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="6678" end="6681" title="LED" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q285136" start="6695" end="6703" title="VU meter" label="VU meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q483130" start="7556" end="7576" title="Geographic information system" label="Computerized mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527484" start="7578" end="7604" title="automatic vehicle location" label="automatic vehicle location"/>
<link wikidata="Q787179" start="7606" end="7637" title="automatic number identification" label="automatic number identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q747865" start="7642" end="7674" title="Caller ID" label="caller-identification technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q511093" start="9226" end="9235" title="Centroid" label="centroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346408" start="10340" end="10349" title="Geocoding" label="Geocoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="10355" end="10366" title="translation" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="11044" end="11052" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="11057" end="11066" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q588975" start="11080" end="11109" title="Universal Transverse Mercator" label="Universal Transverse Mercator"/>
<link wikidata="Q23383" start="14199" end="14210" title="draw bridge" label="draw bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="14215" end="14226" title="street cars" label="street cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498663" start="16345" end="16360" title="fire department" label="fire department"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044950" start="17451" end="17486" title="National Information Exchange Model" label="National Information Exchange Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455952" start="17532" end="17537" title="OASIS (organization)" label="OASIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="17612" end="17615" title="United States Department of Homeland Security" label="DHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="18431" end="18440" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="18445" end="18456" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18465" end="18470" title="ICEMS" label="ICEMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q508378" start="19277" end="19310" title="intelligent transportation system" label="Intelligent Transportation System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157520" start="19571" end="19599" title="Computer aided call handling" label="Computer aided call handling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370696" start="19901" end="19929" title="Emergency medical dispatcher" label="Emergency medical dispatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322889" start="19932" end="19942" title="EDXL Sharp" label="EDXL Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660964" start="19945" end="19968" title="Incident Command System" label="Incident Command System"/>
<link wikidata="Q177777" start="19971" end="19980" title="Logistics" label="Logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315811" start="19983" end="20014" title="Resource Ordering Status System" label="Resource Ordering Status System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447757" start="20017" end="20034" title="Selective calling" label="Selective calling"/>
<link wikidata="Q510646" start="20037" end="20066" title="Public safety answering point" label="Public safety answering point"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405912" wikidata="Q712886" url="?curid=405912" title="Ekrima Sa'id Sabri">
<text>Sheikh Ekrima Sa&#x27;id Sabri (; born 1939) is a religious leader and former Grand Mufti of Jerusalem and Palestine from October 1994 to July 2006. He was appointed by Yasser Arafat.

Mahmoud Abbas removed Sabri as mufti in July 2006, reportedly for his growing popularity and open expression of racially charged, one-sided political views. Abbas appointed Muhammad Ahmad Hussein in July 2006 as Sabri&#x27;s successor.

Israel has arrested Sabri several times, most recently on August 2, 2024 after allegedly mourning Ismail Haniyeh&#x27;s assassination.

==Controversy==
In a 1999 interview regarding the political situation on the Temple Mount, Sabri stated, &quot;If the Jews want peace, they will stay away from Al Aqsa. This is a decree from God. The Haram al-Sharif belongs to the Muslim. But we know the Jew is planning on destroying the Haram. The Jew will get the Christian to do his work for him. This is the way of the Jews. This is the way Satan manifests himself. The majority of the Jews want to destroy the mosque. They are preparing this as we speak.&quot;

In a 2000 interview with the Italian newspaper &quot;la Repubblica&quot;, Sabri responded to a question about the Holocaust by stating, &quot;Six million Jews dead? No way, they were much fewer. Let’s stop with this fairy tale exploited by Israel to capture international solidarity. It is not my fault if Hitler hated Jews, indeed they were hated a little everywhere. Instead, it is necessary to denounce the unjust occupation endured by my people. Tomorrow I will ask John Paul II... to support our cause.&quot;

In a July 2001 interview with Jeffrey Goldberg for &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, Sabri remarked: &quot;Look at the society of the Israelis. It is a selfish society that loves life. These are not people who are eager to die for their country and their God. The Jews will leave this land rather than die, but the Muslim is happy to die.&quot;

On 20 February 2005, Sabri appeared on Saudi Arabian Al Majd TV to comment on the assassination of Rafic Hariri, the former Lebanese Prime Minister. Sabri stated, &quot;Anyone who studies &quot;The Protocols of the Elders of Zion&quot; and specifically the Talmud will discover that one of the goals of these &quot;Protocols&quot; is to cause confusion in the world and to undermine security throughout the world.&quot;

==See also==

*Grand Mufti of Jerusalem

==Notes and references==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="0" end="6" title="Sheikh" label="Sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q712886" start="7" end="30" title="Ekrima Sa&amp;#x27;id Sabri" label="Ekrima Sa&amp;#x27;id Sabri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538679" start="78" end="89" title="Grand Mufti" label="Grand Mufti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="93" end="102" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q407199" start="107" end="116" title="Palestinian territories" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34211" start="169" end="182" title="Yasser Arafat" label="Yasser Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q127998" start="185" end="198" title="Mahmoud Abbas" label="Mahmoud Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137829" start="358" end="380" title="Muhammad Ahmad Hussein" label="Muhammad Ahmad Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q152378" start="520" end="534" title="Ismail Haniyeh" label="Ismail Haniyeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q128172378" start="542" end="555" title="Assassination of Ismail Haniyeh" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q193163" start="635" end="647" title="Temple Mount" label="Temple Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610806" start="758" end="773" title="Al-Aqsa" label="Haram al-Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q85329" start="1129" end="1142" title="la Repubblica" label="la Repubblica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="1186" end="1199" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="1546" end="1558" title="John Paul II" label="John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176005" start="1621" end="1637" title="Jeffrey Goldberg" label="Jeffrey Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="1648" end="1662" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="1970" end="1982" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121863" start="1984" end="1994" title="Almajd TV Network" label="Al Majd TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q192778" start="2030" end="2042" title="Rafic Hariri" label="Rafic Hariri"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="2055" end="2063" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q26193" start="2125" end="2160" title="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" label="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="2188" end="2194" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774336" start="2367" end="2391" title="Grand Mufti of Jerusalem" label="Grand Mufti of Jerusalem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405913" wikidata="Q767012" url="?curid=405913" title="Egyptian Wafd Party">
<text>The New Wafd Party (), officially the Egyptian Wafd Party and also known as the Al-Wafd Party, is a nationalist liberal party in Egypt.

It is the extension of one of the oldest and historically most active political parties in Egypt, Wafd Party, which was dismantled after the 1952 Revolution. The New Wafd was established in 1978, but banned only months later. It was revived after President Anwar Sadat&#x27;s assassination in 1981.

In Egypt&#x27;s legislative and presidential elections in November and December 2005, the party won 6 out of 454 seats in the People&#x27;s Assembly, and its presidential candidate Numan Gumaa received 2.9 per cent of the total votes cast for president.

Following the 2011 revolution the party joined the National Democratic Alliance for Egypt electoral bloc, which was dominated by the Muslim Brotherhood&#x27;s Freedom and Justice Party.

No member of the party was a candidate for the 2012 election.

As the date neared for fielding candidate lists, Wafd left the alliance and competed in the elections independently. In the subsequent parliamentary elections, the party came third with 9.2% of the vote, and was the most successful non-Islamist party.

Wafd Party is now headquartered in Dokki, Giza Province in Egypt.

Esteemed lawyer Bahaa El-Din Abou Shaka is the current party chairman after winning the Wafd&#x27;s internal elections in 2018, replacing pharmaceutical tycoon El-Sayyed El-Badawi, who had served the maximum of two consecutive terms.

==Ideology and goals==

The New Wafd has tried to place itself at the ideological center between the main historic traditions in Egypt of Arab socialism and private capitalism. It has been critical of the government&#x27;s encouragement of foreign private investment, advocating a more balanced approach to the relationship between private and public sectors.

The party presses for introducing political, economic, and social reforms, promoting democracy, ensuring basic freedoms and human rights, and maintaining national unity.

The party also calls for abolishing the emergency law, solving the unemployment and housing problems, upgrading the health services and developing the education system.

=== Controversy ===
In an interview with &quot;The Washington Times&quot; in July 2011, former Wafd Party vice-chairman Ahmed Ezz el-Arab dismissed The Holocaust as a &quot;lie&quot; (while accepting that the Nazis killed &quot;hundreds of thousands&quot; of Jews, but not 6 million), and the &quot;Diary of Anne Frank&quot; as a &quot;forgery&quot;. Moreover, he claimed that the September 11 attacks were in reality perpetrated by Mossad, the CIA and America&#x27;s &quot;military–industrial complex&quot;, and that Osama bin Laden was an &quot;American agent&quot;.

== Prominent party figures ==
*Fuad Serageddin Pasha – the party&#x27;s first chairman
*Bahaa El-Din Abu Shoka – member of parliament, senator; current chairman of the party, and chairman of the legislative committee in parliament and leader of the party&#x27;s current parliamentary bloc
*Khaled Kandil – current vice chairman of the party, senator
*Numan Gumaa – former chairman and 2005 presidential candidate
* Monir Fakhri Abdel Nour – long-time serving Coptic parliament member, politician and former party vice chairman
* Muhammed Elwan – one of the founders and long-serving chairman&#x27;s assistant
* Essam Shiha – member of the supreme committee of the party
* Ahmed Gamal El Segini – member of parliament, current chairman of the committee of local governance
* Hilmi Murad – one of the founding vice presidents

== History ==
== After 1973==
After the end of 6 October War with Israel, and the Camp David treaty, Egyptian president Anwar Sadat started to accept the return of the multi-party system to the political life in Egypt, after Egypt had been under one-party rule for over 25 years, therefore, Sadat established the Egyptian Arab Socialist Party, where he became its president. In 1976 the Liberal Party was established, which represented the Liberal wing, followed by the Unionist Party, which represented the left wing. Later on Sadat established the National Democratic party. After then there were plans to revive the Wafd Party, led by the efforts of young ambitious Egyptian political figures and Fouad Serag el Deen Pasha.

=== Early years and establishment===

In January 1978 Fouad Serageddin requested to allow New Wafd Party to engage into the Egyptian political life freely, which was met by disagreement from the Egyptian authorities and the President. The Egyptian authorities started to spread false news about the corruption of the party, and that New Wafd Party seeks the return of the pre-1952 revolution status. However, New Wafd party was accepted to be established on 4 February 1978, by the Egyptian Partys&#x27; Committee. Even though New Wafd party was accepted and could stand legally, the party froze its membership with its own discretion to avoid clashes with the Egyptian President and Authorities, which inevitably took place, which included the detainment of Fouad Serag el Deen, the party&#x27;s chairman at then, by a decision of the president in September 1981, which included many Egyptian political figures and some founders of New Wafd Party. 

After the assassination of Anwar el Saddat, after which, Hosni Mubarak became president, change in Egyptian political life was needed, as such Hosni Mubarak decided to free all those detained by Anwar Sadat&#x27;s decisions. Consequently, New Wafd party took the chance its chance for revival, and decided to unfreeze it status, which was rejected by the Egyptian Lawsuits authority, however, New Wafd party challenged such decision and the party was back to political life in 1984.

=== 1984 elections ===
In 1984 Wafd formed an alliance with the Muslim Brotherhood ahead of parliamentary elections, but the results were disappointing as it won only 15% of the vote.

=== 2005–2006 turmoil ===
Early in December 2005 the party appeared to be in crisis following the parliamentary elections, when party chairman Numan Gumaa dismissed prominent party leader and vice chairman Monir Fakhri Abdel Nour following the poor performance the party showed during the elections.

Abdel Nour was also the leader of the opposition bloc in the outgoing parliament before losing his seat in the first stage of elections. Abdel Nour told the media before his dismissal, that the only way the party could improve would be by &quot;changing its leadership&quot;. He also continued that there was much support within the party for such a change.

After a poor showing in the 2005 Egyptian Presidential elections, the Wafd Party split into two camps, with one group demanding that Numan Gumaa leave his post as chairman. That demand became even more pronounced after the party also did poorly in the parliamentary elections.

Later in December 2005 the party&#x27;s higher political board reverted Gumaa&#x27;s decisions on firing Abdel Nour as well as other members. The higher board also elections for its membership and amended its internal by-laws and rules, especially those that give the party&#x27;s chairman vast authorities in an aim to trim the chairman&#x27;s political powers, all of which Gumaa has agreed to support.

On 18 January 2006 the supreme committee for the party ousted its chairman Numan Gomaa from the party and from the presidency of the board of al-Wafd newspaper. The committee attributed its decision to Gomaa&#x27;s tyrannical behaviour and abuse of authority.

It also appointed his deputy Mahmoud Abaza as an interim chairman for a period of 60 days after which the General Assembly of the party would be invited for an emergency meeting to choose a new chairman.

However, Gomaa contended that this decision contradicted to the party&#x27;s statute and that he was the legitimate chairman who can be dismissed only by a decision of the party&#x27;s General Assembly. He responded by filing a complaint to Egypt&#x27;s Prosecutor General who ruled that Gomaa should be allowed access to party&#x27;s headquarters. Abaza filed an urgent lawsuit asking that the Prosecutor General&#x27;s ruling be overturned.

The party&#x27;s newspaper &quot;Al-Wafd&quot; was suspended for thirteen days from 27 January until 8 February 2006 after Gomaa asked &quot;Al-Ahram&quot; publishing house to stop printing the paper and fired its editor and some journalists, complaining of their allegiance to Abaza&#x27;s group.

On 10 February 2006, the party&#x27;s General Assembly agreed to dismiss Gomaa from the Wafd presidency and appointed Mustafa El-Tawil (a member of al-Wafd supreme committee) as an interim president till the next elections in July 2006. Gomaa argued the decision was due to an earlier ruling by Giza&#x27;s court of first instance to stop the General Assembly meeting.

On 1 April 2006, Gumaa and his supporters occupied the party&#x27;s headquarters to reclaim control and opened fire on supporters of the rival faction who responded by throwing stones. Twenty three people were injured and fire broke out in the building but was brought under control. Egyptian authorities arrested Gumaa and some of his supporters.

===2010 party elections===

In May 2010, the party&#x27;s deputy chairman Fouad Badrawi, grandson of Wafd&#x27;s late leader Fouad Serageddin announced that he was withdrawing his name from the nominations for party presidency to allow El-Sayyid el-Badawi, a member of the party&#x27;s supreme authority and the party&#x27;s former secretary-general, to run instead in the party elections scheduled by the end of the month. 
In a rare occurrence in Egyptian partisan life, the elections were conducted in a transparent, peaceful manner and characterized by integrity. At its end, it was announced that El-Badawi would be the new party chairman, with the outgoing president standing beside him.

Since his election, El-Badawi has met with many prominent figures in Egyptian life, ranging from politicians, current members of parliament, Muslim and Coptic religious figures and even actors, actresses and football players.

To many observers, Wafd merged as a much stronger party after this election, which would be counted that would once again attract liberals who were losing grip in the current political map to Islamists and other extremists.

===Role after 2011 revolution===
After the 2011 Egyptian revolution forced President Hosni Mubarak to announce that he would step down in the coming elections, the government invited opposition parties to participate in dialogue. The party&#x27;s secretary-general accepted on condition that protesters would not be attacked.

Representatives of the Al-Wafd Party joined anti-Mubarak protesters in Tahrir Square and vowed not to have a dialogue with government officials until Mubarak relinquished his office.

===Parliamentary election, 2011–12===
Following the 2011 Egyptian revolution, on 13 June 2011 the Wafd Party announced its alliance (the National Democratic Alliance for Egypt) with the Freedom and Justice Party, the political wing of the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood, to present a joint list of candidates for the 2011 parliamentary election. Executive members of Wafd have criticized the cooperation of the secular party with the Islamists. As the date neared for fielding candidate lists, the Wafd decided to participate in the elections independently, and left the Democratic Alliance for Egypt.

In the subsequent parliamentary election, the New Wafd Party won 9.2% of the vote, and 38 seats in the 508-seat parliament. It was the third-most successful party, after the Islamist Freedom &amp; Justice Party with 213 seats, and the more conservative Islamist Al-Nour Party with 107 seats. It had a slim lead over the other main secularist grouping, the Egyptian Bloc.

==Current parliament (2015–present)==
===Elections===
The Wafd Party successfully contested the 2015 parliamentary elections, winning 36 seats, making it the third largest party in parliament. At the time it was led by El-Sayyid el-Badawi, and ran as part of the &quot;For the Love of Egypt&quot; electoral alliance.

===Policies===
The Wafd Party has largely supported the Egyptian Government since the formation of the current parliament. It has strongly backed the economic reform programme embarked on by President Sisi, believing it to be the key to Egypt&#x27;s successful economic recovery from the 2011 and 2013 revolutions.

In the international arena, the Wafd Party has strongly supported efforts to strengthen ties with other Arab countries, and especially form links with the African continent, in order to regain Egypt&#x27;s leading and influential position in the African and Arab World, as a strong regional power. Being Egypt&#x27;s oldest party, and having been set up 100 years ago, the party enjoys a powerful reputation among neighbouring countries, and often sends foreign delegations abroad to campaign for Egypt&#x27;s interests.

===Abou Shaka leadership===
In early 2018 Bahaa El-Din Abou Shaka won the internal party elections, becoming Chairman of the Wafd Party. He took on a far more active than that of his predecessor, with the aim of rounding up all liberal parties in Egypt in order to form an alliance that would act as an opposition bloc to the government, and the now parliamentary majority party Future of the Nation.

He is currently leading efforts to establish, for the first time in Egyptian history, a council representing all major political parties in Egypt, no matter what their policies, that would hold regular meetings with the Egyptian President to discuss matters of national interest, and open dialogue into major current affairs with the executive branch.

Abdel-Sanad Yamama is the party&#x27;s candidate in the 2023 Egyptian presidential election.

== Electoral history ==

=== Presidential elections ===

=== People&#x27;s Assembly of Egypt elections ===
== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q767012" start="4" end="18" title="Egyptian Wafd Party" label="New Wafd Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q767012" start="38" end="57" title="Egyptian Wafd Party" label="Egyptian Wafd Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q767012" start="80" end="93" title="Egyptian Wafd Party" label="Al-Wafd Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q660018" start="100" end="119" title="National liberalism" label="nationalist liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745541" start="120" end="125" title="List of political parties in Egypt" label="party"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="129" end="134" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q748617" start="235" end="245" title="Wafd Party" label="Wafd Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780431" start="278" end="293" title="1952 Revolution" label="1952 Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="394" end="405" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Anwar Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="453" end="464" title="legislative" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115151" start="469" end="481" title="Egyptian presidential election, 2005" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354671" start="482" end="491" title="elections in Egypt" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501976" start="563" end="585" title="People&amp;#x27;s Assembly of Egypt" label="People&amp;#x27;s Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879171" start="618" end="629" title="Numan Gumaa" label="Numan Gumaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q29198" start="706" end="721" title="2011 Egyptian revolution" label="2011 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186130" start="743" end="781" title="National Democratic Alliance for Egypt" label="National Democratic Alliance for Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q133207" start="825" end="843" title="Muslim Brotherhood" label="Muslim Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q685715" start="851" end="876" title="Freedom and Justice Party (Egypt)" label="Freedom and Justice Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q861684" start="926" end="939" title="2012 Egyptian presidential election" label="2012 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382040" start="1077" end="1100" title="2011–12 Egyptian parliamentary election" label="parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842214" start="1278" end="1301" title="Bahaa El-Din Abu Shoka" label="Bahaa El-Din Abou Shaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q539624" start="1422" end="1441" title="El-Sayyid el-Badawi" label="El-Sayyed El-Badawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q624284" start="1635" end="1649" title="Arab socialism" label="Arab socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="1662" end="1672" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12150" start="2069" end="2082" title="Emergency law in Egypt" label="emergency law"/>
<link wikidata="Q494170" start="2246" end="2266" title="The Washington Times" label="The Washington Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="2347" end="2360" title="The Holocaust" label="The Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911" start="2498" end="2517" title="Diary of Anne Frank" label="Diary of Anne Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="2580" end="2600" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q34216" start="2632" end="2638" title="Mossad" label="Mossad"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="2644" end="2647" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q744593" start="2673" end="2700" title="military–industrial complex" label="military–industrial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="2717" end="2732" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165850" start="2800" end="2815" title="Fuad Serageddin" label="Fuad Serageddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842214" start="2857" end="2879" title="Bahaa El-Din Abu Shoka" label="Bahaa El-Din Abu Shoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q104798209" start="3059" end="3072" title="Khaled Kandil" label="Khaled Kandil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879171" start="3120" end="3131" title="Numan Gumaa" label="Numan Gumaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860273" start="3184" end="3207" title="Monir Fakhri Abdel Nour" label="Monir Fakhri Abdel Nour"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="3228" end="3234" title="Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56289646" start="3380" end="3391" title="Essam Shiha" label="Essam Shiha"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823329" start="3441" end="3462" title="Ahmed Gamal El Segini" label="Ahmed Gamal El Segini"/>
<link wikidata="Q109484335" start="3543" end="3554" title="Hilmi Murad" label="Hilmi Murad"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="3714" end="3725" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Anwar Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q253195" start="3907" end="3936" title="Egypt Arab Socialist Party" label="Egyptian Arab Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q402650" start="3981" end="3994" title="Liberal Socialists Party (Egypt)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966909" start="4064" end="4078" title="National Progressive Unionist Party" label="Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q841133" start="4144" end="4169" title="National Democratic Party (Egypt)" label="National Democratic party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165850" start="4376" end="4392" title="Fouad Serageddin" label="Fouad Serageddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780431" start="4698" end="4713" title="Egyptian Revolution of 1952" label="1952 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q34105" start="5330" end="5343" title="Hosni Mubarak" label="Hosni Mubarak"/>
<link wikidata="Q16190895" start="5821" end="5839" title="Muslim Brotherhood of Egypt" label="Muslim Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860273" start="6148" end="6171" title="Monir Fakhri Abdel Nour" label="Monir Fakhri Abdel Nour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118565" start="8229" end="8236" title="Al-Wafd" label="Al-Wafd"/>
<link wikidata="Q286468" start="8337" end="8345" title="Al-Ahram" label="Al-Ahram"/>
<link wikidata="Q81788" start="8790" end="8794" title="Giza" label="Giza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8802" end="8825" title="The Egyptian Judicial System#Courts" label="court of first instance"/>
<link wikidata="Q539624" start="9450" end="9469" title="El-Sayyid el-Badawi" label="El-Sayyid el-Badawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29198" start="10404" end="10428" title="2011 Egyptian revolution" label="2011 Egyptian revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q34105" start="10446" end="10459" title="Hosni Mubarak" label="Hosni Mubarak"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061" start="10759" end="10772" title="Tahrir Square" label="Tahrir Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186130" start="11009" end="11047" title="National Democratic Alliance for Egypt" label="National Democratic Alliance for Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q685715" start="11058" end="11083" title="Freedom and Justice Party (Egypt)" label="Freedom and Justice Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="11111" end="11119" title="Islamism" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q133207" start="11120" end="11138" title="Muslim Brotherhood" label="Muslim Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382040" start="11186" end="11213" title="2011–12 Egyptian parliamentary election" label="2011 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186130" start="11440" end="11469" title="Democratic Alliance for Egypt" label="Democratic Alliance for Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382040" start="11490" end="11512" title="2011–12 Egyptian parliamentary election" label="parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q210461" start="11734" end="11747" title="Al-Nour Party" label="Al-Nour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q254009" start="11828" end="11841" title="Egyptian Bloc" label="Egyptian Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q627548" start="11940" end="11968" title="Egyptian parliamentary election, 2015" label="2015 parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q29198" start="12450" end="12454" title="Egyptian revolution of 2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q13605743" start="12459" end="12463" title="2013 Egyptian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842214" start="13042" end="13065" title="Bahaa El-Din Abu Shoka" label="Bahaa El-Din Abou Shaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q20982186" start="13379" end="13399" title="Nation&amp;#x27;s Future Party" label="Future of the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="13736" end="13752" title="Executive (government)" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q122924750" start="13755" end="13773" title="Abdel-Sanad Yamama" label="Abdel-Sanad Yamama"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842916" start="13811" end="13846" title="2023 Egyptian presidential election" label="2023 Egyptian presidential election"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405919" wikidata="Q3498347" url="?curid=405919" title="Mobile data terminal">
<text>A mobile data terminal (MDT) or mobile digital computer (MDC) is a computerized device used in emergency services, public transport, taxicabs, package delivery, roadside assistance, and logistics, among other fields, to communicate with a central dispatcher. They are also used to display mapping and information relevant to the tasks and actions performed by the vehicle such as CAD drawings, diagrams and safety information.

Mobile data terminals feature a screen on which to view information and a keyboard or keypad for entering information, and may be connected to various peripheral devices. Standard peripherals include two-way radios and taximeters, both of which predate computer-aided dispatching. MDTs may be simple display and keypad units, intended to be connected to a separate black-box or AVL (see below) computer. While MDTs were originally thin clients, most have been replaced with fully functional PC hardware, known as MDCs (Mobile Digital Computers). While the MDC term is more correct, MDT is still widely used. Other common terms include MVC (Motor Vehicle Computer) and names of manufacturers such as iMobile or KDT.

==History==
During the late 1960s, a surge in crime in the United States spurred the police community to modernize tactics. This led to a push for the adoption of computers by police departments, which would turn out to be a slow process. Some police officials attributed this to a few specific factors including, &quot;the complexities of the new technology, the cautious, conservative nature of many police officers, and citizens&#x27; &#x27;fear of Big Brother&#x27;. Lack of funds for computer training and equipment maintenance also played a part.&quot;

The earliest MDTs began showing up in police cars in the early 1970s. In 1973, the Cleveland Police Department introduced the specialized AMC Ambassador Impact task force police car equipped with a Kustom electronics MDT, capable of checking for license numbers or owner information, stolen vehicles, verifying wanted persons, and exchange private messages between vehicles. These would be the first police computers to be used in the State of Ohio.

Motorola would become a major provider of MDTs by the late 1970s. One of these earliest models was the D-1118, which would be succeeded by the MDT-9100 in the 1980s. By the early 1990s, police departments began to increasingly use computers for more advanced activities, as opposed to routine patrol tasks that accounted for the typical modicum of usage. According to Bureau of Justice statistics, there was a considerable uptake in adoption between 1990 and 1993, with one half of departments using computers compared to two thirds by 1993. Police departments with computers staffed approximately 95 percent of local officers by 1993.

These early police computers, including those developed by Motorola, became notorious for security issues due to the relatively basic data protocol used. Despite Motorola&#x27;s marketed appearance of secure communications, it was soon discovered that this conspicuous “special code” for bit interleaving and data stream obfuscation was nothing more than simple ASCII. This approach taken by Motorola would have been considered security by obscurity. In the 1990s, hackers deciphered the properties of the protocol and PC programs soon began appearing on the market allowing the general public to monitor police communications - an issue that lasted well into the 2000s.

==Technology==
In the earlier days of computer-aided dispatching (CAD), many MDT&#x27;s were custom devices, used with specialized point to point radios, particularly in applications such as police dispatching. While applications like taxi and package delivery often still use custom designed terminals, the majority of CAD systems have switched to ruggedized laptops and Wide-Area Wireless IP communications, utilizing the Internet or private IP networks connected to and over it.

For industrial applications such as commercial trucking, GIS, agriculture, mobile asset management, and other industries, custom electronic hardware is still preferred. Custom terminals use I/O interfaces that connect directly to industry-specific equipment. They are usually environmentally hardened packages with power supply protection and robust memory file systems that greatly improve reliability and task efficiency. MDT solutions that are based on ruggedized consumer products or consumer available software will typically not have the life cycle duration expected in industrial applications, over 5 years.

==Typical features==
* 9 VDC to 36 VDC input power.
* May be tablet convertible.
* Serial ports to connect to a satellite or terrestrial radio transceiver.
* Digital I/O to monitor external events.
* Removable medial or I/O port of retrieving data or upgrading software.
* Wide operating temperature of to or greater.
* Water and dust resistance rated.
* Drop tested and rated.
* Sealed against dust and liquid.
* Connections to industry specific equipment, such as J1708 data bus for commercial truck applications.
* Display technology specific to viewing conditions for the intended industry (LCD, TFT LCD, Vacuum fluorescent display, CSTN).
* Integrated uninterruptible power supply, which will ride through electrical brown-outs typical in vehicle installations.
* 802.11 transceiver (depending on target application), possibly with external antenna connection.
* Cellular transceiver providing an Internet connection.

A related device classification, specific to the transportation industry, is called automatic vehicle location (AVL). Mobile data terminals are often used in conjunction with a &quot;black box&quot; that contains a GPS receiver, cell phone transceiver, other radio devices, or interfaces to industry-specific equipment. AVL devices may be simple stand-alone modems or may include operating systems with application space for the system integrator.

==Use in vehicle==
MDTs are most commonly associated with in-vehicle use. This requires the MDT to be anchored to the vehicle for driver safety, device security, and user ergonomics. Mounts are designed for attaching MDTs to mobile workspaces into, most notably: automobiles, forklifts, boats, and planes. MDTs generally require specific installation protocols to be followed for proper ergonomics, power and communications functionality. MDT installation companies such as PCN Strategies, USAT Corp. and TouchStar Technologies UK, specialize in designing the mount design, assembling the proper parts, and installing them in a safe and consistent manner away from airbags, vehicle HVAC controls, and driver controls. Frequent installations will include a WAN modem, power conditioning equipment, and a WAN, WLAN, and GPS antenna mounted external to the vehicle.

== Use in UK ambulance services ==
The mobile data terminal (MDT) allows for routing, receiving and display of data between control room and operational vehicles allowing ambulance crews to respond quickly and appropriately to calls. This allows for up to date CAD information to be dispatched instantly to the receiving ambulance saving valuable time in receiving critical information about the incident. Its mapping software allows for accurate location of the incident to be transmitted directly to the ambulance as well as plotting the quickest route to the scene. This software also allows for the control room to track all operational vehicles to identify which available ambulance is closest to the scene of an incident allowing for the closest appropriate resource to be dispatched. 
Other benefits of the MDT are:

* Booking on system to identify which staff member is currently on the vehicle.
* Status updates, allowing the crew to inform the control room of their current status on an incident via a touchscreen menu rather than informing them over the radio.
* 2-way text conversation with the control room to decrease unnecessary radio demand.
* Request additional payment for soiled uniform when clothing is contaminated. 
* Further options can be added such as the ability to download apps so crews can watch entertainment or order food delivery when on standby.

==See also==
* Portable data terminal

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3498347" start="2" end="22" title="Mobile data terminal" label="mobile data terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498347" start="24" end="27" title="Mobile data terminal" label="MDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498347" start="32" end="55" title="Mobile data terminal" label="mobile digital computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498347" start="57" end="60" title="Mobile data terminal" label="MDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q814610" start="95" end="112" title="emergency service" label="emergency service"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="115" end="131" title="public transport" label="public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="133" end="137" title="taxi" label="taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447463" start="143" end="159" title="package delivery" label="package delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q337810" start="161" end="180" title="roadside assistance" label="roadside assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q177777" start="186" end="195" title="logistics" label="logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q570755" start="247" end="257" title="dispatcher" label="dispatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q327065" start="460" end="466" title="Display device" label="screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q250" start="502" end="510" title="Computer keyboard" label="keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398237" start="514" end="520" title="keyboard technology" label="keypad"/>
<link wikidata="Q178648" start="579" end="589" title="peripheral" label="peripheral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="628" end="641" title="Two-way radio#Data over two-way radio" label="two-way radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135572" start="647" end="656" title="taximeter" label="taximeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308807" start="681" end="704" title="computer-aided dispatch" label="computer-aided dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q918090" start="859" end="870" title="thin client" label="thin client"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132122" start="1787" end="1814" title="Cleveland Police Department" label="Cleveland Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q294677" start="1842" end="1856" title="AMC Ambassador" label="AMC Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="2139" end="2152" title="Ohio" label="State of Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="3154" end="3159" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q133735" start="3220" end="3241" title="security by obscurity" label="security by obscurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308807" start="3502" end="3528" title="computer-assisted dispatch" label="computer-aided dispatching"/>
<link wikidata="Q10885285" start="3813" end="3823" title="Rugged computer" label="ruggedized"/>
<link wikidata="Q483130" start="4004" end="4007" title="GIS" label="GIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q656685" start="4841" end="4862" title="operating temperature" label="operating temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="5158" end="5161" title="LCD" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366737" start="5163" end="5170" title="TFT LCD" label="TFT LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277396" start="5172" end="5198" title="Vacuum fluorescent display" label="Vacuum fluorescent display"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086900" start="5200" end="5204" title="CSTN" label="CSTN"/>
<link wikidata="Q207696" start="5220" end="5248" title="uninterruptible power supply" label="uninterruptible power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527484" start="5571" end="5597" title="automatic vehicle location" label="automatic vehicle location"/>
<link wikidata="Q11384" start="6692" end="6695" title="Wide area network" label="WAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231366" start="8195" end="8217" title="Portable data terminal" label="Portable data terminal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405925" wikidata="Q3178411" url="?curid=405925" title="Balance of Terror">
<text>&quot;Balance of Terror&quot; is the fourteenth episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series &quot;Star Trek&quot;. Written by Paul Schneider and directed by Vincent McEveety, it first aired on December 15, 1966.

The series, which was later subtitled &quot;The Original Series&quot;, follows the adventures of the starship and its crew led by Captain James T. Kirk (portrayed by William Shatner) through the galaxy. The episode follows a strategy-filled battle between the &quot;Enterprise&quot; and a Romulan ship that has methodically destroyed Federation outposts bordering the Neutral Zone.

&quot;Balance of Terror&quot; notably introduces both the Romulan species and the cloaking device. Mark Lenard, who plays the unnamed Romulan commander, later portrayed Spock&#x27;s father Sarek in the majority of his later &quot;Star Trek&quot; appearances, as well as a Klingon captain in &quot;Star Trek: The Motion Picture&quot;. The episode&#x27;s events are revisited within an alternate future in the &quot;Star Trek: Strange New Worlds&quot; 2022 episode &quot;A Quality of Mercy&quot;.

==Plot==
The USS &quot;Enterprise&quot;, under the command of Captain Kirk, is investigating a loss of communications with a line of Earth outposts near the Romulan Neutral Zone, formed under the terms of the peace treaty that ended the Earth–Romulan War a century earlier. Because there were no visual communications at that time, the two races have never seen each other.

While Kirk officiates at the wedding of Lieutenant Tomlinson and Ensign Martine, Outpost 4 comes under attack. The &quot;Enterprise&quot; races to Outpost 4&#x27;s aid and contacts the base commander, Hansen, who reveals he is the only survivor of an attack by an unknown enemy. As they speak, the enemy ship reappears, fires, and disappears.

Though sheltered under a mile of iron on an asteroid, the outpost is destroyed, and Hansen killed.

The ship&#x27;s sensors locate the attacker, which remains invisible. Kirk surmises that the attacker is equipped with a cloaking device. A coded message from the intruder provides a view through one of its internal cameras, revealing humanoids with an appearance like Vulcans. Lieutenant Stiles, the navigator, a descendant of a service family that lost several members in the Earth–Romulan War, begins to question the loyalty of the &quot;Enterprise&quot; first officer, Mr. Spock.

During a discussion of the Romulan ship&#x27;s capabilities, Stiles suggests the &quot;Enterprise&quot; attack before it can reach the Neutral Zone. Spock agrees; he reasons that if the Romulans are in fact an offshoot of the Vulcan species and have retained the martial philosophy of the Vulcans&#x27; ancient past, they would surely take advantage of any perceived weakness.

A cat-and-mouse game ensues. The &quot;Enterprise&quot; is faster and more maneuverable, while the Romulan ship has a cloaking device and immensely destructive plasma torpedoes. However, the range of these torpedoes is limited, and firing one requires so much power that the ship must decloak first.

After several attacks, the Romulans, almost beaten, plant a nuclear weapon amidst jettisoned debris. When Spock detects a &quot;metal-cased object&quot;, Kirk orders a point-blank phaser shot that detonates the device. The &quot;Enterprise&quot; is shaken by the blast and many of the phaser crew are incapacitated, requiring Stiles to fill in. Kirk orders operations to work at minimal power to exaggerate the apparent damage and lure the Romulans in for a kill shot. Although the Romulan commander suspects Kirk&#x27;s trap, Decius, a politically well-connected member of the command crew, pressures him to attack. When the Romulan ship decloaks to launch a torpedo, Kirk tries to spring his trap, but a coolant leak in the phaser control room incapacitates Stiles and Tomlinson. Spock, whom Stiles had insulted as being unneeded in the phaser control room, returns to rescue Stiles and fires the phasers, mortally wounding the Romulan ship.

Kirk hails the Romulans and at last communicates directly with his opponent, offering to beam aboard survivors. The Romulan commander tells Kirk that he regrets having met him in combat, that &quot;You and I are of a kind. In a different reality, I could have called you friend.&quot; He declines Kirk&#x27;s offer to take off his crew, telling the Captain that it is not the Romulan way to be taken prisoner. The Commander then triggers his ship&#x27;s self-destruct system.

&quot;Enterprise&quot; only fatality is Lt. Tomlinson. Kirk goes to the chapel to offer comfort to a grieving Ensign Martine.

==Production==

&quot;The Star Trek Compendium&quot; stated the episode was essentially a science fiction version of the submarine film &quot;The Enemy Below&quot;, depicting a cat-and-mouse game between the &quot;Enterprise&quot; as the American destroyer against a Romulan vessel as the U-boat.
Director Vincent McEveety had seen the 1957 film &quot;The Enemy Below&quot; but only noticed the similarities between its plot and this episode later. He admitted &quot;Obviously, it&#x27;s the same story.&quot;

The business of the Romulan Commander launching the body of the Centurion out the disposal tube in an attempt to convince Captain Kirk his Warbird has been destroyed is taken from the 1958 war movie Run Silent, Run Deep where Captain Richardson of the USS &quot;Nerka&quot; (Clark Gable) uses the same tactic for the same purpose.

The soundtrack cue &quot;In the Chapel&quot;, played during the opening scene of the wedding ceremony, is an instrumental medley of the 19th century English song &quot;Long, Long Ago&quot; by Thomas Haynes Bayly and the &quot;Bridal Chorus&quot; by Richard Wagner.

The term &quot;photon torpedo&quot; was only invented for a later episode &quot;Arena&quot;, but the same effect was used in this one although still called &quot;phaser&quot;.

On September 16, 2006, &quot;Balance of Terror&quot; became the first digitally remastered &quot;Star Trek&quot; episode, featuring enhanced and new visual effects, computer generated (CGI) spaceships, and high-definition format.

All core &quot;Star Trek&quot; regular background players appear in this episode: Eddie Paskey (Lt. Lesley and William Shatner stand-in), Frank da Vinci (Lt. Brent and Leonard Nimoy stand-in), William Blackburn (Lt. Hadley and De Forest Kelley stand-in), Ron Veto (Harrison), John Arndt (Fields) and Jeanne Malone (&quot;Enterprise&quot; yeoman and stand-in for Grace Lee Whitney).

==Reception==
The episode is frequently praised by critics and regularly appears on lists of the best episodes of &quot;Star Trek&quot;. In 2016, &quot;The Washington Post&quot; ranked &quot;Balance of Terror&quot; the third-best episode of the entire &quot;Star Trek&quot; franchise, noting that it investigates the connection between wars and race, that it shows both sides of a conflict in deep space. A 2017 article in &quot;The Washington Post&quot; which ranked the seven captains of &quot;Star Trek&quot; included a special mention of the captain of the Romulan vessel, calling him &quot;The greatest alien captain&quot;.
In 2016, &quot;Business Insider&quot; ranked &quot;Balance of Terror&quot; the best episode of &quot;The Original Series&quot;. In 2016, &quot;SyFy&quot; ranked guest star Mark Lenard (the Romulan captain), as the eighth-best guest star on &quot;The Original Series&quot;. In 2016, &quot;Empire&quot; ranked this the 43rd-best in a top 50 ranking of the 700 plus &quot;Star Trek&quot; television episodes. Critic Ed Gross praised the episode for exploring the theme of bigotry, and as &quot;a piece of television that manages to conjure genuine suspense as one commander attempts to outmaneuvre the other&quot;.

==Legacy==
Guest star Mark Lenard, who portrayed the Romulan commander, returned in the episode &quot;Journey to Babel&quot; where he played Sarek, Spock&#x27;s father. Lenard has the distinction of having played a Romulan, a Klingon and a Vulcan over the course of the series, the only actor to have done so.
Bryan Fuller called the episode a &quot;favorite&quot; and a &quot;touchstone&quot; which influenced the creation of the story arc in &quot;Star Trek: Discovery&quot;.

The events of the episode are revisited in the &quot;Star Trek: Strange New Worlds&quot; episode &quot;A Quality of Mercy&quot;, where Christopher Pike (Anson Mount) sees an alternative future wherein he was not disabled and has retained captaincy of the USS &quot;Enterprise&quot;. The differences between Pike and Kirk are highlighted; while Pike&#x27;s preference for peace and mutual respect eventually gain the admiration of the Romulan commander, the peaceful attempt to negotiate with the Romulans, who see the gesture as an act of weakness and determine that the Federation is likewise weak, caused restarting open war with the Romulans, and it is ultimately alternate-future Kirk&#x27;s brashness, cunning and luck that barely saved the alternative &quot;Enterprise&quot;; his quality is implied to be what prevented open war with Romulans in the original timeline.

==Non-canonical works==
Comic book publisher IDW Publishing released a prequel, &quot;Star Trek Alien Spotlight: Romulans&quot; and a sequel, &quot;Star Trek Romulans: The Hollow Crown&quot;. They are not part of the official Star Trek canon.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* &quot;Balance of Terror&quot; Revised Script July 19–22, 1966; report and analysis by Dave Eversole
*Star Trek transcript - Balance of Terror</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3178411" start="6" end="23" title="Balance of Terror" label="Balance of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="" start="63" end="75" title="Star Trek: The Original Series season 1" label="first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="92" end="107" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="" start="132" end="141" title="Star Trek: The Original Series" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153474" start="160" end="174" title="Paul Schneider (writer)" label="Paul Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q165828" start="191" end="207" title="Vincent McEveety" label="Vincent McEveety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130239" start="269" end="284" title="Retronym" label="later subtitled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16311" start="377" end="398" title="James T. Kirk" label="Captain James T. Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16297" start="413" end="428" title="William Shatner" label="William Shatner"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="442" end="448" title="Milky Way" label="galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q268082" start="536" end="543" title="Romulan" label="Romulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110" start="581" end="591" title="United Federation of Planets" label="Federation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="615" end="627" title="List of Star Trek regions of space#Neutral Zone" label="Neutral Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300708" start="712" end="727" title="cloaking device" label="cloaking device"/>
<link wikidata="Q940971" start="729" end="740" title="Mark Lenard" label="Mark Lenard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16341" start="799" end="804" title="Spock" label="Spock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712069" start="819" end="824" title="Sarek" label="Sarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q54259" start="902" end="909" title="Klingon" label="Klingon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="927" end="956" title="Star Trek: The Motion Picture" label="Star Trek: The Motion Picture"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1044" end="1073" title="Star Trek: Strange New Worlds" label="Star Trek: Strange New Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q834003" start="1139" end="1165" title="USS Enterprise (NCC-1701)" label="USS &amp;quot;Enterprise&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16311" start="1188" end="1200" title="Captain Kirk" label="Captain Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="1259" end="1264" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q268082" start="1283" end="1290" title="Romulan" label="Romulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598248" start="1291" end="1303" title="Neutral Zone (Star Trek)" label="Neutral Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300708" start="2066" end="2081" title="cloaking device" label="cloaking device"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497384" start="2214" end="2221" title="Vulcan (Star Trek)" label="Vulcans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16341" start="2418" end="2427" title="Mr. Spock" label="Mr. Spock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051089" start="2810" end="2828" title="cat-and-mouse game" label="cat-and-mouse game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518402" start="2968" end="2982" title="plasma torpedo" label="plasma torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="3169" end="3183" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80594" start="4508" end="4521" title="self-destruct" label="self-destruct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615638" start="4779" end="4793" title="Submarine films" label="submarine film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263897" start="4800" end="4815" title="The Enemy Below" label="The Enemy Below"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051089" start="4835" end="4853" title="Cat and mouse" label="cat-and-mouse game"/>
<link wikidata="Q834003" start="4872" end="4882" title="USS Enterprise (NCC-1701)" label="Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="4905" end="4914" title="destroyer" label="destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q268082" start="4925" end="4932" title="Romulan" label="Romulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="4947" end="4953" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q165828" start="4964" end="4980" title="Vincent McEveety" label="Vincent McEveety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263897" start="5010" end="5025" title="The Enemy Below" label="The Enemy Below"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741380" start="5368" end="5388" title="Run Silent, Run Deep (film)" label="Run Silent, Run Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q71243" start="5444" end="5455" title="Clark Gable" label="Clark Gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671806" start="5669" end="5683" title="Long, Long Ago" label="Long, Long Ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790528" start="5693" end="5712" title="Thomas Haynes Bayly" label="Thomas Haynes Bayly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476098" start="5727" end="5740" title="Bridal Chorus" label="Bridal Chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="5750" end="5764" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5782" end="5796" title="Weapons in Star Trek#Photon torpedo" label="photon torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5847" end="5852" title="Arena (Star Trek: The Original Series)" label="Arena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5929" end="5935" title="Weapons in Star Trek#Phaser" label="phaser"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6024" end="6064" title="Star Trek: The Original Series#Remastered edition" label="remastered &amp;quot;Star Trek&amp;quot; episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q8317" start="6093" end="6107" title="visual effects" label="visual effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="6109" end="6133" title="Computer-generated imagery" label="computer generated (CGI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="6134" end="6144" title="Spacecraft" label="spaceships"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="6710" end="6729" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q286707" start="7202" end="7218" title="Business Insider" label="Business Insider"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="7324" end="7340" title="Syfy" label="&amp;quot;SyFy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="7469" end="7487" title="Empire (film magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Empire&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251725" start="7902" end="7918" title="Journey to Babel" label="Journey to Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q995026" start="8110" end="8122" title="Bryan Fuller" label="Bryan Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8250" end="8270" title="Star Trek: Discovery" label="Star Trek: Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8332" end="8361" title="Star Trek: Strange New Worlds" label="Star Trek: Strange New Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q612625" start="8414" end="8430" title="Christopher Pike (Star Trek)" label="Christopher Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q570006" start="8432" end="8443" title="Anson Mount" label="Anson Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146596" start="9200" end="9214" title="IDW Publishing" label="IDW Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500963" start="9381" end="9396" title="Star Trek canon" label="Star Trek canon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405926" wikidata="Q7310869" url="?curid=405926" title="Relaxed Muscle">
<text>Relaxed Muscle are an English electro duo formed in 2002 by Pulp&#x27;s Jarvis Cocker and All Seeing I&#x27;s Jason Buckle.

In early 2003, Relaxed Muscle began playing gigs. Cocker and Buckle maintained anonymity by assuming the alter-egos &#x27;Darren Spooner&#x27; and &#x27;Wayne Marsden&#x27; respectively. Billing themselves as &quot;the sound of young Doncaster&quot;, Darren claimed to have met Wayne &quot;planting flowers&quot; while doing community service for burglary. Their fictional criminality fitted the project well, with their songs about sex, gambling and domestic violence complementing the depraved character of Relaxed Muscle.

While on-stage as Darren Spooner, Cocker took to karate-chopping balsa wood and breaking sugar glass bottles on other band members.

However, soon Cocker and Buckle&#x27;s cover was blown while playing a gig in London, despite wearing full eye make-up and skeleton suits. Even with their identities revealed, the band continued playing gigs, capitalising on their electronic sound to play the likes of Trash club on 20 October 2003.

Relaxed Muscle seemed to fade away after their album release in 2003. Pulp remained on a hiatus. However, Cocker and Buckle worked on the soundtrack for &quot;Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire&quot; which was released in November 2005 and have since worked together on Cocker&#x27;s solo album &quot;Jarvis&quot; (2006).

From 5–8 April 2012, Relaxed Muscle appeared as part of a special event titled &#x27;Who&#x27;s Zoo?&#x27; created by British choreographer Michael Clark. The event featured music accompanied by dancers – both professionals and untrained volunteers – plus, special lighting and projections. &quot;The New York Times&quot; reviewed the first night and reported that Relaxed Muscle played four of the show&#x27;s six songs with &quot;The Heavy&quot;, &quot;Let It Ride&quot;, &quot;Beastmaster&quot; and an encore of &quot;B-Real&quot; from their album &quot;A Heavy Nite With...&quot;.

==Discography==
===Albums===
*&quot;A Heavy Nite With...&quot; (2003) - No. 13 UK Indie Albums Chart

===Singles/EPs===
*&quot;Heavy EP&quot; (2003) - No. 135 UK Singles Chart
*#&quot;The Heavy&quot;
*#&quot;Rod of Iron&quot;
*#&quot;Branded!&quot;
*&quot;Billy Jack/Sexualized&quot; (2003)
*# &quot;Billy Jack&quot;
*# &quot;Sexualized&quot;
*# &quot;Year of the Dog&quot;

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7310869" start="0" end="14" title="Relaxed Muscle" label="Relaxed Muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q504464" start="60" end="64" title="Pulp (band)" label="Pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q356994" start="72" end="85" title="Jarvis Cocker" label="Jarvis Cocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837593" start="90" end="102" title="All Seeing I" label="All Seeing I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837593" start="110" end="122" title="Jason Buckle" label="Jason Buckle"/>
<link wikidata="Q58900" start="359" end="368" title="Doncaster" label="Doncaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043121" start="450" end="467" title="community service" label="community service"/>
<link wikidata="Q12302824" start="716" end="726" title="Ochroma" label="balsa wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q28243" start="740" end="751" title="sugar glass" label="sugar glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835710" start="1053" end="1058" title="Trash (nightclub)" label="Trash"/>
<link wikidata="Q102225" start="1244" end="1279" title="Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162812" start="1387" end="1393" title="Jarvis (album)" label="Jarvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308115" start="1549" end="1562" title="Michael Clark (dancer)" label="Michael Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657284" start="1966" end="1986" title="A Heavy Nite With..." label="A Heavy Nite With..."/>
<link wikidata="Q4657284" start="2031" end="2051" title="A Heavy Nite With..." label="A Heavy Nite With..."/>
<link wikidata="Q1604413" start="2074" end="2095" title="UK Indie Chart" label="UK Indie Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="2154" end="2170" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405928" wikidata="Q267748" url="?curid=405928" title="Penelope Fitzgerald">
<text>Penelope Mary Fitzgerald (17 December 1916 – 28 April 2000) was a Booker Prize-winning novelist, poet, essayist and biographer from Lincoln, England. In 2008 &quot;The Times&quot; listed her among &quot;the 50 greatest British writers since 1945&quot;. &quot;The Observer&quot; in 2012 placed her final novel, &quot;The Blue Flower&quot;, among &quot;the ten best historical novels&quot;. A.S. Byatt called her, &quot;Jane Austen’s nearest heir for precision and invention.&quot;

==Biography==
Penelope Fitzgerald was born Penelope Mary Knox on 17 December 1916 at the Old Bishop&#x27;s Palace, Lincoln, the daughter of Edmund Knox, later editor of &quot;Punch&quot;, and Christina, &quot;née&quot; Hicks, daughter of Edward Hicks, Bishop of Lincoln, and one of the first female students at Oxford. She was a niece of the theologian and crime writer Ronald Knox, the cryptographer Dillwyn Knox, the Bible scholar Wilfred Knox, and the novelist and biographer Winifred Peck. Fitzgerald later wrote: &quot;When I was young I took my father and my three uncles for granted, and it never occurred to me that everyone else wasn&#x27;t like them. Later on, I found that this was a mistake, but I&#x27;ve never quite managed to adapt myself to it. I suppose they were unusual, but I still think that they were right, and insofar as the world disagrees with them, I disagree with the world.&quot;

She was educated at Wycombe Abbey, an independent girls&#x27; boarding school, and Somerville College, Oxford University, where she graduated in 1938 with a congratulatory First, being named a &quot;Woman of the Year&quot; in &quot;Isis&quot;, the student newspaper. She worked for the BBC in the Second World War. In 1942 she married Desmond Fitzgerald, whom she had met in 1940 at Oxford. He had been studying for the bar and enlisted as a soldier in the Irish Guards. Six months later, Desmond&#x27;s regiment was sent to North Africa. He won the Military Cross in the Western Desert Campaign in Libya, but returned to civilian life an alcoholic.

In the early 1950s the couple lived in Hampstead, London, where she had grown up. They co-edited a magazine called &quot;World Review&quot;, in which J. D. Salinger&#x27;s &quot;For Esmé with Love and Squalor&quot; was first published in the UK, as were writings of Bernard Malamud, Norman Mailer, and Alberto Moravia. Fitzgerald also contributed, writing about literature, music and sculpture. Soon afterwards Desmond was disbarred from the legal profession for &quot;forging signatures on cheques that he cashed at the pub.&quot; This led to a life of poverty for the Fitzgeralds. At times they were even homeless, living for four months in a homeless centre and for eleven years in public housing. To provide for her family in the 1960s, Fitzgerald taught at a drama school, Italia Conti Academy, and at Queen&#x27;s Gate School, where her pupils included Camilla Shand (later Queen Camilla). She also taught &quot;at a posh crammer&quot;, where her pupils included Anna Wintour, Edward St Aubyn, and Helena Bonham Carter. Indeed, she continued to teach until she was 70 years old. For a while she worked in a bookshop in Southwold, Suffolk, and in another period lived in Battersea on a houseboat that sank twice – the second time for good, destroying many of her books and family papers.

The couple had three children: a son, Valpy, and two daughters, Tina and Maria. Penelope Fitzgerald died on 28 April 2000.

==Legacy==
Fitzgerald&#x27;s archive was acquired by the British Library in June 2017. It consists of 170 files of correspondence and papers relating to her literary works, and of correspondence and other items belonging to family members, including her father, E. V. Knox, and papers of Fitzgerald&#x27;s Literary Estate. Many of her literary papers, including research notes, manuscript drafts letters, and photographs are held in the Harry Ransom Center.

==Literary career==
Fitzgerald launched her literary career in 1975 at the age of 58, with &quot;scholarly, accessible biographies&quot; of the Pre-Raphaelite artist Edward Burne-Jones and two years later of &quot;The Knox Brothers&quot;, her father and uncles, although she never mentions herself by name. Later in 1977 she published her first novel, &quot;The Golden Child&quot;, a comic murder mystery with a museum setting inspired by the Tutankhamun mania of the 1970s, written to amuse her terminally ill husband, who died in 1976.

Over the next five years she published four novels, each tied to her own experiences. &quot;The Bookshop&quot; (1978), which was shortlisted for the Booker Prize, concerns a struggling store in a fictional East Anglian town. Set in 1959, it includes as a pivotal event the shop&#x27;s decision to stock &quot;Lolita&quot;. A 2017 film adaptation, also entitled &quot;The Bookshop&quot;, stars Emily Mortimer as Florence Green. It was written and directed by Isabel Coixet. Fitzgerald won the 1979 Booker Prize with &quot;Offshore&quot;, a novel set among houseboat residents in Battersea in 1961. &quot;Human Voices&quot; (1980) fictionalises wartime life at the BBC, while &quot;At Freddie&#x27;s&quot; (1982) depicts life at a drama school.

In 1999 Fitzgerald was awarded the Golden PEN Award by English PEN for &quot;a Lifetime&#x27;s Distinguished Service to Literature&quot;.

===Historical novels===
Fitzgerald said after &quot;At Freddie&#x27;s&quot; that she &quot;had finished writing about the things in my own life, which I wanted to write about.&quot; Instead she wrote a biography of the poet Charlotte Mew and began a series of novels with a variety of historical settings. The first was &quot;Innocence&quot; (1986), a romance between the daughter of an impoverished aristocrat and a doctor from a southern Communist family set in 1950s Florence, Italy. The Italian Marxist theorist Antonio Gramsci appears as a minor character.

&quot;The Beginning of Spring&quot; (1988) takes place in Moscow in 1913. It examines the world just before the Russian Revolution through the family and work troubles of a British businessman born and raised in Russia. &quot;The Gate of Angels&quot; (1990), about a young Cambridge physicist who falls in love with a nursing trainee after a bicycle accident, is set in 1912, when physics was about to enter its own revolutionary period.

Fitzgerald&#x27;s final novel, &quot;The Blue Flower&quot; (1995), centres on the 18th-century German poet and philosopher Novalis and his love for what is portrayed as an ordinary child. Other historical figures such as the poet Goethe and the philosopher Karl Wilhelm Friedrich von Schlegel, feature in the story. It won the National Book Critics Circle Award 1997 and has been called her masterpiece. In 1999 it was adapted and dramatised for BBC Radio by Peter Wolf.

A collection of Fitzgerald&#x27;s short stories, &quot;The Means of Escape&quot;, and a volume of her essays, reviews and commentaries, &quot;A House of Air&quot;, were published posthumously. In 2013 the first full biography of Fitzgerald, &quot;Penelope Fitzgerald: A Life&quot; by Hermione Lee, appeared, and was awarded the James Tait Black Memorial Prize.

==Bibliography==
===Biographies===
*&quot;Edward Burne-Jones&quot; (1975)
*&quot;The Knox Brothers&quot; (1977)
*&quot;Charlotte Mew and Her Friends: With a Selection of Her Poems&quot; (1984)

===Novels===
*&quot;The Golden Child&quot; (1977)
*&quot;The Bookshop&quot; (1978)
*&quot;Offshore&quot; (1979)
*&quot;Human Voices&quot; (1980)
*&quot;At Freddie&#x27;s&quot; (1982)
*&quot;Innocence&quot; (1986)
*&quot;The Beginning of Spring&quot; (1988)
*&quot;The Gate of Angels&quot; (1990)
*&quot;The Blue Flower&quot; (UK 1995, U.S. 1997)

===Short story collections===
*&quot;The Means of Escape&quot; (2000)
**Paperback edition (2001) has 2 additional stories

===Essays and reviews===
*&quot;A House of Air: Selected Writings&quot; (U.S. title &quot;The Afterlife&quot;) edited by Terence Dooley with Mandy Kirkby and Chris Carduff, with an introduction by Hermione Lee (2003)

===Letters===
*&quot;So I Have Thought of You. The Letters of Penelope Fitzgerald&quot; edited by Terence Dooley, with a preface by A. S. Byatt (2008)

==References==
==External links==

*Obituary, The New York Times, May 3, 2000
*Julian Barnes, &quot;How did she do it?&quot;, &quot;The Guardian&quot;, 26 July 2008
*Edmund Gordon, &quot;The Unknown Penelope Fitzgerald&quot;, &quot;TLS&quot;, 30 June 2010
*Courtney Cook, &quot;Penelope Fitzgerald Was Here: An Appreciation&quot;, &quot;Los Angeles Review of Books&quot;, 23 January 2015
*Penelope Fitzgerald Collection
*Additional Papers at the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin
*Penelope Fitzgerald archive at the British Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q267748" start="0" end="24" title="Penelope Fitzgerald" label="Penelope Mary Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="66" end="78" title="Booker Prize" label="Booker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904109" start="116" end="126" title="biographer" label="biographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="132" end="148" title="Lincoln, England" label="Lincoln, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="164" end="173" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="259" end="271" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q20085225" start="316" end="331" title="The Blue Flower" label="The Blue Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="364" end="380" title="historical novel" label="historical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q232417" start="389" end="399" title="A.S. Byatt" label="A.S. Byatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550844" start="570" end="603" title="Old Bishop&amp;#x27;s Palace, Lincoln" label="Old Bishop&amp;#x27;s Palace, Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286318" start="621" end="632" title="E. V. Knox" label="Edmund Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="656" end="661" title="Punch (magazine)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343446" start="719" end="750" title="Edward Hicks (bishop)" label="Edward Hicks, Bishop of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="792" end="798" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q707945" start="851" end="862" title="Ronald Knox" label="Ronald Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q318252" start="882" end="894" title="Dillwyn Knox" label="Dillwyn Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q15997968" start="914" end="926" title="Wilfred Knox" label="Wilfred Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025413" start="960" end="973" title="Winifred Peck" label="Winifred Peck"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039639" start="1411" end="1424" title="Wycombe Abbey" label="Wycombe Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q774489" start="1474" end="1492" title="Somerville College, Oxford" label="Somerville College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="1494" end="1511" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848741" start="1623" end="1627" title="The Isis Magazine" label="Isis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1677" end="1680" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1684" end="1704" title="World War II" label="the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q252564" start="1848" end="1860" title="Irish Guards" label="Irish Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="1916" end="1928" title="North African Campaign" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335064" start="1941" end="1955" title="Military Cross" label="Military Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q625798" start="1963" end="1986" title="Western Desert Campaign" label="Western Desert Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="1990" end="1995" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="2030" end="2039" title="alcoholic" label="alcoholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25610" start="2081" end="2090" title="Hampstead" label="Hampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q79904" start="2192" end="2206" title="J. D. Salinger" label="J. D. Salinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q351547" start="2308" end="2323" title="Bernard Malamud" label="Bernard Malamud"/>
<link wikidata="Q180962" start="2325" end="2338" title="Norman Mailer" label="Norman Mailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q161933" start="2344" end="2359" title="Alberto Moravia" label="Alberto Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="2649" end="2657" title="homeless" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q348134" start="2820" end="2840" title="Italia Conti Academy" label="Italia Conti Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269998" start="2849" end="2873" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Gate School" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Gate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q152239" start="2922" end="2935" title="Queen Camilla" label="Queen Camilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q118547" start="2970" end="2977" title="Cram school" label="crammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q230744" start="3011" end="3023" title="Anna Wintour" label="Anna Wintour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293722" start="3025" end="3040" title="Edward St Aubyn" label="Edward St Aubyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q170428" start="3046" end="3066" title="Helena Bonham Carter" label="Helena Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854554" start="3167" end="3176" title="Southwold" label="Southwold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138912" start="3218" end="3227" title="Battersea" label="Battersea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321309" start="3233" end="3242" title="houseboat" label="houseboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q125924795" start="3374" end="3379" title="Valpy Fitzgerald" label="Valpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23939639" start="3409" end="3414" title="Maria Fitzgerald" label="Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="3517" end="3532" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="3897" end="3916" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q36279" start="4038" end="4049" title="biography" label="biographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q184814" start="4063" end="4077" title="Pre-Raphaelite" label="Pre-Raphaelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q216406" start="4085" end="4103" title="Edward Burne-Jones" label="Edward Burne-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873569" start="4277" end="4293" title="The Golden Child (novel)" label="The Golden Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937792" start="4309" end="4323" title="murder mystery" label="murder mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154" start="4362" end="4373" title="Tutankhamun" label="Tutankhamun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822825" start="4550" end="4562" title="The Bookshop" label="The Bookshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="4607" end="4619" title="Booker Prize" label="Booker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q580631" start="4664" end="4675" title="East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q127149" start="4767" end="4773" title="Lolita" label="Lolita"/>
<link wikidata="Q28055172" start="4825" end="4837" title="The Bookshop (film)" label="The Bookshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q230308" start="4851" end="4865" title="Emily Mortimer" label="Emily Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q232273" start="4916" end="4929" title="Isabel Coixet" label="Isabel Coixet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821704" start="4979" end="4987" title="Offshore (novel)" label="Offshore"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840217" start="5061" end="5073" title="Human Voices" label="Human Voices"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870861" start="5138" end="5155" title="At Freddie&amp;#x27;s" label="At Freddie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993081" start="5237" end="5253" title="Golden PEN Award" label="Golden PEN Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353598" start="5257" end="5268" title="English PEN" label="English PEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q458169" start="5565" end="5578" title="Charlotte Mew" label="Charlotte Mew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="5626" end="5636" title="historical novel" label="historical"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893349" start="5667" end="5676" title="Innocence (Penelope Fitzgerald novel)" label="Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="5811" end="5819" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q83003" start="5857" end="5872" title="Antonio Gramsci" label="Antonio Gramsci"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892133" start="5910" end="5933" title="The Beginning of Spring" label="The Beginning of Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="5962" end="5968" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="6016" end="6034" title="Russian Revolution of 1917" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892913" start="6130" end="6148" title="The Gate of Angels" label="The Gate of Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="6177" end="6186" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q20085225" start="6380" end="6395" title="The Blue Flower" label="The Blue Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q60684" start="6466" end="6473" title="Novalis" label="Novalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="6573" end="6579" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q157271" start="6600" end="6635" title="Karl Wilhelm Friedrich von Schlegel" label="Karl Wilhelm Friedrich von Schlegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505018" start="6670" end="6704" title="National Book Critics Circle Award" label="National Book Critics Circle Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="6789" end="6798" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="6849" end="6862" title="short stories" label="short stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q515543" start="7099" end="7111" title="Hermione Lee" label="Hermione Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q392586" start="7143" end="7174" title="James Tait Black Memorial Prize" label="James Tait Black Memorial Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q216406" start="7219" end="7237" title="Edward Burne-Jones" label="Edward Burne-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q458169" start="7296" end="7309" title="Charlotte Mew" label="Charlotte Mew"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873569" start="7391" end="7407" title="The Golden Child (novel)" label="The Golden Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822825" start="7428" end="7440" title="The Bookshop" label="The Bookshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821704" start="7461" end="7469" title="Offshore (novel)" label="Offshore"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840217" start="7490" end="7502" title="Human Voices" label="Human Voices"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870861" start="7523" end="7540" title="At Freddie&amp;#x27;s" label="At Freddie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893349" start="7561" end="7570" title="Innocence (Penelope Fitzgerald novel)" label="Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892133" start="7591" end="7614" title="The Beginning of Spring" label="The Beginning of Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892913" start="7635" end="7653" title="The Gate of Angels" label="The Gate of Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q20085225" start="7674" end="7689" title="The Blue Flower" label="The Blue Flower"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7962" end="7976" title="Terence Dooley" label="Terence Dooley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8157" end="8171" title="Terence Dooley" label="Terence Dooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q232417" start="8191" end="8202" title="A. S. Byatt" label="A. S. Byatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q295431" start="8290" end="8303" title="Julian Barnes" label="Julian Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="8657" end="8676" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="8684" end="8713" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="8750" end="8765" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405936" wikidata="Q355265" url="?curid=405936" title="Pasqual Maragall">
<text>Pasqual Maragall Mira (; born 13 January 1941) is a Spanish retired politician and former President of Generalitat de Catalunya. He had previously been Mayor of Barcelona, from 1982 to 1997, and helped run the city&#x27;s successful Olympic bid.

== Early life and education ==
He was born in Barcelona in 1941 as the third of eight siblings. His grandfather was the Catalan poet Joan Maragall. In 1965, he married Diana Garrigosa, and he has two daughters and a son. He was an active member of the Workers&#x27; Front of Catalonia and joined the left-wing anti-Franco movement Popular Liberation Front. He studied law and economics at the University of Barcelona between 1957 and 1964.

In 1965, after his studies, he joined the Specialist Office of Barcelona City Council as an economist, work he combined with giving classes in economic theory at the Autonomous University of Barcelona, acting as assistant to the professor, . He also cooperated with the Studies Service of the , run by .

Between 1971 and 1973, he lived in New York City, where he gained a master of arts in economics from the New School University.

== Beginnings in politics ==

In 1973, he came back to Barcelona and returned to the Barcelona City Council and to the UAB, where he gave classes on urban economics and international economics as a temporary assistant lecturer. One year earlier, he supported &quot;Convergència Socialista de Catalunya&quot;, one of the founding groups of the PSC. In 1978, at the Economics Faculty of the UAB, he presented his doctoral thesis &quot;The prices of urban land, The case of Barcelona (1948–1978)&quot;. In 1978, he was a researcher and guest professor at the Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. This university would later appoint him doctor honoris causa.

==First elections==

He joined the PSC electoral list in the first democratic municipal election for Barcelona City Council in 1979 and this party won the most votes at the ballot box. His friend Narcís Serra became Mayor while he became &quot;tinent d&#x27;alcalde&quot; (Deputy Mayor) for Administrative Reform, and later for Taxation. On 1 December 1982 he succeeded Narcís Serra as Mayor of Barcelona, since Serra was appointed minister of Defence by the new Socialist government of Felipe González.

In 1986, Barcelona was chosen to host the 1992 Summer Olympics Accordingly, the city&#x27;s mayorPasqual Maragallpresided over the organising committee (COOB&#x27;92). The Olympics provided the city with sorely needed infrastructure. Another Maragall initiative, the 2004 Universal Forum of Cultures, exhibited the same &quot;top-down&quot; approach. It is widely recognised, however, that the &#x27;92 Games helped Barcelona to redefine itself as one of the great cities of Europe.

From 1991 to 1997, he was President of the Council of Municipalities and Regions of Europe. He was also Vice-President of the International Union of Local Authorities and President of the Committee of the Regions of the European Union from 1996 to 1998.

== Recent years ==

In 1997, Pasqual Maragall resigned as Barcelona&#x27;s mayor and returned to university lecturing in Rome and New York City. Two years later he came back to active politics and was elected as the PSC-CpC candidate for the presidency of the Generalitat in the 1999 election.

In 2000, he was elected President of the Partit dels Socialistes de Catalunya (PSC-PSOE), and was a member of the Catalan Parliament from 1988 to 1995. From 1999 to 2003, he presided over the PSC-CpC parliamentary group.

On 16 December 2003, Maragall was elected President of the Generalitat by the Catalan Parliament after cliff-hanger negotiations with the ERC and ICV parties. He finally took office on 20 December. While generally popular as Mayor of Barcelona, Maragall&#x27;s career as President of the coalition government was marked by a series of crises. A particularly severe one involved Chief Councilor Carod&#x27;s &quot;secret&quot; trip to France to unofficially negotiate with ETA. Others include the stormy negotiations over a new Statute of Autonomy for Catalonia in which Maragall and the PSC hovered between a nationalist stance and giving in to the central government pressure; the collapse of an entire city block in Barcelona&#x27;s Carmel district following poorly planned and executed tunnelling work; and a schemesupported by Maragall&#x27;s governmentto build a tunnel for the AVE high-speed train under the shaky foundations of Barcelona&#x27;s 19th-century city centre. In October 2005 Maragall met with objections regarding his plans for reshuffling the cabinet without consulting either his coalition partners or his party. The President&#x27;s brother, Ernest Maragall, was tipped for a ministerial post in the reshuffle. Ernest, who held the post of Executive Secretary, was seen by critics as an &quot;apparatchik&quot;, and whipped up a storm of protest in June 2005 when he opposed plans to make Catalonia&#x27;s future anti-fraud department independent of the government. Pasqual Maragall&#x27;s pledges to fight corruption and nepotism in public administration were one of the key planks in his 2003 campaign.

On 21 June 2006, Maragall announced that he would not be standing for reelection (see 2006 Catalan Parliament election). He offered his support to new President José Montilla amongst controversy over Montilla&#x27;s non-Catalan heritage, stating that it did not make Catalonia &quot;less Catalan&quot;, and later commented that &quot;our new homeland is Europe&quot;. He later stated &quot;our new path is the Mediterranean&quot;. On 19 October 2007, it was announced that he would not pay his PSOE membership fee anymore, ending three decades of activity within the party. The following day, he announced that he had been diagnosed with Alzheimer&#x27;s disease and that he was creating the Pasqual Maragall Foundation to fight against the illness.

In 2007 he founded the Catalunya Europa Foundation, which develops work inspired by the thought and political work of Maragall, including the active involvement of Catalan society in a more united Europe, the global role of cities as spaces for social transformation, and lasting dialogue between Catalonia, Spain and Europe.

In 2017 a collection of essays edited by Jaume Claret, &quot;Pasqual Maragall: Pensament i acció&quot;, was published by RBA Libros. Academics and colleagues of the politician discuss the essential points of his career: the city and the region, his vision of Catalonia&#x27;s place in Spain and in the world, government policies and the 1992 Olympic Games, among others.

In 2020, a documentary film directed by Josep M. Mañé and Francesca Català, &quot;Maragall i la Lluna&quot;, was released. The documentary starts with the experience of Lluna, a girl who was eight years old when, in 1993, the then-mayor of Barcelona moved into her home to better understand the reality of the Roquetes neighborhood. Twenty-five years later, Lluna begins a search that starts with the memory of those days and leads her to discover Maragall through family members, acquaintances and politicians.

== References ==
==External links==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q355265" start="0" end="21" title="Pasqual Maragall" label="Pasqual Maragall Mira"/>
<link wikidata="Q722234" start="90" end="127" title="List of Presidents of Catalonia" label="President of Generalitat de Catalunya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="161" end="170" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="233" end="240" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="293" end="302" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q562402" start="380" end="393" title="Joan Maragall" label="Joan Maragall"/>
<link wikidata="Q22337903" start="415" end="430" title="Diana Garrigosa" label="Diana Garrigosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894482" start="499" end="531" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Front of Catalonia" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Front of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326414" start="578" end="602" title="Popular Liberation Front (Spain)" label="Popular Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q219615" start="640" end="663" title="University of Barcelona" label="University of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129773" start="751" end="773" title="Barcelona City Council" label="Barcelona City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q43452" start="854" end="888" title="Autonomous University of Barcelona" label="Autonomous University of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1028" end="1041" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q599316" start="1098" end="1119" title="New School University" label="New School University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129773" start="1207" end="1229" title="Barcelona City Council" label="Barcelona City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q43452" start="1241" end="1244" title="Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona" label="UAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q47417" start="1291" end="1314" title="international economics" label="international economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055003" start="1465" end="1468" title="Partit dels Socialistes de Catalunya" label="PSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q43452" start="1511" end="1514" title="Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona" label="UAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="1678" end="1702" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="1706" end="1715" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055003" start="1815" end="1818" title="Partit dels Socialistes de Catalunya" label="PSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129773" start="1881" end="1903" title="Barcelona City Council" label="Barcelona City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178484" start="1976" end="1988" title="Narcís Serra" label="Narcís Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180217" start="2166" end="2184" title="Mayor of Barcelona" label="Mayor of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6354361" start="2212" end="2231" title="Minister of Defence (Spain)" label="minister of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q156799" start="2267" end="2282" title="Felipe González" label="Felipe González"/>
<link wikidata="Q8488" start="2327" end="2347" title="1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772966" start="2552" end="2584" title="2004 Universal Forum of Cultures" label="2004 Universal Forum of Cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005815" start="2812" end="2859" title="Council of European Municipalities and Regions" label="Council of Municipalities and Regions of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974854" start="2895" end="2935" title="International Union of Local Authorities" label="International Union of Local Authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q205203" start="2957" end="2981" title="Committee of the Regions" label="Committee of the Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055003" start="3240" end="3243" title="Partit dels Socialistes de Catalunya" label="PSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8346549" start="3244" end="3247" title="Ciutadans pel Canvi" label="CpC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022" start="3284" end="3295" title="Generalitat de Catalunya" label="Generalitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q126044" start="3303" end="3316" title="1999 Catalan Parliament election" label="1999 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055003" start="3360" end="3396" title="Partit dels Socialistes de Catalunya" label="Partit dels Socialistes de Catalunya"/>
<link wikidata="Q135630" start="3433" end="3451" title="Catalan Parliament" label="Catalan Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055003" start="3511" end="3514" title="Partit dels Socialistes de Catalunya" label="PSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8346549" start="3515" end="3518" title="Ciutadans pel Canvi" label="CpC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933549" start="3583" end="3611" title="President of the Government of Catalonia" label="President of the Generalitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q150068" start="3679" end="3682" title="Esquerra Republicana de Catalunya" label="ERC"/>
<link wikidata="Q149877" start="3687" end="3690" title="Iniciativa per Catalunya Verds" label="ICV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055462" start="3935" end="3940" title="Josep-Lluís Carod-Rovira" label="Carod"/>
<link wikidata="Q42814" start="4013" end="4016" title="ETA (separatist group)" label="ETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975265" start="4064" end="4101" title="Draft of New Statute of Autonomy for Catalonia of 2005" label="new Statute of Autonomy for Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319498" start="4276" end="4291" title="El Carmel" label="Carmel district"/>
<link wikidata="Q433671" start="4424" end="4427" title="AVE" label="AVE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032587" start="4705" end="4720" title="Ernest Maragall" label="Ernest Maragall"/>
<link wikidata="Q376962" start="4856" end="4867" title="apparatchik" label="apparatchik"/>
<link wikidata="Q125983" start="5255" end="5287" title="2006 Catalan Parliament election" label="2006 Catalan Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q465464" start="5330" end="5343" title="José Montilla" label="José Montilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="5807" end="5831" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886787" start="5861" end="5888" title="Pasqual Maragall Foundation" label="Pasqual Maragall Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8488" start="6584" end="6602" title="1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627690" start="6929" end="6950" title="Les Roquetes, Barcelona" label="Roquetes neighborhood"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405940" wikidata="Q636133" url="?curid=405940" title="Katzenelnbogen">
<text>Katzenelnbogen () is the name of a castle and small town in the district of Rhein-Lahn-Kreis in Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany. Katzenelnbogen is the seat of the &quot;Verbandsgemeinde&quot; (&quot;collective municipality&quot;) Aar-Einrich.

==History==
Katzenelnbogen originated as a castle built on a promontory over the river Lahn around 1095. The lords of the castle became important local magnates, acquiring during the centuries some key and highly lucrative customs rights on the Rhine. The Counts of Katzenelnbogen also built Burg Neukatzenelnbogen and Burg Rheinfels on the Rhine.

The male line of the German family died out in 1479, while the Austrian lineage continued, and the county became disputed between Hesse and Nassau. In 1557, the former finally won, but when Hesse was split due to the testament of Philipp the Magnanimous, Katzenelnbogen was split as well, between Hesse-Darmstadt and the small new secondary principality of Hesse-Rheinfels.

When the latter line expired in 1583, its property went to Hesse-Kassel (or Hesse-Cassel), which added the inherited part of Katzenelnbogen to its side-line principality of Hesse-Rotenburg. After the Congress of Vienna, this part of Katzenelnbogen was given to Nassau in exchange for property that had been taken away from it; after the War of 1866, with all Nassau, it became part of Prussia.

In 1945, Hesse-Darmstadt was united with most of the Prussian province of Hesse-Nassau, which included the former Hesse-Kassel along with Nassau and the formerly Free City of Frankfurt, to form the federal state of Hesse. Thus, Hesse now includes the larger part of former county of Katzenelnbogen.

A smaller part of Nassau, including the old castle and village bearing the name of Katzenelnbogen, ended up as part of Rhineland-Palatinate (part of the Rhein-Lahn and Westerwaldkreis districts). William III of England a Prince of Orange had the title Katzenelnbogen in his reign from 1689-1702 and today one of the titles of the King of the Netherlands (the House of Orange-Nassau) is that of Count of Katzenelnbogen.

==Etymology==
In German, the name &quot;Katzenelnbogen&quot; literally translates as &#x27;cat&#x27;s elbow&#x27;, which is arguably a later mondegreen. Historians have speculated that the name derives from &quot;Cattimelibocus&quot;, a combination of two words: the ancient Germanic tribal name of the Chatti and &quot;Melibokus&quot;, a generic Roman name for &#x27;mountains&#x27;. The theory is based on the name Μηλίβοκον (&quot;Mēlíbokon&quot;), used by Ptolemy specifically for a mountain range farther east: the Harz, the Thuringian Forest or both. &quot;Melibokon&quot;, in a Latinised form, would then be &quot;Melibocus&quot; or &quot;Melibokus&quot;. The fact that the name, in any recognisable form, first appears in medieval documents also suggests that it has no older Roman origin.

==History of wine==
In the history of wine, Katzenelnbogen is famous for the first documentation of Riesling grapes in the world: this was in 1435, when the storage inventory of Count John IV of Katzenelnbogen, a member of the Holy Roman high nobility, lists the purchase of vines of &quot;Rieslingen&quot;.

==See also==
*Katznelson surname

==References==
==External links==
* graf-von-katzenelnbogen.de
* schloss-katzenelnbogen.de
* ngw.nl
*&quot;Jewish Encyclopedia&quot;: &quot;Katzenellenbogen (more correctly Katzenelnbogen, sometimes with the epithet Ashkenazi)&quot; by Meyer Kayserling, Gotthard Deutsch, Max Seligsohn, Peter Wiernik, Nahum London, Solomon Schechter, Henry Malter, Herman Rosenthal, and Joseph Jacobs (1906).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q636133" start="0" end="14" title="Katzenelnbogen" label="Katzenelnbogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8601" start="76" end="92" title="Rhein-Lahn-Kreis" label="Rhein-Lahn-Kreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="96" end="116" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="118" end="125" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q23006" start="167" end="183" title="Verbandsgemeinde" label="Verbandsgemeinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q47507465" start="228" end="239" title="Aar-Einrich" label="Aar-Einrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="285" end="291" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q103148" start="329" end="333" title="Lahn" label="Lahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q182290" start="465" end="472" title="customs" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="487" end="492" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q567635" start="534" end="556" title="Burg Katz" label="Burg Neukatzenelnbogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q567643" start="561" end="575" title="Burg Rheinfels" label="Burg Rheinfels"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="583" end="588" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199" start="721" end="726" title="Hesse" label="Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q836680" start="731" end="737" title="Nassau (duchy)" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q169319" start="821" end="844" title="Philipp I of Hesse" label="Philipp the Magnanimous"/>
<link wikidata="Q693551" start="888" end="903" title="Landgraviate of Hesse-Darmstadt" label="Hesse-Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q451519" start="948" end="963" title="Hesse-Rheinfels" label="Hesse-Rheinfels"/>
<link wikidata="Q529605" start="1025" end="1037" title="Electorate of Hesse" label="Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q463845" start="1139" end="1154" title="Hesse-Rotenburg" label="Hesse-Rotenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="1166" end="1184" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="1303" end="1314" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="War of 1866"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="1351" end="1358" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q694231" start="1370" end="1385" title="People&amp;#x27;s State of Hesse" label="Hesse-Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q693356" start="1435" end="1447" title="Hesse-Nassau" label="Hesse-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q529605" start="1475" end="1487" title="Electorate of Hesse" label="Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q836680" start="1499" end="1505" title="Nassau (duchy)" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="1536" end="1545" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199" start="1576" end="1581" title="Hesse" label="Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q452332" start="1634" end="1658" title="county of Katzenelnbogen" label="county of Katzenelnbogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="1780" end="1800" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8601" start="1814" end="1824" title="Rhein-Lahn" label="Rhein-Lahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8602" start="1829" end="1844" title="Westerwaldkreis" label="Westerwaldkreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="1857" end="1879" title="William III of England" label="William III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q549449" start="1882" end="1898" title="Prince of Orange" label="Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156877" start="2222" end="2232" title="mondegreen" label="mondegreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q164076" start="2384" end="2390" title="Chatti" label="Chatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q464552" start="2401" end="2410" title="Melibokus" label="Melibokus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="2541" end="2548" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="2601" end="2605" title="Harz" label="Harz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4210" start="2611" end="2628" title="Thuringian Forest" label="Thuringian Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="2918" end="2922" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q456471" start="2980" end="2988" title="Riesling" label="Riesling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3058" end="3071" title="Count John IV" label="Count John IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q56269314" start="3203" end="3213" title="Katznelson" label="Katznelson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405944" wikidata="Q2393193" url="?curid=405944" title="Time complexity">
<text>In theoretical computer science, the time complexity is the computational complexity that describes the amount of computer time it takes to run an algorithm. Time complexity is commonly estimated by counting the number of elementary operations performed by the algorithm, supposing that each elementary operation takes a fixed amount of time to perform. Thus, the amount of time taken and the number of elementary operations performed by the algorithm are taken to be related by a constant factor.

Since an algorithm&#x27;s running time may vary among different inputs of the same size, one commonly considers the worst-case time complexity, which is the maximum amount of time required for inputs of a given size. Less common, and usually specified explicitly, is the average-case complexity, which is the average of the time taken on inputs of a given size (this makes sense because there are only a finite number of possible inputs of a given size). In both cases, the time complexity is generally expressed as a function of the size of the input. Since this function is generally difficult to compute exactly, and the running time for small inputs is usually not consequential, one commonly focuses on the behavior of the complexity when the input size increases—that is, the asymptotic behavior of the complexity. Therefore, the time complexity is commonly expressed using big O notation, typically etc., where is the size in units of bits needed to represent the input.

Algorithmic complexities are classified according to the type of function appearing in the big O notation. For example, an algorithm with time complexity formula_1 is a &quot;linear time algorithm&quot; and an algorithm with time complexity formula_2 for some constant formula_3 is a &quot;polynomial time algorithm&quot;.

== Table of common time complexities ==

The following table summarizes some classes of commonly encountered time complexities. In the table, , i.e., polynomial in &quot;x&quot;.

== Constant time ==
An algorithm is said to be constant time (also written as formula_4 time) if the value of formula_5 (the complexity of the algorithm) is bounded by a value that does not depend on the size of the input. For example, accessing any single element in an array takes constant time as only one operation has to be performed to locate it. In a similar manner, finding the minimal value in an array sorted in ascending order; it is the first element. However, finding the minimal value in an unordered array is not a constant time operation as scanning over each element in the array is needed in order to determine the minimal value. Hence it is a linear time operation, taking formula_6 time. If the number of elements is known in advance and does not change, however, such an algorithm can still be said to run in constant time.

Despite the name &quot;constant time&quot;, the running time does not have to be independent of the problem size, but an upper bound for the running time has to be independent of the problem size. For example, the task &quot;exchange the values of and if necessary so that formula_7&quot; is called constant time even though the time may depend on whether or not it is already true that formula_7. However, there is some constant such that the time required is always &quot;at most&quot; .

== Logarithmic time ==

An algorithm is said to take logarithmic time when formula_9. Since formula_10 and formula_11 are related by a constant multiplier, and such a multiplier is irrelevant to big O classification, the standard usage for logarithmic-time algorithms is formula_12 regardless of the base of the logarithm appearing in the expression of .

Algorithms taking logarithmic time are commonly found in operations on binary trees or when using binary search.

An formula_12 algorithm is considered highly efficient, as the ratio of the number of operations to the size of the input decreases and tends to zero when increases. An algorithm that must access all elements of its input cannot take logarithmic time, as the time taken for reading an input of size is of the order of .

An example of logarithmic time is given by dictionary search. Consider a dictionary which contains entries, sorted in alphabetical order. We suppose that, for formula_14, one may access the th entry of the dictionary in a constant time. Let formula_15 denote this th entry. Under these hypotheses, the test to see if a word is in the dictionary may be done in logarithmic time: consider formula_16, where formula_17 denotes the floor function. If formula_18--that is to say, the word is exactly in the middle of the dictionary--then we are done. Else, if formula_19--i.e., if the word comes earlier in alphabetical order than the middle word of the whole dictionary--we continue the search in the same way in the left (i.e. earlier) half of the dictionary, and then again repeatedly until the correct word is found. Otherwise, if it comes after the middle word, continue similarly with the right half of the dictionary. This algorithm is similar to the method often used to find an entry in a paper dictionary. As a result, the search space within the dictionary decreases as the algorithm gets closer to the target word.

== Polylogarithmic time ==
An algorithm is said to run in polylogarithmic time if its time formula_20 is formula_21 for some constant . Another way to write this is formula_22.

For example, matrix chain ordering can be solved in polylogarithmic time on a parallel random-access machine, and a graph can be determined to be planar in a fully dynamic way in formula_23 time per insert/delete operation.

== Sub-linear time ==
An algorithm is said to run in sub-linear time (often spelled sublinear time) if formula_24. In particular this includes algorithms with the time complexities defined above. 

The specific term &quot;sublinear time algorithm&quot; commonly refers to randomized algorithms that sample a small fraction of their inputs and process them efficiently to approximately infer properties of the entire instance. This type of sublinear time algorithm is closely related to property testing and statistics.

Other settings where algorithms can run in sublinear time include:

* Parallel algorithms that have linear or greater total work (allowing them to read the entire input), but sub-linear depth. 
* Algorithms that have guaranteed assumptions on the input structure. An important example are operations on data structures, e.g. binary search in a sorted array.
* Algorithms that search for local structure in the input, for example finding a local minimum in a 1-D array (can be solved in formula_25 time using a variant of binary search).  A closely related notion is that of Local Computation Algorithms (LCA) where the algorithm receives a large input and queries to local information about some valid large output.

== Linear time ==
An algorithm is said to take linear time, or formula_1 time, if its time complexity is formula_1. Informally, this means that the running time increases at most linearly with the size of the input. More precisely, this means that there is a constant such that the running time is at most formula_28 for every input of size . For example, a procedure that adds up all elements of a list requires time proportional to the length of the list, if the adding time is constant, or, at least, bounded by a constant.

Linear time is the best possible time complexity in situations where the algorithm has to sequentially read its entire input. Therefore, much research has been invested into discovering algorithms exhibiting linear time or, at least, nearly linear time. This research includes both software and hardware methods. There are several hardware technologies which exploit parallelism to provide this. An example is content-addressable memory. This concept of linear time is used in string matching algorithms such as the Boyer–Moore string-search algorithm and Ukkonen&#x27;s algorithm.

== Quasilinear time ==
An algorithm is said to run in quasilinear time (also referred to as log-linear time) if formula_29 for some positive constant ; linearithmic time is the case formula_30. Using soft O notation these algorithms are formula_31. Quasilinear time algorithms are also formula_32 for every constant formula_33 and thus run faster than any polynomial time algorithm whose time bound includes a term formula_34 for any formula_35.

Algorithms which run in quasilinear time include:
* In-place merge sort, formula_36
* Quicksort, formula_37, in its randomized version, has a running time that is formula_37 in expectation on the worst-case input. Its non-randomized version has an formula_37 running time only when considering average case complexity.
* Heapsort, formula_37, merge sort, introsort, binary tree sort, smoothsort, patience sorting, etc. in the worst case
* Fast Fourier transforms, formula_37
* Monge array calculation, formula_37

In many cases, the formula_37 running time is simply the result of performing a formula_44 operation times (for the notation, see ). For example, binary tree sort creates a binary tree by inserting each element of the -sized array one by one. Since the insert operation on a self-balancing binary search tree takes formula_12 time, the entire algorithm takes formula_37 time.

Comparison sorts require at least formula_47 comparisons in the worst case because formula_48, by Stirling&#x27;s approximation. They also frequently arise from the recurrence relation formula_49.

== Sub-quadratic time ==
An algorithm is said to be subquadratic time if formula_50.

For example, simple, comparison-based sorting algorithms are quadratic (e.g. insertion sort), but more advanced algorithms can be found that are subquadratic (e.g. shell sort). No general-purpose sorts run in linear time, but the change from quadratic to sub-quadratic is of great practical importance.

== Polynomial time ==

An algorithm is said to be of polynomial time if its running time is upper bounded by a polynomial expression in the size of the input for the algorithm, that is, for some positive constant &quot;k&quot;. Problems for which a deterministic polynomial-time algorithm exists belong to the complexity class P, which is central in the field of computational complexity theory. Cobham&#x27;s thesis states that polynomial time is a synonym for &quot;tractable&quot;, &quot;feasible&quot;, &quot;efficient&quot;, or &quot;fast&quot;.

Some examples of polynomial-time algorithms:
* The selection sort sorting algorithm on &quot;n&quot; integers performs formula_51 operations for some constant &quot;A&quot;. Thus it runs in time formula_52 and is a polynomial-time algorithm.
* All the basic arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and comparison) can be done in polynomial time.
* Maximum matchings in graphs can be found in polynomial time. In some contexts, especially in optimization, one differentiates between strongly polynomial time and weakly polynomial time algorithms. 

These two concepts are only relevant if the inputs to the algorithms consist of integers.

=== Complexity classes ===

The concept of polynomial time leads to several complexity classes in computational complexity theory. Some important classes defined using polynomial time are the following.

* P: The complexity class of decision problems that can be solved on a deterministic Turing machine in polynomial time
* NP: The complexity class of decision problems that can be solved on a non-deterministic Turing machine in polynomial time
* ZPP: The complexity class of decision problems that can be solved with zero error on a probabilistic Turing machine in polynomial time
* RP: The complexity class of decision problems that can be solved with 1-sided error on a probabilistic Turing machine in polynomial time.
* BPP: The complexity class of decision problems that can be solved with 2-sided error on a probabilistic Turing machine in polynomial time
* BQP: The complexity class of decision problems that can be solved with 2-sided error on a quantum Turing machine in polynomial time

P is the smallest time-complexity class on a deterministic machine which is robust in terms of machine model changes. (For example, a change from a single-tape Turing machine to a multi-tape machine can lead to a quadratic speedup, but any algorithm that runs in polynomial time under one model also does so on the other.) Any given abstract machine will have a complexity class corresponding to the problems which can be solved in polynomial time on that machine.

== Superpolynomial time ==
An algorithm is defined to take superpolynomial time if &quot;T&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) is not bounded above by any polynomial. Using little omega notation, it is &quot;ω&quot;(&quot;n&quot;&quot;c&quot;) time for all constants &quot;c&quot;, where &quot;n&quot; is the input parameter, typically the number of bits in the input.

For example, an algorithm that runs for 2&quot;n&quot; steps on an input of size &quot;n&quot; requires superpolynomial time (more specifically, exponential time).

An algorithm that uses exponential resources is clearly superpolynomial, but some algorithms are only very weakly superpolynomial. For example, the Adleman–Pomerance–Rumely primality test runs for time on &quot;n&quot;-bit inputs; this grows faster than any polynomial for large enough &quot;n&quot;, but the input size must become impractically large before it cannot be dominated by a polynomial with small degree.

An algorithm that requires superpolynomial time lies outside the complexity class P. Cobham&#x27;s thesis posits that these algorithms are impractical, and in many cases they are. Since the P versus NP problem is unresolved, it is unknown whether NP-complete problems require superpolynomial time.

== Quasi-polynomial time ==

Quasi-polynomial time algorithms are algorithms whose running time exhibits quasi-polynomial growth, a type of behavior that may be slower than polynomial time but yet is significantly faster than exponential time. The worst case running time of a quasi-polynomial time algorithm is formula_53 for some fixed When formula_54 this gives polynomial time, and for formula_55 it gives sub-linear time.

There are some problems for which we know quasi-polynomial time algorithms, but no polynomial time algorithm is known. Such problems arise in approximation algorithms; a famous example is the directed Steiner tree problem, for which there is a quasi-polynomial time approximation algorithm achieving an approximation factor of formula_56 (&quot;n&quot; being the number of vertices), but showing the existence of such a polynomial time algorithm is an open problem.

Other computational problems with quasi-polynomial time solutions but no known polynomial time solution include the planted clique problem in which the goal is to find a large clique in the union of a clique and a random graph. Although quasi-polynomially solvable, it has been conjectured that the planted clique problem has no polynomial time solution; this planted clique conjecture has been used as a computational hardness assumption to prove the difficulty of several other problems in computational game theory, property testing, and machine learning.

The complexity class QP consists of all problems that have quasi-polynomial time algorithms. It can be defined in terms of DTIME as follows.
:formula_57

=== Relation to NP-complete problems ===

In complexity theory, the unsolved P versus NP problem asks if all problems in NP have polynomial-time algorithms. All the best-known algorithms for NP-complete problems like 3SAT etc. take exponential time. Indeed, it is conjectured for many natural NP-complete problems that they do not have sub-exponential time algorithms. Here &quot;sub-exponential time&quot; is taken to mean the second definition presented below. (On the other hand, many graph problems represented in the natural way by adjacency matrices are solvable in subexponential time simply because the size of the input is the square of the number of vertices.) This conjecture (for the k-SAT problem) is known as the exponential time hypothesis. Since it is conjectured that NP-complete problems do not have quasi-polynomial time algorithms, some inapproximability results in the field of approximation algorithms make the assumption that NP-complete problems do not have quasi-polynomial time algorithms. For example, see the known inapproximability results for the set cover problem.

== Sub-exponential time ==
The term sub-exponential time is used to express that the running time of some algorithm may grow faster than any polynomial but is still significantly smaller than an exponential. In this sense, problems that have sub-exponential time algorithms are somewhat more tractable than those that only have exponential algorithms. The precise definition of &quot;sub-exponential&quot; is not generally agreed upon, however the two most widely used are below.

===First definition===
A problem is said to be sub-exponential time solvable if it can be solved in running times whose logarithms grow smaller than any given polynomial. More precisely, a problem is in sub-exponential time if for every there exists an algorithm which solves the problem in time &quot;O&quot;(2&quot;n&quot;&quot;ε&quot;). The set of all such problems is the complexity class SUBEXP which can be defined in terms of DTIME as follows.

:formula_58

This notion of sub-exponential is non-uniform in terms of &quot;ε&quot; in the sense that &quot;ε&quot; is not part of the input and each ε may have its own algorithm for the problem.

=== Second definition ===
Some authors define sub-exponential time as running times in formula_59. This definition allows larger running times than the first definition of sub-exponential time. An example of such a sub-exponential time algorithm is the best-known classical algorithm for integer factorization, the general number field sieve, which runs in time about where the length of the input is . Another example was the graph isomorphism problem, which the best known algorithm from 1982 to 2016 solved in However, at STOC 2016 a quasi-polynomial time algorithm was presented.

It makes a difference whether the algorithm is allowed to be sub-exponential in the size of the instance, the number of vertices, or the number of edges. In parameterized complexity, this difference is made explicit by considering pairs formula_60 of decision problems and parameters &quot;k&quot;. SUBEPT is the class of all parameterized problems that run in time sub-exponential in &quot;k&quot; and polynomial in the input size &quot;n&quot;:

:formula_61

More precisely, SUBEPT is the class of all parameterized problems formula_60 for which there is a computable function formula_63 with formula_64 and an algorithm that decides &quot;L&quot; in time formula_65.

==== Exponential time hypothesis ====
The exponential time hypothesis (ETH) is that 3SAT, the satisfiability problem of Boolean formulas in conjunctive normal form with at most three literals per clause and with &quot;n&quot; variables, cannot be solved in time 2&quot;o&quot;(&quot;n&quot;). More precisely, the hypothesis is that there is some absolute constant such that 3SAT cannot be decided in time 2&quot;cn&quot; by any deterministic Turing machine. With &quot;m&quot; denoting the number of clauses, ETH is equivalent to the hypothesis that &quot;k&quot;SAT cannot be solved in time 2&quot;o&quot;(&quot;m&quot;) for any integer . The exponential time hypothesis implies P ≠ NP.

== Exponential time ==
An algorithm is said to be exponential time, if &quot;T&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) is upper bounded by 2poly(&quot;n&quot;), where poly(&quot;n&quot;) is some polynomial in &quot;n&quot;. More formally, an algorithm is exponential time if &quot;T&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) is bounded by &quot;O&quot;(2&quot;n&quot;&quot;k&quot;) for some constant &quot;k&quot;. Problems which admit exponential time algorithms on a deterministic Turing machine form the complexity class known as EXP.
:formula_66

Sometimes, exponential time is used to refer to algorithms that have &quot;T&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) = 2&quot;O&quot;(&quot;n&quot;), where the exponent is at most a linear function of &quot;n&quot;. This gives rise to the complexity class E.
:formula_67

== Factorial time ==

An algorithm is said to be factorial time if &quot;T(n)&quot; is upper bounded by the factorial function &quot;n!&quot;. Factorial time is a subset of exponential time (EXP) because formula_68 for all formula_69. However, it is not a subset of E.

An example of an algorithm that runs in factorial time is bogosort, a notoriously inefficient sorting algorithm based on trial and error. Bogosort sorts a list of &quot;n&quot; items by repeatedly shuffling the list until it is found to be sorted. In the average case, each pass through the bogosort algorithm will examine one of the &quot;n&quot;! orderings of the &quot;n&quot; items. If the items are distinct, only one such ordering is sorted. Bogosort shares patrimony with the infinite monkey theorem.

== Double exponential time ==
An algorithm is said to be double exponential time if &quot;T&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) is upper bounded by 22poly(&quot;n&quot;), where poly(&quot;n&quot;) is some polynomial in &quot;n&quot;. Such algorithms belong to the complexity class 2-EXPTIME.
:formula_70

Well-known double exponential time algorithms include:
* Decision procedures for Presburger arithmetic
* Computing a Gröbner basis (in the worst case)
* Quantifier elimination on real closed fields takes at least double exponential time, and can be done in this time.

== See also ==
* L-notation
* Space complexity

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2878974" start="3" end="31" title="theoretical computer science" label="theoretical computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="37" end="52" title="Time complexity" label="time complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157286" start="60" end="84" title="computational complexity" label="computational complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="147" end="156" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="481" end="496" title="constant factor" label="constant factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037118" start="615" end="641" title="Worst-case complexity" label="worst-case time complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828244" start="770" end="793" title="average-case complexity" label="average-case complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="1017" end="1025" title="Function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q752718" start="1281" end="1300" title="asymptotic analysis" label="asymptotic behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="1379" end="1393" title="big O notation" label="big O notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="1441" end="1444" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q186152" start="2253" end="2258" title="array data structure" label="array"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="2291" end="2300" title="Instruction (computer science)" label="operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q379825" start="2558" end="2565" title="element (math)" label="element"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3454" end="3473" title="Logarithmic identities#Changing the base" label="constant multiplier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3486" end="3510" title="Big O notation#Multiplication by a constant" label="multiplier is irrelevant"/>
<link wikidata="Q380172" start="3746" end="3757" title="binary tree" label="binary tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q243754" start="3773" end="3786" title="binary search" label="binary search"/>
<link wikidata="Q80585" start="4183" end="4193" title="Dictionary (data structure)" label="dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q10925" start="4228" end="4246" title="alphabetical order" label="alphabetical order"/>
<link wikidata="Q215193" start="4538" end="4552" title="floor function" label="floor function"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395620" start="5291" end="5306" title="polylogarithmic function" label="polylogarithmic"/>
<link wikidata="Q917612" start="5424" end="5445" title="Matrix chain multiplication" label="matrix chain ordering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754095" start="5489" end="5519" title="parallel random-access machine" label="parallel random-access machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="5525" end="5532" title="Graph (discrete mathematics)" label="a graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200967" start="5540" end="5563" title="Planarity testing" label="determined to be planar"/>
<link wikidata="Q20018775" start="5569" end="5582" title="Dynamic connectivity" label="fully dynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q621751" start="6007" end="6020" title="approximation algorithm" label="approximately"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918980" start="6122" end="6138" title="property testing" label="property testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="6143" end="6153" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087987" start="6226" end="6244" title="Parallel algorithm" label="Parallel algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6280" end="6284" title="Analysis of parallel algorithms#Definitions" label="work"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6342" end="6347" title="Analysis of parallel algorithms#Definitions" label="depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q130203" start="6373" end="6395" title="Promise problem" label="guaranteed assumptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q175263" start="6459" end="6474" title="data structures" label="data structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q243754" start="6481" end="6494" title="binary search algorithm" label="binary search"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6730" end="6764" title="Local Computation Algorithms (LCA)" label="Local Computation Algorithms (LCA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="7768" end="7779" title="Parallel computing" label="parallelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q745101" start="7811" end="7837" title="content-addressable memory" label="content-addressable memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q895984" start="7917" end="7952" title="Boyer–Moore string-search algorithm" label="Boyer–Moore string-search algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7878334" start="7957" end="7981" title="Ukkonen&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Ukkonen&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="8184" end="8199" title="soft O notation" label="soft O notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189057" start="8483" end="8502" title="In-place merge sort" label="In-place merge sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q486598" start="8517" end="8526" title="Quicksort" label="Quicksort"/>
<link wikidata="Q474095" start="8752" end="8760" title="Heapsort" label="Heapsort"/>
<link wikidata="Q189057" start="8774" end="8784" title="merge sort" label="merge sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395653" start="8786" end="8795" title="introsort" label="introsort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714823" start="8815" end="8825" title="smoothsort" label="smoothsort"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480255" start="8827" end="8843" title="patience sorting" label="patience sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q623950" start="8870" end="8892" title="Fast Fourier transform" label="Fast Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899477" start="8908" end="8919" title="Monge array" label="Monge array"/>
<link wikidata="Q863521" start="9091" end="9107" title="binary tree sort" label="binary tree sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q380172" start="9118" end="9129" title="binary tree" label="binary tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q245955" start="9220" end="9253" title="self-balancing binary search tree" label="self-balancing binary search tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632949" start="9322" end="9337" title="Comparison sort" label="Comparison sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q470877" start="9420" end="9449" title="Stirling&amp;#x27;s approximation" label="Stirling&amp;#x27;s approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q740970" start="9487" end="9506" title="recurrence relation" label="recurrence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="9548" end="9557" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q181593" start="9644" end="9661" title="sorting algorithm" label="sorting algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q117241" start="9683" end="9697" title="insertion sort" label="insertion sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q848955" start="9770" end="9780" title="shell sort" label="shell sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222579" start="10002" end="10013" title="upper bound" label="upper bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="10021" end="10031" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262192" start="10138" end="10146" title="Decision problem" label="Problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q908207" start="10220" end="10236" title="complexity class" label="complexity class"/>
<link wikidata="Q846354" start="10237" end="10238" title="P (complexity)" label="P"/>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="10273" end="10304" title="computational complexity theory" label="computational complexity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138877" start="10306" end="10326" title="Cobham&amp;#x27;s thesis" label="Cobham&amp;#x27;s thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q220831" start="10513" end="10527" title="selection sort" label="selection sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088751" start="10842" end="10858" title="Maximum matching" label="Maximum matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="10863" end="10869" title="Graph (discrete mathematics)" label="graphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q141495" start="10935" end="10947" title="Optimization (mathematics)" label="optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q124504877" start="10976" end="11000" title="Strongly-polynomial time" label="strongly polynomial time"/>
<link wikidata="Q846354" start="11339" end="11340" title="P (complexity)" label="P"/>
<link wikidata="Q908207" start="11346" end="11362" title="complexity class" label="complexity class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262192" start="11366" end="11382" title="decision problem" label="decision problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="11408" end="11436" title="deterministic Turing machine" label="deterministic Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q628036" start="11458" end="11460" title="NP (complexity)" label="NP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190223" start="11528" end="11560" title="non-deterministic Turing machine" label="non-deterministic Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q136355" start="11582" end="11585" title="ZPP (complexity)" label="ZPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191836" start="11669" end="11697" title="probabilistic Turing machine" label="probabilistic Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190846" start="11719" end="11721" title="RP (complexity)" label="RP"/>
<link wikidata="Q796890" start="11859" end="11862" title="BPP (complexity)" label="BPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q601325" start="11999" end="12002" title="BQP" label="BQP"/>
<link wikidata="Q765620" start="12089" end="12111" title="quantum Turing machine" label="quantum Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524240" start="12208" end="12214" title="Robustness (computer science)" label="robust"/>
<link wikidata="Q787114" start="12465" end="12481" title="abstract machine" label="abstract machine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12756" end="12777" title="big O notation#Family of Bachmann–Landau notations" label="little omega notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683276" start="13266" end="13305" title="Adleman–Pomerance–Rumely primality test" label="Adleman–Pomerance–Rumely primality test"/>
<link wikidata="Q908207" start="13601" end="13617" title="complexity class" label="complexity class"/>
<link wikidata="Q846354" start="13618" end="13619" title="P (complexity)" label="P"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138877" start="13621" end="13641" title="Cobham&amp;#x27;s thesis" label="Cobham&amp;#x27;s thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q746242" start="13726" end="13745" title="P versus NP problem" label="P versus NP problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q215206" start="13783" end="13794" title="NP-complete" label="NP-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q123879013" start="13940" end="13963" title="quasi-polynomial growth" label="quasi-polynomial growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="14061" end="14077" title="exponential time" label="exponential time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764144" start="14464" end="14484" title="Steiner tree problem" label="Steiner tree problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304372" start="14846" end="14860" title="planted clique" label="planted clique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196873" start="14893" end="14912" title="clique problem" label="find a large clique"/>
<link wikidata="Q910404" start="14944" end="14956" title="random graph" label="random graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157320" start="15135" end="15168" title="computational hardness assumption" label="computational hardness assumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q44455" start="15236" end="15247" title="game theory" label="game theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918980" start="15249" end="15265" title="property testing" label="property testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="15271" end="15287" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155831" start="15413" end="15418" title="DTIME" label="DTIME"/>
<link wikidata="Q746242" start="15521" end="15532" title="P versus NP" label="P versus NP"/>
<link wikidata="Q215206" start="15635" end="15646" title="NP-complete" label="NP-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421532" start="16171" end="16198" title="exponential time hypothesis" label="exponential time hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q621751" start="16343" end="16367" title="approximation algorithms" label="approximation algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192100" start="16521" end="16530" title="set cover" label="set cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031403" start="16577" end="16592" title="Infra-exponential" label="sub-exponential"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155831" start="17455" end="17460" title="DTIME" label="DTIME"/>
<link wikidata="Q140770" start="17987" end="18013" title="general number field sieve" label="general number field sieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738036" start="18099" end="18124" title="graph isomorphism problem" label="graph isomorphism problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661893" start="18197" end="18201" title="Symposium on Theory of Computing" label="STOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570441" start="18414" end="18438" title="parameterized complexity" label="parameterized complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262192" start="18508" end="18524" title="decision problem" label="decision problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148456" start="18816" end="18835" title="computable function" label="computable function"/>
<link wikidata="Q875276" start="19012" end="19016" title="3SAT" label="3SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q846564" start="19068" end="19091" title="conjunctive normal form" label="conjunctive normal form"/>
<link wikidata="Q746242" start="19608" end="19614" title="P ≠ NP" label="P ≠ NP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276570" start="20110" end="20113" title="EXP" label="EXP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276623" start="20365" end="20366" title="E (complexity)" label="E"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="20489" end="20507" title="factorial function" label="factorial function"/>
<link wikidata="Q762850" start="20709" end="20717" title="bogosort" label="bogosort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219080" start="20772" end="20787" title="trial and error" label="trial and error"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930567" start="20848" end="20857" title="shuffling" label="shuffling"/>
<link wikidata="Q487132" start="21134" end="21157" title="infinite monkey theorem" label="infinite monkey theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075235" start="21217" end="21235" title="double exponential function" label="double exponential"/>
<link wikidata="Q10844267" start="21426" end="21435" title="2-EXPTIME" label="2-EXPTIME"/>
<link wikidata="Q956059" start="21531" end="21552" title="Presburger arithmetic" label="Presburger arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551631" start="21567" end="21580" title="Gröbner basis" label="Gröbner basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849020" start="21603" end="21625" title="Quantifier elimination" label="Quantifier elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068227" start="21629" end="21646" title="real closed field" label="real closed field"/>
<link wikidata="Q15401695" start="21736" end="21746" title="L-notation" label="L-notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098905" start="21749" end="21765" title="Space complexity" label="Space complexity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405945" wikidata="Q2164373" url="?curid=405945" title="Shirley Temple (drink)">
<text>A Shirley Temple is a non-alcoholic mixed drink traditionally made with ginger ale and a splash of grenadine, and garnished with a maraschino cherry. Modern Shirley Temple recipes may substitute lemon-lime soda or lemonade and sometimes orange juice, in part or in whole. Shirley Temples are often served as an alternative to alcoholic cocktails, as are the similar Roy Rogers and Arnold Palmer.

== Origin ==
The cocktail may have been invented by a bartender at Chasen&#x27;s, a restaurant in West Hollywood, California, to serve then-child actress Shirley Temple. However, other claims to its origin have been made. Temple herself was not a fan of the drink, as she told Scott Simon in an NPR interview in 1986:

In 1988, Temple filed a lawsuit to prevent the sale of a bottled soda version using her name. In October 2024, American soft drink brand 7 Up introduced a limited release Shirley Temple-flavored variety.

== With alcohol ==
Adding 1.5 US fluid ounces (44 ml) of vodka or rum produces a &quot;Dirty Shirley&quot;.

== See also ==
*Queen Mary, a beer cocktail with grenadine and maraschino cherries

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2164373" start="2" end="16" title="Shirley Temple (drink)" label="Shirley Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q125078160" start="22" end="47" title="non-alcoholic mixed drink" label="non-alcoholic mixed drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162763" start="72" end="82" title="ginger ale" label="ginger ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136498" start="99" end="108" title="grenadine" label="grenadine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903446" start="114" end="123" title="Cocktail garnish" label="garnished"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078150" start="131" end="148" title="maraschino cherry" label="maraschino cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130245" start="195" end="210" title="List of lemon-lime drink brands" label="lemon-lime soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q893" start="214" end="222" title="lemonade" label="lemonade"/>
<link wikidata="Q219059" start="237" end="249" title="orange juice" label="orange juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q134768" start="336" end="344" title="cocktail" label="cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942026" start="366" end="376" title="Roy Rogers (drink)" label="Roy Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795197" start="381" end="394" title="Arnold Palmer (drink)" label="Arnold Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087240" start="464" end="477" title="Chasen&amp;#x27;s" label="Chasen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q846421" start="495" end="521" title="West Hollywood, California" label="West Hollywood, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q182580" start="551" end="565" title="Shirley Temple" label="Shirley Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437257" start="674" end="685" title="Scott Simon" label="Scott Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="692" end="695" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="836" end="846" title="soft drink" label="soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q270059" start="853" end="857" title="7 Up" label="7 Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q420266" start="951" end="966" title="Fluid ounce" label="US fluid ounces"/>
<link wikidata="Q374" start="978" end="983" title="vodka" label="vodka"/>
<link wikidata="Q83376" start="987" end="990" title="rum" label="rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q60963623" start="1046" end="1056" title="Queen Mary (beer cocktail)" label="Queen Mary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405952" wikidata="Q5437225" url="?curid=405952" title="Fat Truckers">
<text>The Fat Truckers were a British electroclash group from Sheffield, comprising Ben Rymer, Mark Hudson and Ross Orton.
They toured in support of Jarvis Cocker, apparently wielding light sabres on stage and described themselves as writing songs about &quot;cheap motorbikes, import-export business and multiplex cinemas - we&#x27;re a social comment on modern living&quot; and having a fondness of Henderson&#x27;s Relish.

The band split up in 2004. Orton now works in production with Pulp&#x27;s Steve Mackey, and has recently worked with M.I.A. Rymer DJs as part of Gucci Soundsystem and Hudson has his own band, Meat for a Dark Day.

==Discography==
===Albums===
*&quot;The First Fat Truckers Album Is for Sale&quot; (2003)

===Singles===
* &quot;Superbike&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Teenage Daughter&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Anorexic Robot&quot; (2003)

===Remixes===
* Louie Austen featuring Peaches - &quot;Grab My Shaft&quot; (2003)

==References==
==External links==
*Fat Truckers website
*The Rapture at Reviews on NME.com
*Lengthy interview and pictures from Sandman (magazine)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5437225" start="4" end="16" title="Fat Truckers" label="Fat Truckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q861823" start="32" end="44" title="electroclash" label="electroclash"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="56" end="65" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369555" start="105" end="115" title="Ross Orton" label="Ross Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784795" start="395" end="418" title="Henderson&amp;#x27;s Relish" label="Henderson&amp;#x27;s Relish"/>
<link wikidata="Q504464" start="483" end="487" title="Pulp (band)" label="Pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613221" start="495" end="507" title="Steve Mackey" label="Steve Mackey"/>
<link wikidata="Q204019" start="538" end="544" title="M.I.A. (artist)" label="M.I.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q7734128" start="671" end="711" title="The First Fat Truckers Album Is for Sale" label="The First Fat Truckers Album Is for Sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q877128" start="862" end="874" title="Louie Austen" label="Louie Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q235095" start="885" end="892" title="Peaches (musician)" label="Peaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5590555" start="901" end="914" title="Grab My Shaft" label="Grab My Shaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416418" start="1057" end="1075" title="Sandman (magazine)" label="Sandman (magazine)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405954" wikidata="Q217044" url="?curid=405954" title="Franz Berwald">
<text>Franz Adolf Berwald (23 July 1796 – 3 April 1868) was a Swedish Romantic composer and violinist. He made his living as an orthopedist and later as the manager of a saw mill and glass factory, and became more appreciated as a composer after his death than he had been in his lifetime. Prominent in his oeuvre are several operas, much chamber music and four symphonies.

==Life and works==
Berwald was born in Stockholm and came from a family with four generations of musicians; his father, a violinist in the Royal Opera Orchestra, taught Franz the violin from an early age; he soon appeared in concerts. In 1809, Karl XIII came to power and reinstated the Royal Chapel; the following year Berwald started working there, as well as playing the violin in the court orchestra and the opera, receiving lessons from Edouard du Puy, and also started composing. The summers were off-season for the orchestra, and Berwald travelled around Scandinavia, Finland and Russia. Of his works from that time, a septet and a serenade he still considered worthwhile music in his later years.

In 1818 Berwald started publishing the &quot;Musikalisk journal&quot;, later renamed &quot;Journal de musique&quot;, a periodical with easy piano pieces and songs by various composers as well as some of his own original work. In 1821, his Violin Concerto was premiered by his brother August. It was not well received; some people in the audience burst out laughing during the slow movement.

His family got into dire economic circumstances after the death of his father in 1825. Berwald tried to get several scholarships, but only got one from the King, which enabled him to study in Berlin, where he worked hard on operas despite not having any chance to put them on the stage. To make a living, Berwald started an orthopedic and physiotherapy clinic in Berlin in 1835, which turned out to be profitable. Some of the orthopedic devices he invented were still in use decades after his death.
He stopped composing during his time in Berlin, resuming only in 1841 with a move to Vienna and marriage to Mathilde Scherer. In 1842 a concert of his tone poems at the Redoutensaal at the Hofburg Imperial Palace received extremely positive reviews, and over the course of the next three years Berwald wrote four symphonies. These were not the first symphonies he had written: numerous major works from the 1820s have gone missing, and the torso of a Symphony in A&#x27;s first movement remains, has been finished, and recorded.

The Symphony No. 1 in G minor, &quot;&quot;Sérieuse&quot;, was the only one of Berwald&#x27;s four symphonies that was performed in his lifetime. In 1843, it was premiered in Stockholm with his cousin Johan Frederik conducting the Royal Opera House Orchestra. At that same concert, his operetta &quot;Jag går i kloster&quot; (&quot;I enter a monastery&quot;) was also performed, but its success is credited to one of the roles having been sung by Jenny Lind. In 1846, Lind sang in one of Berwald&#x27;s cantatas. Another operetta, &quot;The Modiste&quot;, had less success in 1845.

His Piano Concerto, finished in 1855, intended for his piano pupil Hilda Aurora Thegerström, who continued her studies with Antoine François Marmontel and Franz Liszt, did not see the light of day until 1904, when Berwald&#x27;s granddaughter Astrid performed it at a Stockholm student concert. Particularly in its brilliant last movement it may be compared favourably to Robert Schumann or Edvard Grieg. Its three movements are played without a break.

Berwald&#x27;s music was not recognised favourably in Sweden during his lifetime, even drawing hostile newspaper reviews, but fared a little better in Germany and Austria. The Mozarteum Salzburg made him an honorary member in 1847.

When Berwald returned to Sweden in 1849, he managed a glass works at Sandö in Ångermanland owned by Ludvig Petré, an amateur violinist. During that time Berwald focused his attention on producing chamber music.

One of his few operas to be staged in his lifetime, &quot;Estrella de Soria&quot;, was heartily applauded at its premiere at the Royal Theater in April 1862, and was given four more performances in the same month. Following this success, he wrote &quot;Drottningen av Golconda&quot; (&quot;The Queen of Golconda&quot;), which would have been premiered in 1864, but was not, due to a change of directors at the Royal Opera.

In 1866, Berwald received the Swedish Order of the Polar Star, in recognition of his musical achievements. The following year, the Board of the Royal Musical Academy appointed Berwald professor of musical composition at the Stockholm Conservatory, only to have the Conservatory Board reverse the decision a few days later, and appoint another. The royal family stepped in, and Berwald got the post. At around that time he was also given many important commissions, but he did not live to fulfill them all.

Berwald died in Stockholm in 1868 of pneumonia and was interred there in the Norra begravningsplatsen (Northern Cemetery). The second movement of the Symphony No. 1 was played at his funeral.
Ten years after Berwald&#x27;s death, his Symphony No. 4 in E-flat major, &quot;Naïve&quot;, was premiered in 1878 (the originally planned 1848 premiere in Paris having been cancelled because of the political unrest of the time). This gap between composition and first performance was relatively short, however, compared to what befell the Symphony No. 2 in D major, &quot;Capricieuse&quot; and Symphony No. 3 in C major, &quot;Singulière&quot;&quot;. Those two pieces were not premiered until 1914 and 1905, respectively.

The Swedish conductor and composer Ulf Björlin has recorded various works of Berwald under the EMI Classics label.

==Critical assessment==

Eduard Hanslick, writing in his 1869 book &quot;Geschichte des Concertwesens in Wien&quot;, opined of Berwald, &quot;a man stimulating, witty, prone to bizarrerie, [who] as a composer lacked creative power and fantasy&quot;. On the other hand, composers Ludvig Norman, Tor Aulin, and Wilhelm Stenhammar worked hard to promote Berwald&#x27;s music. However, despite these musicians&#x27; efforts, it took a while before Berwald was recognized as, to quote composer-critic Wilhelm Peterson-Berger, writing in the Stockholm newspaper &quot;Dagens Nyheter&quot;, Sweden&#x27;s &quot;most original and modern composer&quot;.

In 1911, Carl Nielsen wrote of Berwald, &quot;Neither the media, money nor power can damage or benefit good Art. It will always find some simple, decent artists who forge ahead and produce and stand up for their works. In Sweden, you have the finest example of this: Berwald.&quot; More recently, British musicologist Robert Layton wrote in 1959 what remains the sole English-language biography of Berwald, as well as discussing Berwald&#x27;s music in considerable detail elsewhere. 

One of the examples given by Harold Truscott (in his analysis of Havergal Brian&#x27;s &quot;Gothic&quot; Symphony) of composers prior to Brian writing &quot;sonata movements which do not order their events on the usual plan&quot; is Franz Berwald, &quot;a storehouse of them ... but he never did unusual things in any way that impaired sonata style. They were always logical, though surprising, and helped, rather than hindered, the sonata shape and expression.&quot;

Of Berwald&#x27;s E-flat major String Quartet, Paul Griffiths finds that the &quot;achievement ... of a new formal shape is remarkable enough, even if the single-movement structures of Liszt or Schumann are more tightly bound.&quot;

== Works ==

=== Symphonies ===
* Symphony in A (Fragment) (1820)
* Symphony No. 1 in G minor (&quot;Sinfonie sérieuse&quot;) (1842)
* Symphony No. 2 in D (&quot;Sinfonie capricieuse&quot;) (1842)
* Symphony No. 3 in C (&quot;Sinfonie singulière&quot;) (1845)
* Symphony No. 4 in E flat (&quot;Sinfonie naïve&quot;) (1845)

=== Concertante ===
* Theme and Variations in B flat for Violin and Orchestra (1816)
* Concerto for 2 Violins and Orchestra (1817)
* Violin Concerto in C sharp minor (1820)
* Konzertstück in F for Bassoon and Orchestra (1827)
* Piano Concerto in D (1855)

=== Other orchestral works ===
*Tone poems
** &quot;Slaget vid Leipzig&quot; (&quot;The Battle of Leipzig&quot;, 1828)
** &quot;Elfenspiel&quot; (1841)
** &quot;Ernste und heitere Grillen&quot; (1842)
** &quot;Erinnerung an die norwegischen Alpen&quot; (1842)
** &quot;Bayaderen-Fest&quot; (1842)
** &quot;Wettlauf&quot; (1842)
* Fugue in E flat (1841)
* &quot;Stor polonaise&quot; (&quot;Grand polonaise&quot;, 1843)

=== Chamber music ===
* Duo for Violin and Piano in D (1857–60)
* Duo for Cello (or Violin) and Piano in B flat (1858)
* Duo Concertante for 2 Violins in A (1816)
* Piano Trio in C (1845)
* Piano Trio No. 1 in E flat (1849)
* Piano Trio No. 2 in F minor (1851)
* Piano Trio No. 3 in D minor (1851)
* Piano Trio No. 4 in C (1853)
* String Quartet No. 1 in G minor (1818)
* String Quartet No. 2 in A minor (1849)
* String Quartet No. 3 in E flat (1849)
* Quartet in E flat for Piano, Clarinet, Horn and Bassoon (1819)
* Piano Quintet No. 1 in C minor (1853)
* Piano Quintet No. 2 in A (1850–57)
* Septet in B flat for Clarinet, Horn, Bassoon, Violin, Viola, Cello and Double Bass (1828)
* various piano pieces

=== Vocal works ===
* &quot;Kantat i anledning av högtidligheterna&quot; (1821)
* &quot;Serenade for tenor and chamber ensemble&quot; (1825)
* &quot;Kantat författad i anledning av HKH Kronprinsessans ankomst till Sverige och höga förmälning&quot; (1823)
* &quot;Gustaf Adolph den stores seger och död vid Lützen&quot; (1845)
* &quot;Nordiska fantasibilder&quot; (1846)
* &quot;Gustaf Wasas färd till Dalarna&quot; (1849)
* &quot;Apoteos&quot; (1864)
* other choral works and songs

=== Stage works ===
* &quot;Leonida&quot;, opera (1829, lost)
* &quot;Jag går i kloster&quot;, operetta (1843; first performance 1843)
* &quot;Modehandlerskan&quot;, operetta (1843; first performance 1845)
* &quot;Ein ländliches Verlobungsfest in Schweden&quot;, cantata (1847)
* &quot;Estrella de Soria&quot;, opera (1841/48)
* &quot;Drottningen av Golconda&quot; (&quot;The Queen of Golconda&quot;), opera (1864)

=== Work for wind orchestra ===
* &quot;Revue-Marsch&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
* Robert Layton, &quot;Franz Berwald&quot; (Swedish edition 1956, English 1959)
* Robert Layton, editor, &quot;A Guide To The Symphony&quot;, Chapter 13, &quot;The Symphony in Scandinavia&quot;, written by Robert Layton.
* Harold Truscott, &quot;The Music of the Symphony&quot; in &quot;Havergal Brian&#x27;s Gothic Symphony: Two Studies&quot;, David Brown, editor. Kent: Alan Pooley Printing Ltd. (1981)

==External links==
*Berwald Biography , a brief biographical sketch on the site of GMN ClassicalPlus
*Swedish Musical Heritage - Franz Berwald</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217044" start="0" end="19" title="Franz Berwald" label="Franz Adolf Berwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="56" end="63" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q207591" start="64" end="72" title="Romantic music" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="73" end="81" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q216685" start="122" end="133" title="orthopedist" label="orthopedist"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="164" end="172" title="saw mill" label="saw mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q12185286" start="177" end="190" title="glassblowing" label="glass factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="408" end="417" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="491" end="497" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q52928" start="613" end="622" title="Charles XIII of Sweden" label="Karl XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365684" start="811" end="825" title="Edouard du Puy" label="Edouard du Puy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="931" end="942" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12375230" start="944" end="951" title="Finland under Swedish rule" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="956" end="962" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1359" end="1365" title=":sv:August Berwald" label="August"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="1659" end="1665" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q216685" start="1791" end="1801" title="orthopedic" label="orthopedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="1806" end="1819" title="physiotherapy" label="physiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="2052" end="2058" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q271802" start="2118" end="2127" title="tone poem" label="tone poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q46242" start="2156" end="2179" title="Hofburg Imperial Palace" label="Hofburg Imperial Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507643" start="2501" end="2526" title="Symphony No. 1 (Berwald)" label="Symphony No. 1 in G minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q170384" start="2783" end="2791" title="operetta" label="operetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980147" start="2829" end="2848" title="I enter a monastery" label="I enter a monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q231345" start="2944" end="2954" title="Jenny Lind" label="Jenny Lind"/>
<link wikidata="Q174873" start="3000" end="3008" title="Cantata" label="cantatas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751896" start="3034" end="3045" title="The Modiste" label="The Modiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982446" start="3147" end="3171" title="Hilda Aurora Thegerström" label="Hilda Aurora Thegerström"/>
<link wikidata="Q586181" start="3204" end="3230" title="Antoine François Marmontel" label="Antoine François Marmontel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="3235" end="3246" title="Franz Liszt" label="Franz Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938871" start="3323" end="3329" title="Astrid Berwald" label="Astrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351" start="3452" end="3467" title="Robert Schumann" label="Robert Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q80621" start="3471" end="3483" title="Edvard Grieg" label="Edvard Grieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="3588" end="3594" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="3685" end="3692" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="3697" end="3704" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q871369" start="3710" end="3728" title="Universität Mozarteum Salzburg" label="Mozarteum Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q209853" start="3845" end="3857" title="Ångermanland" label="Ångermanland"/>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="3963" end="3976" title="chamber music" label="chamber music"/>
<link wikidata="Q926956" start="4037" end="4054" title="Estrella de Soria" label="Estrella de Soria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759012" start="4269" end="4290" title="The Queen of Golconda" label="The Queen of Golconda"/>
<link wikidata="Q961142" start="4441" end="4464" title="Order of the Polar Star" label="Order of the Polar Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796144" start="4627" end="4649" title="Royal College of Music, Stockholm" label="Stockholm Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="4947" end="4956" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252312" start="4987" end="5011" title="Norra begravningsplatsen" label="Norra begravningsplatsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507795" start="5144" end="5174" title="Symphony No. 4 (Berwald)" label="Symphony No. 4 in E-flat major"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507760" start="5497" end="5552" title="Symphony No. 3 (Berwald)" label="Symphony No. 3 in C major, &amp;quot;Singulière&amp;quot;&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597693" start="5661" end="5672" title="Ulf Björlin" label="Ulf Björlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q84246" start="5767" end="5782" title="Eduard Hanslick" label="Eduard Hanslick"/>
<link wikidata="Q704992" start="6021" end="6034" title="Ludvig Norman" label="Ludvig Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q786825" start="6036" end="6045" title="Tor Aulin" label="Tor Aulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q435688" start="6051" end="6069" title="Wilhelm Stenhammar" label="Wilhelm Stenhammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q472602" start="6238" end="6261" title="Wilhelm Peterson-Berger" label="Wilhelm Peterson-Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126918" start="6304" end="6318" title="Dagens Nyheter" label="Dagens Nyheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q205139" start="6397" end="6409" title="Carl Nielsen" label="Carl Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q96402205" start="6706" end="6719" title="Robert Layton (musicologist)" label="Robert Layton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11326953" start="6903" end="6918" title="Harold Truscott" label="Harold Truscott"/>
<link wikidata="Q552046" start="6939" end="6953" title="Havergal Brian" label="Havergal Brian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131269" start="7032" end="7038" title="sonata" label="sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151019" start="7391" end="7405" title="Paul Griffiths (writer)" label="Paul Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507643" start="7646" end="7660" title="Symphony No. 1 (Berwald)" label="Symphony No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507720" start="7713" end="7727" title="Symphony No. 2 (Berwald)" label="Symphony No. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507760" start="7777" end="7791" title="Symphony No. 3 (Berwald)" label="Symphony No. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507795" start="7840" end="7854" title="Symphony No. 4 (Berwald)" label="Symphony No. 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980147" start="9839" end="9856" title="I enter a monastery" label="Jag går i kloster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751896" start="9912" end="9927" title="The Modiste" label="Modehandlerskan"/>
<link wikidata="Q926956" start="10055" end="10072" title="Estrella de Soria" label="Estrella de Soria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759012" start="10104" end="10127" title="The Queen of Golconda" label="Drottningen av Golconda"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405955" wikidata="Q953447" url="?curid=405955" title="Cameroon People's Democratic Movement">
<text>The Cameroon People&#x27;s Democratic Movement (CPDM; , RDPC) is the ruling political party in Cameroon. Previously known as the Cameroonian National Union, which had dominated Cameroon politics since independence in the 1960s, it was renamed in 1985. The national president of the CPDM is Paul Biya, the president of Cameroon, while the secretary-general of the party&#x27;s Central Committee is Jean Nkuete.

==History==
===Cameroonian National Union===

The Cameroonian National Union (CNU; , UNC) was formed in 1966 through a merger of the Cameroon Union (Union Camerounaise) and the Kamerun National Democratic Party, the major political organizations, respectively, of the state of west Cameroon and the state of east Cameroon, and four smaller parties. For the next quarter-century, the UNC/RDPC and the government were effectively one. The UNC sponsored labor, youth, and women&#x27;s organizations and provided the only list of candidates for the 1973, 1978, and 1983 legislative elections.

Ahmadou Ahidjo became the first head of the UNC in 1966 and continued in that capacity after his resignation as the nation&#x27;s president in 1982. Following President Paul Biya&#x27;s assumption of emergency powers in August 1983, Ahidjo, then in France, resigned as party leader. Biya was subsequently elected party chief at a special party congress in September.

===CPDM===
In 1985, the UNC was renamed the Cameroon People&#x27;s Democratic Movement (CPDM or Rassemblement Démocratique du Peuple Camerounais—RDPC). Opposition parties were legalized in 1990.

The CPDM won 88 of the 180 seats in the National Assembly of Cameroon in the March 1992 parliamentary election, and through an alliance with the Movement for the Defense of the Republic (MDR), which won six seats, it obtained a parliamentary majority. Biya subsequently won the October 1992 presidential election with about 40% of the vote, ahead of John Fru Ndi of the Social Democratic Front (SDF), who won about 36%. The CPDM gained 116 of the 180 seats in the May 1997 parliamentary election (it initially won 109 seats, but it subsequently won in the three constituencies where the election was held over again in August, gaining seven more seats) and in the October 1997 presidential election, Biya received 92.6% of the vote amidst an opposition boycott.

====Political opposition and alliances in 2000====
The SDF and its allies in the Union for Change remain critical of Biya but are also critical of France, which they call an &quot;accomplice of those in power.&quot; However, in 2000 the alliance reportedly was falling apart as the SDF sought to distance itself from the Southern Cameroon National Council (SCNC). The SCNC apparently was accusing the SDF of delaying independence for the northwest and southwest English-speaking provinces by refusing to force its English-speaking members of parliament to resign from the Francophone-dominated National Assembly. Moreover, some members of the opposition wanted their party leaders to join Biya&#x27;s coalition government so they could share the spoils of office.

By 2000, Biya had shored up his government by forming a coalition with the northern-based UNDP, which had 13 Assembly seats, and with the UPC, which had one seat. Together, the ruling coalition gave Biya a four-fifth&#x27;s majority in the Assembly. The coalition government enjoyed support from seven of Cameroon&#x27;s 10 provinces, and thus secured former president Ahidjo&#x27;s north–south alliance, which he had created in 1958.

====From 2002====
In the parliamentary election held on 30 June 2002, the party won 149 out of 180 seats, including 16 seats won in a revote on 15 September for constituencies where the election had been invalidated. In the presidential election held on 11 October 2004, Biya won 70.9% of the vote.

The CPDM won 140 out of the 163 initially declared seats in the July 2007 parliamentary election, and it won another 13 seats (out of 17 at stake) in constituencies where the vote was held over again in September, thus winning a total of 153 seats.

==Congresses==
The party held its first ordinary congress, at which Biya told the party to prepare for competition as the move toward multiparty democracy was beginning, on June 28, 1990, in Yaoundé. The CPDM&#x27;s first extraordinary congress was held in Yaoundé on October 7, 1995, and its second ordinary congress was held on December 17–19, 1996. The party held its second extraordinary congress on July 7, 2001 and its third extraordinary congress on July 21, 2006, in Yaoundé. Biya has been consistently re-elected as the CPDM&#x27;s National President.

== Electoral history ==

=== Presidential elections ===
=== National Assembly elections ===
== See also ==
* Emile Andze Andze
* Ephraim Fombi
* Fon Angwafo III of Mankon
* Françoise Foning

==References==
==Bibliography==
*

==External links==
* http://www.rdpcpdm.cm/</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q953447" start="4" end="46" title="Cameroon People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Movement" label="Cameroon People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q953447" start="48" end="52" title="Cameroon People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Movement" label="CPDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="76" end="91" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="95" end="103" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q953447" start="129" end="155" title="Cameroon People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Movement" label="Cameroonian National Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q57272" start="290" end="299" title="Paul Biya" label="Paul Biya"/>
<link wikidata="Q190652" start="376" end="393" title="Central committee" label="Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171256" start="397" end="408" title="Jean Nkuete" label="Jean Nkuete"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026464" start="544" end="558" title="Cameroon Union" label="Cameroon Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q12350429" start="588" end="621" title="Kamerun National Democratic Party" label="Kamerun National Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q298718" start="1001" end="1015" title="Ahmadou Ahidjo" label="Ahmadou Ahidjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q57272" start="1170" end="1179" title="Paul Biya" label="Paul Biya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634099" start="1605" end="1634" title="National Assembly of Cameroon" label="National Assembly of Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026481" start="1642" end="1675" title="Cameroonian parliamentary election, 1992" label="March 1992 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15195678" start="1710" end="1750" title="Movement for the Defense of the Republic" label="Movement for the Defense of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026490" start="1843" end="1877" title="Cameroonian presidential election, 1992" label="October 1992 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700139" start="1915" end="1927" title="John Fru Ndi" label="John Fru Ndi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470113" start="1935" end="1958" title="Social Democratic Front (Cameroon)" label="Social Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026482" start="2029" end="2060" title="Cameroonian parliamentary election, 1997" label="May 1997 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026493" start="2229" end="2263" title="Cameroonian presidential election, 1997" label="October 1997 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026483" start="3554" end="3576" title="Cameroonian parliamentary election, 2002" label="parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586516" start="3753" end="3774" title="Cameroonian presidential election, 2004" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586974" start="3893" end="3925" title="Cameroonian parliamentary election, 2007" label="July 2007 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808" start="4270" end="4277" title="Yaoundé" label="Yaoundé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371527" start="4750" end="4767" title="Emile Andze Andze" label="Emile Andze Andze"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382267" start="4770" end="4783" title="Ephraim Fombi" label="Ephraim Fombi"/>
<link wikidata="Q89488223" start="4786" end="4811" title="Fon Angwafo III of Mankon" label="Fon Angwafo III of Mankon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17628636" start="4814" end="4830" title="Françoise Foning" label="Françoise Foning"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405959" wikidata="Q41317726" url="?curid=405959" title="Rawls">
<text>Rawls is a surname. Notable people with the surname include:

* Alphonzo Rawls, American skateboarder
* Andre Rawls (born 1991), American sportsman
* Anne Warfield Rawls (born 1950), American sociologist
* Betsy Rawls (1928–2023), American golfer
* Eugenia Rawls (1913–2000), American actress
* Hardy Rawls (born 1952), actor
* J. Rawls (born 1974), American musician and record producer
* J. Lewis Rawls (1929–1994), American attorney and politician
* Jerry S. Rawls, American CEO and President of the Finistar Corporation
* John Rawls (disambiguation) – multiple people
* John Rawls (1921–2002), American philosopher
* Johnny Rawls (born 1951), American soul blues singer, guitarist, arranger, songwriter and record producer
* Katherine Rawls (1917–1982), American swimmer
* Lou Rawls (1933–2006), American record producer, singer, composer and actor
* Morgan Rawls, American politician
* Nancy V. Rawls (1926–1985), American diplomat
* Ron Rawls (born 1983), American musician
* Sarah Rawls, American chef
* Thomas Rawls (born 1993), American football player
* Wendell Rawls Jr. (born 1941), American investigative reporter and editor
* Will Rawls, American performer
* Wilson Rawls (1913–1984), American author

Fictional characters:
* Reggie Rawls, &quot;Oz&quot; character
* William Rawls, &quot;The Wire&quot; character

==See also==
* Rawls College of Business, a business school at Texas Tech University in Lubbock, Texas
* The Rawls Course, golf course on the Texas Tech University campus in Lubbock, Texas</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41317726" start="0" end="5" title="Rawls" label="Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q96180164" start="64" end="78" title="Alphonzo Rawls" label="Alphonzo Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881351" start="104" end="115" title="Andre Rawls" label="Andre Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q104773740" start="150" end="169" title="Anne Warfield Rawls" label="Anne Warfield Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898318" start="206" end="217" title="Betsy Rawls" label="Betsy Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407923" start="249" end="262" title="Eugenia Rawls" label="Eugenia Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q949559" start="295" end="306" title="Hardy Rawls" label="Hardy Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106911" start="328" end="336" title="J. Rawls" label="J. Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q97142472" start="390" end="404" title="J. Lewis Rawls Jr." label="J. Lewis Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184365" start="453" end="467" title="Jerry S. Rawls" label="Jerry S. Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q105468274" start="526" end="553" title="John Rawls (disambiguation)" label="John Rawls (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q172544" start="574" end="584" title="John Rawls" label="John Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150102" start="621" end="633" title="Johnny Rawls" label="Johnny Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246530" start="729" end="744" title="Katherine Rawls" label="Katherine Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q455821" start="777" end="786" title="Lou Rawls" label="Lou Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q582160" start="855" end="867" title="Morgan Rawls" label="Morgan Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963049" start="891" end="905" title="Nancy V. Rawls" label="Nancy V. Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q21261577" start="939" end="948" title="Ron Rawls" label="Ron Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q106506137" start="982" end="993" title="Sarah Rawls" label="Sarah Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793424" start="1011" end="1023" title="Thomas Rawls" label="Thomas Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982470" start="1064" end="1081" title="Wendell Rawls Jr." label="Wendell Rawls Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q16736736" start="1140" end="1150" title="Will Rawls" label="Will Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023184" start="1173" end="1185" title="Wilson Rawls" label="Wilson Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q41317726" start="1216" end="1237" title="Rawls" label="Fictional characters:"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494920" start="1240" end="1252" title="Reggie Rawls" label="Reggie Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568900" start="1281" end="1294" title="William Rawls" label="William Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297042" start="1343" end="1368" title="Rawls College of Business" label="Rawls College of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759525" start="1433" end="1449" title="The Rawls Course" label="The Rawls Course"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405963" wikidata="Q1576278" url="?curid=405963" title="Patriotic Salvation Movement">
<text>The Patriotic Salvation Movement (, MPS; ) is the ruling political party in Chad.

==History==
After Idriss Déby, an army commander who participated in an unsuccessful plot against President Hissène Habré in 1989, fled to Sudan, he and his supporters, known as the 1 April Movement, operated from Sudan with Libyan backing and carried out attacks across the border into Chad. The MPS was founded in Sudan on 10 March 1990 through the merger of the 1 April Movement with other anti-Habre groups in exile. After a successful offensive in November 1990, Déby and the MPS came to power on 2 December 1990, when their forces entered N&#x27;Djamena, the Chadian capital.

Idriss Déby was the MPS candidate in the 1996 presidential election and won in a second round. He was again the MPS candidate in the presidential election of 20 May 2001, receiving 63.2% of the vote. In the parliamentary election held on 21 April 2002, the MPS won according to IPU Parline 113 out of 155 seats. In the May 2006 presidential election, Déby was re-elected with 64.7% of the vote, as well as in 2011, 2016, and 2021.

After Idriss Déby was shot and died during the Northern Chad offensive in 2021, he was succeeded by his son Mahamat Déby Itno, with the country&#x27;s constitution being suspended. In the December 2024 elections, the party received 124 out of 188 legislative seats in a process widely derided as fraudulent and only presenting the appearance of democracy.

On January 25, 2025, Mahamat Idriss Deby called an extraordinary congress of the MPS for January 29, 2025.

==Election history==
===Presidential elections===

===National Assembly elections===
== See also ==
* Agnes Allafi

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1576278" start="4" end="32" title="Patriotic Salvation Movement" label="Patriotic Salvation Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576278" start="36" end="39" title="Patriotic Salvation Movement" label="MPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="57" end="72" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="76" end="80" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q57350" start="101" end="112" title="Idriss Déby" label="Idriss Déby"/>
<link wikidata="Q310886" start="191" end="204" title="Hissène Habré" label="Hissène Habré"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="222" end="227" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="308" end="313" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659" start="628" end="642" title="N&amp;#x27;Djamena" label="N&amp;#x27;Djamena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586636" start="707" end="733" title="Chadian presidential election, 1996" label="1996 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586638" start="799" end="820" title="Chadian presidential election, 2001" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066471" start="873" end="895" title="Chadian parliamentary election, 2002" label="parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q176815" start="944" end="955" title="Inter-Parliamentary Union" label="IPU Parline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586639" start="985" end="1015" title="Chadian presidential election, 2006" label="May 2006 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q106572235" start="1145" end="1168" title="2021 Northern Chad offensive" label="Northern Chad offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206405" start="1206" end="1223" title="Mahamat Déby Itno" label="Mahamat Déby Itno"/>
<link wikidata="Q24565713" start="1665" end="1677" title="Agnes Allafi" label="Agnes Allafi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405967" wikidata="Q693356" url="?curid=405967" title="Province of Hesse-Nassau">
<text>The Province of Hesse-Nassau () was a province of the Kingdom of Prussia from 1868 to 1918, then a province of the Free State of Prussia until 1944.

Hesse-Nassau was created as a consequence of the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 by combining the previously independent Hesse-Kassel (or Hesse-Cassel), the Duchy of Nassau, the Free City of Frankfurt, areas gained from the Kingdom of Bavaria, and areas gained from the Grand Duchy of Hesse (including part of the former Landgraviate of Hesse-Homburg from Hesse-Darmstadt). These regions were combined to form the province Hesse-Nassau in 1868 with its capital in Kassel and redivided into two administrative regions: Kassel and Wiesbaden. The largest part of the province surrounded the province of Upper Hesse in the Grand Duchy of Hesse (People&#x27;s State of Hesse from 1918).

On 1 April 1929, the Free State of Waldeck became a part of Hesse-Nassau after a popular vote, becoming part of the Kassel administrative region.

In 1935, the Nazi government &quot;de facto&quot; abolished all states, so the provinces held little meaning. Nevertheless, effective 1 July 1944, Hesse-Nassau was split into the provinces of Kurhessen (capital in Kassel) and Nassau (capital in Wiesbaden). On 19 September 1945, after the end of World War II, these two provinces were re-merged and combined with most of the neighbouring People&#x27;s State of Hesse to form Greater Hesse, which became the modern state of Hesse in 1946. Parts of Nassau were also moved into the Rhineland-Palatinate.
The (&#x27;High Commissioner&#x27;) was the chief administrator of a Prussian province, appointed by the King on the advice of the Prussian Minister for the Interior. The Oberpräsident administered the province with the assistance of a Prussian government-appointed provincial council.
== Population ==
==Insignia==
The flag of Hesse-Nassau is identical to that of the Netherlands. The Dutch royal house originates from the Duchy of Nassau.

The coat of arms is split into three parts, each part showing the coats of arms for the three entities that formed Hesse-Nassau:
* a crowned, silver/red-striped lion on a blue background (Electorate of Hesse)
* a crowned, golden lion on a blue field strewn with billets (Duchy of Nassau)
* a silver eagle with golden talons on a red background (Free City of Frankfurt)



==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q693356" start="4" end="28" title="Province of Hesse-Nassau" label="Province of Hesse-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q574299" start="38" end="46" title="Provinces of Prussia" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="54" end="72" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161036" start="115" end="136" title="Free State of Prussia" label="Free State of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="199" end="218" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="Austro-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q529605" start="267" end="279" title="Electorate of Hesse" label="Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q836680" start="303" end="318" title="Duchy of Nassau" label="Duchy of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q704300" start="324" end="346" title="Free City of Frankfurt" label="Free City of Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q154195" start="370" end="388" title="Kingdom of Bavaria" label="Kingdom of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q20135" start="416" end="436" title="Grand Duchy of Hesse" label="Grand Duchy of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q694269" start="483" end="496" title="Hesse-Homburg" label="Hesse-Homburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865" start="610" end="616" title="Kassel" label="Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928" start="664" end="670" title="Kassel (region)" label="Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q314243" start="675" end="684" title="Wiesbaden (region)" label="Wiesbaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q896499" start="746" end="757" title="Upper Hesse" label="Upper Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q694231" start="787" end="815" title="People&amp;#x27;s State of Hesse" label="People&amp;#x27;s State of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q954891" start="850" end="871" title="Free State of Waldeck" label="Free State of Waldeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="989" end="993" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q314222" start="1168" end="1177" title="Province of Kurhessen" label="Kurhessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q449097" start="1202" end="1208" title="Province of Nassau" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721" start="1221" end="1230" title="Wiesbaden" label="Wiesbaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1272" end="1284" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q694231" start="1364" end="1392" title="People&amp;#x27;s State of Hesse" label="People&amp;#x27;s State of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q262034" start="1401" end="1414" title="Greater Hesse" label="Greater Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199" start="1449" end="1454" title="Hesse" label="Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="1505" end="1525" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654355" start="1667" end="1692" title="Interior Minister of Prussia" label="Minister for the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1896" end="1907" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q646085" start="1913" end="1930" title="House of Nassau" label="Dutch royal house"/>
<link wikidata="Q836680" start="1951" end="1966" title="Duchy of Nassau" label="Duchy of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q338814" start="2130" end="2134" title="lion (heraldry)" label="lion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2231" end="2238" title="Charge (heraldry)#Common charges" label="billets"/>
<link wikidata="Q358148" start="2268" end="2273" title="eagle (heraldry)" label="eagle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405973" wikidata="Q1634009" url="?curid=405973" title="Kyril Bonfiglioli">
<text>Kyril Bonfiglioli (born Cyril Emmanuel George Bonfiglioli; 29 May 1928 – 3 March 1985) was a British art dealer, magazine editor and comic novelist. His eccentric and witty &quot;Mortdecai&quot; novels have gained a following since his death.

==Biography==
Bonfiglioli was born in Eastbourne on the south coast of England to an Italo-Slovene father, Emmanuel Bonfiglioli, and an English mother, Dorothy née Pallett. His mother and brother died in an air raid when he was 14. Having served in the British Army from 1947 to 1954, and being widowed, he applied to Balliol College, Oxford, where he took his degree. After his divorce from his second wife, he lived in Silverdale in Lancashire, then in Jersey and Ireland. With Keith Roberts, he edited &quot;Science Fantasy&quot; magazine for a period from 1964 to 1966, appointed by David Warburton of Roberts and Vinter Ltd.; and the successor &quot;Impulse&quot; for its first few issues in 1966 before handing the reins to Harry Harrison. He died in Jersey of cirrhosis in 1985, having had five children.

He described himself as &quot;an accomplished fencer, a fair shot with most weapons and a serial marrier of beautiful women ... abstemious in all things except drink, food, tobacco and talking ... and loved and respected by all who knew him slightly.&quot;

==Charlie Mortdecai novels==
Bonfiglioli wrote four books featuring Charlie Mortdecai, three of which were published in his lifetime, and one posthumously as completed by the satirist and parodist Craig Brown. Charlie Mortdecai is the fictional art dealer anti-hero of the series. His character resembles, among other things, an amoral Bertie Wooster with occasional psychopathic tendencies. His Mortdecai comic-thriller trilogy received critical plaudits back in the 1970s and early 1980s. The dry satire and black humour of the books were favourably reviewed by &quot;The New Yorker&quot; and others. The books are still in print and have been translated into several languages. The books &quot;attract a devoted cult following and are consistently praised by a wide variety of publications&quot;, although a writer in &quot;The Paris Review&quot; said that &quot;readers are pretty much evenly divided between those who relish the books&#x27; unflinching, un-PC meanness, and those who are appalled&quot;.

&quot;Don&#x27;t Point That Thing At Me&quot; was awarded the 1973 CWA New Blood Dagger for the best crime novel by a hitherto unpublished writer.

Actors Stephen Fry and Hugh Laurie are among those who are fans of his work. Hugh Laurie praised &quot;the excellent Kyril Bonfigliolo&quot; [sic] in the afternotes of his book &quot;The Gun Seller&quot;.

The three original books, published out of chronological order:
* &quot;Don&#x27;t Point That Thing At Me&quot; (Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1972), Book One
::Reissued (Penguin, 2015 ) as film tie-in under title &quot;Mortdecai&quot;
* &quot;After You With The Pistol&quot; (Secker and Warburg, 1979), Book Two
* &quot;Something Nasty In The Woodshed&quot; (Macmillan, 1976), Book Three

Anthologised in:
* &quot;The Mortdecai Trilogy&quot; (Black Spring Press, 1991)

An historical prequel about one of Charlie&#x27;s Dutch ancestors: 
* &quot;All the Tea in China&quot; (Secker and Warburg, 1978)

The posthumously completed sequel:
* &quot;The Great Mortdecai Moustache Mystery&quot; completed by Craig Brown (Black Spring Press, 1999)

Bonfiglioli&#x27;s second wife Margaret wrote and compiled a posthumous anthology of works and anecdotes, called &quot;The Mortdecai ABC&quot; (London: Penguin / Viking, 2001), .

===2015 film===

&quot;Mortdecai&quot;, a film based on the books directed by David Koepp and starring Johnny Depp in the title role, was released in January 2015. The film was a box office bomb, and received overwhelmingly negative reviews. The Rotten Tomatoes aggregated rating for the movie stands at just 12%.

==References==
==External links==

*Entertaining review &amp; quotes
*&quot;Forgotten authors No 56: Kyril Bonfiglioli&quot;, &quot;The Independent&quot;. Retrieved 17 October 2014]
*Article on Bonfiglioli in &quot;The New Yorker&quot;
*Recollections of Bonfiglioli by an old friend
*Mortdecai Film on IMDB
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1634009" start="0" end="17" title="Kyril Bonfiglioli" label="Kyril Bonfiglioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634009" start="24" end="57" title="Kyril Bonfiglioli" label="Cyril Emmanuel George Bonfiglioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142399" start="179" end="188" title="Mortdecai" label="Mortdecai"/>
<link wikidata="Q208262" start="282" end="292" title="Eastbourne" label="Eastbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="562" end="585" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q985212" start="665" end="675" title="Silverdale, Lancashire" label="Silverdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="679" end="689" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="699" end="705" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475733" start="755" end="770" title="Science Fantasy (magazine)" label="Science Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q489193" start="974" end="988" title="Harry Harrison (writer)" label="Harry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="1011" end="1020" title="cirrhosis" label="cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180778" start="1512" end="1523" title="Craig Brown (satirist)" label="Craig Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="1571" end="1580" title="anti-hero" label="anti-hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q828530" start="1651" end="1665" title="Bertie Wooster" label="Bertie Wooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q366886" start="1682" end="1692" title="psychopath" label="psychopath"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142399" start="1711" end="1720" title="Mortdecai" label="Mortdecai"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="1885" end="1899" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988628" start="2142" end="2158" title="The Paris Review" label="The Paris Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408776" start="2392" end="2412" title="CWA New Blood Dagger" label="CWA New Blood Dagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="2480" end="2491" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49017" start="2496" end="2507" title="Hugh Laurie" label="Hugh Laurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447953" start="2656" end="2670" title="The Gun Seller" label="The Gun Seller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567082" start="2792" end="2815" title="Weidenfeld and Nicolson" label="Weidenfeld and Nicolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677798" start="2951" end="2969" title="Secker and Warburg" label="Secker and Warburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142399" start="3089" end="3110" title="Mortdecai" label="The Mortdecai Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180778" start="3376" end="3387" title="Craig Brown (satirist)" label="Craig Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921883" start="3389" end="3407" title="Black Spring Press" label="Black Spring Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q15103254" start="3619" end="3628" title="Mortdecai (film)" label="Mortdecai"/>
<link wikidata="Q270178" start="3674" end="3685" title="David Koepp" label="David Koepp"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175" start="3699" end="3710" title="Johnny Depp" label="Johnny Depp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165644" start="3775" end="3790" title="box office bomb" label="box office bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="3842" end="3857" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405976" wikidata="Q850223" url="?curid=405976" title="Bructeri">
<text>The Bructeri were a Germanic people, who lived in present-day North Rhine-Westphalia, just outside what was then the Roman Empire. The Romans originally reported them living east of the lower Rhine river, in a large area centred around present day Münster stretching from both sides of the upper River Ems in the north, to both sides of the River Lippe in the south. At its greatest extent, their territory apparently stretched between the vicinities of the Rhine in the west and the Teutoburg Forest and Weser river in the east. 

By the end of the first century AD the Bructeri were forced to move south of the Lippe, probably absorbing the remnants of the previous inhabitants, the Sicambri and Marsi. The Ruhr was now their southern boundary separating them from the Tencteri. By the beginning of the fourth century AD they were living still further south, facing Roman Cologne, probably having absorbed their long-time neighbours the Tencteri. In this period the Bructeri were categorized by at least some Roman authors using the new term, &quot;Franks&quot;. In the eighth century, tribes known as the &quot;Boructuare&quot; and &quot;Borthari&quot; are mentioned as living in Germany, and there may have been some connection between these and the much earlier Bructeri.

==Name==
In the first century forms such as Latin &quot;Bructeri&quot; and Greek dominate, but much later names which seem to evolved from those tend to begin with &quot;Bo-&quot;, Borhter, Borahtra, and Boructuarii. The original name is formed in a way which is notably similar to the neighbouring Tencteri. Concerning the name&#x27;s first component there have been several proposals to connect the name to Germanic languages, as listed by Neumann:
*One proposal is that the name&#x27;s first component is related to the verb &quot;to break&quot; and would have meant &quot;defection, resistance, rebellion&quot;, perhaps indicating that they were &quot;the rebels&quot; - either as a character trait, or because of some historical event involving the tribe.
*Another proposals is that it is related to Middle High German &quot;brogen&quot; (&quot;to rise, display pride&quot;), ultimately derived from an Indo-European root &quot;&quot; meaning &quot;high&quot;, or &quot;elevated&quot;. This would make it related to Germanic words referring to fortifications, but Neumann considers this explanation unlikely because of the exact form of the Bructeri name. 
*Thirdly, the name may arise from the Germanic root &quot;&quot;, meaning &quot;useful, beneficial&quot;.
*A fourth proposal listed by Neumann is that the word derives from a proposed Indo-European root &quot;bhr̥g-&quot; meaning &quot;brushwood&quot;, or &quot;thicket&quot;.

==First century==
During the aggressive Roman campaigns of Augustus (died 14 AD) and his dynasty east of the Rhine into , the Bructeri were among the most dangerous enemies of Rome along with the Cherusci and Chatti. Compared to many neighbouring tribes they had a relatively large population and homeland, and could put significant armies into the field.

The Bructeri were one of the larger Germanic peoples, along with the coastal Frisii and Chauci who were divided by the geographer Strabo, writing in about 20 AD, into major and minor divisions. He described the Lippe river running through the territory of the lesser Bructeri (Βουσάκτεροι), about 600 stadia from the Rhine. Ptolemy&#x27;s much later geography, written in the second century AD, clearly used older sources such as Strabo, and also divided the Bructeri into lesser and greater sections. Ptolemy placed the Lesser Bructeri on the Rhine just inland of the coastal Frisii who lived just beyond the Rhine mouths, and the greater Bructeri between the Ems and the Weser, to the south of a part of the Chauci.

In surviving Roman works, the first mention of the Bructeri was in the autumn of 12 BC, when Drusus the Elder fought the Bructeri&#x27;s boats on the Ems River with his fleet. Petrokovits argues that this implies that the Bructeri must have lived north of Rheine on the Ems at this time, in order for the river to be big enough for a naval battle.

In 4 AD, Velleius Paterculus described how Tiberius crossed the Rhine that year in what is now the Netherlands and attacked, according to the badly transcribed text, “”. According to modern interpretations, this referred first to either the Chamavi or Cananefates, then east through the country of the Chattuari, and then further east to the Bructeri. From there they went still further to attack the Cherusci. 

Based upon reports of the aftermath, in 9 AD the Bructeri must have been part of the alliance under the leadership of Arminius that defeated the Roman general Varus and annihilated his three legions at the Battle of Teutoburg Forest. In 11 CE, Tiberius probably marched from present-day Neuss on the Rhine, to defeat the southern Bructeri living near the Lippe. Germanicus took a similar route in 14 CE, to attack the Marsi at a holy site called Tamfana, and the Bructeri, Tubantes, and Usipetes, who presumably all lived close by, attempted to ambush the Romans during their return from this slaughter, but it did not work.

In 15 AD, during Germanicus’ summer campaign, the Romans clashed with the Bructeri twice. Aulus Caecina Severus led 40 cohorts through the territory of the northern Bructeri to the Ems, showing that the Bructeri at this time had settlements west of that river. The Bructeri resisted but were defeated by one of the generals serving under Germanicus, Lucius Stertinius. Among the booty captured by Stertinius was the eagle standard of Legio XIX that had been lost at Teutoburg Forest. The Romans then turned to the rest of the Bructeri country. According to Tacitus, the &quot;troops were then marched to the furthest frontier of the Bructeri, and all the country between the rivers Amisia and Luppia was ravaged, not far from the forest of Teutoburgium, where the remains of Varus and his legions were said to lie unburied&quot;. Bructeri prisoners were paraded alongside other Germanic captives in Germanicus’ triumph in 17 CE.

The Bructeri continued to be an important power although Rome now had a powerful grip on the region. In 58 CE, they were moving to support the Amsivarii, who had been ejected from their lands by the Chauci, but the Romans opposed any settlements of this tribe near the Rhine. The Bructeri withdrew when they realized the determination of the Roman governor.

In 69-70 AD the Bructeri participated in the Batavian rebellion, together with the Batavians, Tencteri and Frisii, against the Romans. Throughout the conflict the Bructeri prophetess Veleda played an important role as a spiritual leader of the rising. Tacitus reported that she was long regarded by many as a divinity. She foretold the success of the &quot;Germani&quot; against the Roman legions during the Batavian revolt. A Roman Munius Lupercus was sent to offer her gifts but was murdered on the road. The inhabitants of Cologne, the Ubii, asked for her as an arbiter; &quot;they were not, however, allowed to approach or address Veleda herself. In order to inspire them with more respect they were prevented from seeing her. She dwelt in a lofty tower, and one of her relatives, chosen for the purpose, conveyed, like the messenger of a divinity, the questions and answers.&quot;

In 70 during this revolt, Tacitus mentions that the Bructeri participated in two battles. During a battle near Trier on the Moselle they were on the left, together with the Tencteri. In the battle at Castra Vetera near present day Xanten, where the Lippe enters the Rhine, a column of Bructeri were stationed on a dam which the rebels made into the river, in order to create marshy conditions. They swam from there into the main fight, creating confusion, but the legions were later able to hold their line, while a cavalry unit found a way to attack the rebel&#x27;s rear. The Bructeri were probably also involved in the capture of the Roman flagship on the Rhine, which was rowed up the Lippe to be presented as a gift to Veleda.

Some years after the revolt, Rutilius Gallicus, Roman governor of Germania Inferior in about 76–78 AD, invaded the territory of the Bructeri, captured Veleda and took her to Italy.

Probably in 97 AD, Vestricius Spurinna, Roman governor of Germania Inferior at that time, restored a deposed Bructeri king to power, with military support, threatening war if the Bructeri would attempt to reverse this. Pliny the Younger (died 113) mentioned in a letter (2.7) that in his time &quot;a triumphal Statue was decreed by the Senate to Vestricius Spurinna&quot;, at the notion of the emperor, because he &quot;had brought the King of the Bructeri into his Realm by force of War; and even subdu&#x27;d that rugged Nation, by the Sight and Terror of it, the most honourable kind of Victory&quot;.

At about the same time, not long before 98 AD, the Bructeri were invaded by their neighbours the Chamavi and Angrivarii. Tacitus reported that more than 60,000 of the Bructeri fell, and the country was totally annihilated, &quot;offering delight to Roman eyes&quot;, writing: &quot;May the tribes, I pray, ever retain if not love for us [Romans], at least hatred for each other; for while [...], fortune can give no greater boon than discord among our foes.&quot;

Modern historians generally believe that Tacitus exaggerated. The Bructeri continued to be an important people in the region, but they appear to have lost their large territories north of the Lippe, and moved into new areas south of it. It might have been in this period, if not earlier, that they moved into areas previously belonging to the Sicambri, who had been expelled earlier by the Romans, including areas near the bank of the Rhine. The Marsi, who also lived in this area, no longer appear in records and their population probably merged into the Bructeri. Tacitus reports that the Tencteri were their neighbours to the south in his time, around 100 AD.

==Later antiquity==
After a long period of Roman dominance in the region, during the Crisis of the Third Century, both the Roman written record and archaeological evidence indicate that Rome began to lose control of the Lower Rhine region, and the tribes facing them there, began to be referred to as &quot;Franks&quot;.

In 308 AD, Constantine the Great executed two &quot;kings of Francia&quot;, Ascaric and Merogaisus, who violated the peace after the death of his father Constantius, and then &quot;so that the enemy should not merely grieve over the punishment of their kings&quot; made a devastating raid on the Bructeri, now specifically named, and built a bridge over the Rhine at Cologne to &quot;lord it over the remnants of a shattered nation&quot;. The later &quot;4th&quot; panegyric of 321 lists Bructeri, Chamavi, Cherusci, Lancionae, Alamanni, and Tubantes as peoples Constantine had fought against successfully, and who eventually formed an alliance against him. Several or all of these people were probably involved in the major field battle on the Rhine in 313 AD, which is reported in the &quot;12th&quot; panegyric.

In a list of barbarian nations under Roman domination the Laterculus Veronensis, which was made about 314 AD, Saxons and Franks are listed separately from several of the older Rhineland tribal names including the Chamavi (&quot;Camari&quot;), Cattuari (&quot;Gallouari&quot;) Amsiuari, Angriuari, Bructeri, and Cati.

In 392 AD, according to a citation by Gregory of Tours, Sulpicius Alexander reported that Arbogast crossed the Rhine to punish the Franks for incursions into Gaul. He first devastated the territory of the &quot;Bricteri&quot;, near the bank of the Rhine, then the Chamavi, apparently their neighbours. Neither of these tribes confronted him. The Ampsivarii and the Chatti however were under military leadership of the Frankish princes Marcomer and Sunno and they appeared &quot;on the ridges of distant hills&quot;. At this time the Bructeri apparently lived near Cologne. 

In the Peutinger map, the Bructeri also appear as a distinct entity on the opposite side of the Rhine to Cologne and Bonn, the &quot;Burcturi&quot;, with Franks to their north, and Suevi to their south. This has been interpreted to mean that the Bructeri had moved into the area previously inhabited by the Tencteri and Usipetes, which had in the time of Caesar been inhabited by the Ubii (who had in turn crossed the Rhine to inhabit Cologne as Roman citizens during imperial times). 

Sidonius Apollinaris, in his Poems, VII, lists the Bructeri among the allies who crossed the Rhine into Gaul under Attila in 451, and then fought against the Roman allies, including many Franks, at the Battle of the Catalaunian Fields. But it is possible, according for example to E. A. Thompson that Sidonius included names of historical tribes, for effect.

==&quot;Boructuari&quot;, &quot;Borahtra&quot; and &quot;Borthari&quot;==
Procopius writing in the 550s, described the &quot;Arboruchoi&quot; (Αρβόρυχοι) as a Christian people living in Gaul next to the Franks on the lower Rhine during the time of Clovis I (c. 490). They are most often seen as referring to the Armorici, which was a term that could be used for the Romanized Gauls living near the English channel in this period. However, it has also been proposed that this word evolved from the name of the Bructeri. According to Procopius, they were from Gaul but fought on the Roman side against the Franks before joining and merging with them. This proposal depends on a misspelling by Procopius, of &quot;Arboruchoi&quot; for &quot;Arboruchtoi&quot;.

At the beginning of the eighth century, Bede in his &quot;Ecclesiastical History of the English People&quot;, written in Latin, lists the among the peoples &quot;from whom the Angles and Saxons who now live in Britain derive their origin&quot;. In the same passage Bede also lists the Frisians, Rugians, Danes, Huns and continental Saxons. Bede also reported that Saint Suitbert tried to convert these &quot;Boructuari&quot; to Christianity in the late 7th century, when he was bishop of the Frisians, but that during this period they were attacked by the Saxons. In the Old English translation the name became or . Although Bede does not explain where these people lived, this name is usually connected with that of the Bructeri, including the addition of a common suffix &quot;-uari&quot; found in the names of Germanic tribes, and meaning &quot;inhabitants&quot; or &quot;wards&quot; of a land. The name would thus represent the people living in the old land of the Bructeri. While Ian Wood, for example, accepts these &quot;Boructuari&quot; as a likely Frankish component in the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain, Walter Pohl and Matthias Springer have argued that Bede may have used his specific spelling based on his knowledge of the Bructeri in Roman literature. 

Springer in particular has argued that the Old English seems related to the later medieval gau or (district) name, &quot;Borahtra&quot;. And despite this gau being between Lippe and Ruhr, near where the Bructeri lived, on the basis of linguistic considerations he believes this term is not derived from the word &quot;Bructeri&quot;. Medieval spellings for this gau include Borotra, Bortergo, Boractron, Boroctra, Borhtergo.

About 738, the &quot;Borthari&quot; were one of the peoples of Germania addressed in a letter of Pope Gregory III, the others being the Hessians, Thuringians, Nistresi, Wedrecii, Lognai, Suduodi and Graffelti. The letter was carried by Boniface. In it, Gregory advises the peoples and their princes to accept Boniface&#x27;s religious authority and to abandon the pagan customs they had rejected at baptism. The &quot;Borthari&quot; are usually identified with Bede&#x27;s &quot;Boructuari&quot;.

It has been proposed that the name of the Bructeri is preserved in the names Großbrüchter and Kleinbrüchter, in the municipality Helbedündorf in Thuringia. The earliest attestation of this placename is Borahtride. Other etymologies are also proposed.

== References ==

==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q850223" start="4" end="12" title="Bructeri" label="Bructeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="20" end="35" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="62" end="84" title="North Rhine-Westphalia" label="North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="117" end="129" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="192" end="197" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742" start="248" end="255" title="Münster" label="Münster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648" start="296" end="305" title="Ems (river)" label="River Ems"/>
<link wikidata="Q153945" start="341" end="352" title="Lippe River" label="River Lippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="458" end="463" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q109773" start="484" end="500" title="Teutoburg Forest" label="Teutoburg Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650" start="505" end="510" title="Weser" label="Weser"/>
<link wikidata="Q206403" start="685" end="693" title="Sicambri" label="Sicambri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265446" start="698" end="703" title="Marsi" label="Marsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="709" end="713" title="Ruhr" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143734" start="771" end="779" title="Tencteri" label="Tencteri"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="874" end="881" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="1051" end="1057" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143734" start="1577" end="1585" title="Tencteri" label="Tencteri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348645" start="2758" end="2773" title="Roman campaigns in Germania (12 BC – AD 16)" label="Roman campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="2777" end="2785" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q268307" start="2914" end="2922" title="Cherusci" label="Cherusci"/>
<link wikidata="Q164076" start="2927" end="2933" title="Chatti" label="Chatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2769838" start="3152" end="3158" title="Frisii" label="Frisii"/>
<link wikidata="Q168549" start="3163" end="3169" title="Chauci" label="Chauci"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="3205" end="3211" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645966" start="3376" end="3382" title="stadia (length)" label="stadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2769838" start="3652" end="3658" title="Frisii" label="Frisii"/>
<link wikidata="Q168549" start="3785" end="3791" title="Chauci" label="Chauci"/>
<link wikidata="Q156778" start="3887" end="3903" title="Nero Claudius Drusus" label="Drusus the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3890" start="4050" end="4056" title="Rheine" label="Rheine"/>
<link wikidata="Q316098" start="4152" end="4171" title="Velleius Paterculus" label="Velleius Paterculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="4186" end="4194" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q859987" start="4384" end="4391" title="Chamavi" label="Chamavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q652984" start="4395" end="4406" title="Cananefates" label="Cananefates"/>
<link wikidata="Q595253" start="4445" end="4454" title="Chattuari" label="Chattuari"/>
<link wikidata="Q68880" start="4674" end="4682" title="Arminius" label="Arminius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="4701" end="4706" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q214765" start="4715" end="4720" title="Publius Quinctilius Varus" label="Varus"/>
<link wikidata="Q87779" start="4762" end="4788" title="Battle of Teutoburg Forest" label="Battle of Teutoburg Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948" start="4843" end="4848" title="Neuss" label="Neuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q191039" start="4918" end="4928" title="Germanicus" label="Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265446" start="4974" end="4979" title="Marsi" label="Marsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q444391" start="5002" end="5009" title="Tamfana" label="Tamfana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501100" start="5029" end="5037" title="Tubantes" label="Tubantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517050" start="5043" end="5051" title="Usipetes" label="Usipetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191039" start="5520" end="5530" title="Germanicus" label="Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599459" start="5539" end="5549" title="Stertinia gens" label="Stertinius"/>
<link wikidata="Q399246" start="5616" end="5625" title="Legio XIX" label="Legio XIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q168549" start="6311" end="6317" title="Chauci" label="Chauci"/>
<link wikidata="Q576364" start="6516" end="6534" title="Batavian rebellion" label="Batavian rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q176825" start="6554" end="6563" title="Batavians" label="Batavians"/>
<link wikidata="Q267711" start="6654" end="6660" title="Veleda" label="Veleda"/>
<link wikidata="Q576364" start="6879" end="6894" title="Batavian revolt" label="Batavian revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="6997" end="7004" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q664800" start="7010" end="7014" title="Ubii" label="Ubii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138" start="7469" end="7474" title="Trier" label="Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667" start="7482" end="7489" title="Moselle" label="Moselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q162890" start="7589" end="7595" title="Xanten" label="Xanten"/>
<link wikidata="Q168707" start="8492" end="8509" title="Pliny the Younger" label="Pliny the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529668" start="8620" end="8639" title="Vestricius Spurinna" label="Vestricius Spurinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q859987" start="8977" end="8984" title="Chamavi" label="Chamavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q83150" start="8989" end="8999" title="Angrivarii" label="Angrivarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q206403" start="9688" end="9696" title="Sicambri" label="Sicambri"/>
<link wikidata="Q329838" start="10094" end="10121" title="Crisis of the Third Century" label="Crisis of the Third Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="10316" end="10322" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="10342" end="10363" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866363" start="10407" end="10414" title="Ascaric" label="Ascaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q713506" start="10419" end="10429" title="Merogaisus" label="Merogaisus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163966" start="11205" end="11226" title="Laterculus Veronensis" label="Laterculus Veronensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q67841" start="11503" end="11519" title="Gregory of Tours" label="Gregory of Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376509" start="11521" end="11540" title="Sulpicius Alexander" label="Sulpicius Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q380065" start="11555" end="11563" title="Arbogast (magister militum)" label="Arbogast"/>
<link wikidata="Q477338" start="11811" end="11821" title="Ampsivarii" label="Ampsivarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q164076" start="11830" end="11836" title="Chatti" label="Chatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q371744" start="11900" end="11908" title="Marcomer" label="Marcomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396545" start="11913" end="11918" title="Sunno" label="Sunno"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="12029" end="12036" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12767" start="12047" end="12060" title="Peutinger map" label="Peutinger map"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="12145" end="12152" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="12157" end="12161" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q155085" start="12221" end="12226" title="Suevi" label="Suevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143734" start="12347" end="12355" title="Tencteri" label="Tencteri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517050" start="12360" end="12368" title="Usipetes" label="Usipetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q664800" start="12424" end="12428" title="Ubii" label="Ubii"/>
<link wikidata="Q302936" start="12527" end="12547" title="Sidonius Apollinaris" label="Sidonius Apollinaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q36724" start="12642" end="12648" title="Attila" label="Attila"/>
<link wikidata="Q139808" start="12729" end="12761" title="Battle of the Catalaunian Fields" label="Battle of the Catalaunian Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291497" start="12808" end="12822" title="E. A. Thompson" label="E. A. Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q186153" start="12961" end="12970" title="Procopius" label="Procopius"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372294" start="13012" end="13022" title="Arboruchoi" label="Arboruchoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="13090" end="13096" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q82339" start="13135" end="13143" title="Clovis I" label="Clovis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q641203" start="13199" end="13207" title="Armorici" label="Armorici"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="13685" end="13689" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q661541" start="13703" end="13747" title="Ecclesiastical History of the English People" label="Ecclesiastical History of the English People"/>
<link wikidata="Q106416" start="13930" end="13938" title="Frisians" label="Frisians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378594" start="13940" end="13947" title="Rugini" label="Rugians"/>
<link wikidata="Q164714" start="13949" end="13954" title="Danes" label="Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="13956" end="13960" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="13977" end="13983" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q560531" start="14009" end="14023" title="Suitbert of Kaiserswerth" label="Saint Suitbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574945" start="14630" end="14638" title="Ian N. Wood" label="Ian Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435247" start="14728" end="14761" title="Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain" label="Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q89384" start="14763" end="14774" title="Walter Pohl" label="Walter Pohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252884" start="15008" end="15011" title="gau (country subdivision)" label="gau"/>
<link wikidata="Q103268" start="15440" end="15456" title="Pope Gregory III" label="Pope Gregory III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199" start="15479" end="15485" title="Hessia" label="Hessia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160892" start="15489" end="15497" title="Thuringi" label="Thuringi"/>
<link wikidata="Q883158" start="15522" end="15528" title="Lognai" label="Lognai"/>
<link wikidata="Q160445" start="15579" end="15587" title="Boniface" label="Boniface"/>
<link wikidata="Q627863" start="15970" end="15982" title="Helbedündorf" label="Helbedündorf"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405978" wikidata="Q7530" url="?curid=405978" title="Volhynia">
<text>Volhynia or Volynia ( ; see below) is a historic region in Central and Eastern Europe, between southeastern Poland, southwestern Belarus, and northwestern Ukraine. The borders of the region are not clearly defined, but in Ukraine it is roughly equivalent to Volyn and Rivne Oblasts; the territory that still carries the name is Volyn Oblast.
Volhynia has changed hands numerous times throughout history and been divided among competing powers. For centuries it was part of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. After the Russian annexation during the Partitions of Poland, all of Volhynia was made part of the Pale of Settlement on the southwestern border of the Russian Empire. Important cities include Rivne, Lutsk, Zviahel, and Volodymyr.

== Names and etymology ==
* ;
* or ;
* ;
*;
* or (both ); Volhynian German: , , or (all );
*, or .

The alternative name for the region is Lodomeria after the city of Volodymyr, which was once a political capital of the medieval Volhynian Principality.

According to some historians, the region is named after a semi-legendary city of &quot;Volin&quot; or &quot;Velin&quot;, said to have been located on the Southern Bug River, whose name may come from the Proto-Slavic root &#x27;wet&#x27;. In other versions, the city was located over to the west of Volodymyr near the mouth of the River, a tributary of the Western Bug.

== Geography ==

Geographically it occupies northern areas of the Volhynian-Podolian Upland and western areas of Polesian Lowland along the Pripyat valley as part of the vast East European Plain, between the Western Bug in the west and upper streams of Uzh and Teteriv rivers. Before the partitions of Poland, the eastern edge stretched a little west along the right-banks of the Sluch River or just east of it. Within the territory of Volhynia is located Little Polisie, a lowland that actually divides the Volhynian-Podolian Upland into separate Volhynian Upland and northern outskirts of Podolian Upland, the so-called Kremenets Hills. Volhynia is located in the basins of the Western Bug and Pripyat, therefore most of its rivers flow either in a northern or a western direction.

Relative to other historical regions, it is northeast of Galicia, east of Lesser Poland and northwest of Podolia. The borders of the region are not clearly defined, and it is often considered to overlap a number of other regions, among which are Polesia and Podlasie.

The territories of historical Volhynia are now part of the Volyn, Rivne and parts of the Zhytomyr, Ternopil and Khmelnytskyi oblsts of Ukraine, as well as parts of Poland (see Chełm). Major cities include Lutsk, Rivne, Kovel, Volodymyr, Kremenets (Ternopil Oblast) and Starokostiantyniv (Khmelnytskyi Oblast). Before World War II, many Jewish &quot;shtetls&quot; (small towns), such as Trochenbrod and Lozisht, were an integral part of the region. At one time all of Volhynia was part of the Pale of Settlement designated by Imperial Russia on its southwesternmost border.

== History ==
The first records can be traced to the Ruthenian chronicles, such as the &quot;Primary Chronicle,&quot; which mentions tribes of the Dulebes, Buzhans and Volhynians. The land was mentioned in the works of Al-Masudi and Abraham ben Jacob that in ancient times the &quot;Walitābā&quot; and king &quot;Mājik&quot;, which some read as &quot;Walīnānā&quot; and identified with the Volhynians, were &quot;the original, pure-blooded Saqaliba, the most highly honoured&quot; and dominated the rest of the Slavic tribes, but due to &quot;dissent&quot; their &quot;original organization was destroyed&quot; and &quot;the people divided into factions, each of them ruled by their own king&quot;, implying existence of a Slavic federation which perished after the attack of the Pannonian Avars.

Volhynia may have been included in (or was in the sphere of influence of) the Grand Duchy of Kiev (Ruthenia) as early as the tenth century. At that time Princess Olga sent a punitive raid against the Drevlians to avenge the death of her husband Grand Prince Igor (Ingvar Röreksson); she later established pogosts along the Luha River. In the opinion of the Ukrainian historian Yuriy Dyba, the chronicle phrase «» (and established in place pogosts and tribute along Luha), the path of pogosts and tribute reflects the actual route of Olga&#x27;s raid against the Drevlians further to the west, up to the Western Bug&#x27;s right tributary Luha River.

As early as 983, Vladimir the Great appointed his son Vsevolod as the ruler of the Volhynian principality. In 988, he established the city of Volodymer ().

Volhynia&#x27;s early history coincides with that of the duchies or principalities of Galicia and Volhynia. These two successor states of the Kievan Rus formed Galicia–Volhynia between the 12th and the 14th centuries.
After the disintegration of the Galicia–Volhynia circa 1340, the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania divided the region, Poland taking western Volhynia and Lithuania taking eastern Volhynia (1352–1366). During this period many Poles and Jews settled in the area. The Roman and Greek Catholic churches became established in the province. In 1375, a Roman Catholic Diocese of Lodomeria was established, but it was suppressed in 1425. Many Orthodox churches joined the latter organization in order to benefit from a more attractive legal status. Records of the first agricultural colonies of Mennonites, religious refugees of Dutch, Frisian and German background, date from 1783. After 1569, Volhynia was organized as a voivodeship within the larger Lesser Poland Province of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. Future Polish King Michał Korybut Wiśniowiecki spent a part of childhood in Volhynia.

===Late modern period===
A small south-western part of Volhynia was annexed by Austria in the First Partition of Poland in 1772.

In 1783, a porcelain factory was founded in Korzec by Józef Klemens Czartoryski.

After the Third Partition of Poland in 1795, the remainder of Volhynia was annexed as the Volhynian Governorate of the Russian Empire. It covered an area of 71,852.7 square kilometres. Following this annexation, the Russian government greatly changed the religious make-up of the area: it forcibly liquidated the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, transferring all of its buildings to the ownership and control of the Russian Orthodox Church. Many Roman Catholic church buildings were also given to the Russian Church. The Roman Catholic Diocese of Lutsk was suppressed by order of Empress Catherine II.

Several battles of the Polish 1863 January Uprising against Russia were fought in the region, including the Battle of Salicha.

In 1897, the population amounted to 2,989,482 people (41.7 per square kilometre). It consisted of 73.7 percent East Slavs (predominantly Ukrainians), 13.2 percent--400,000 Jews, 6.2 percent Poles, and 5.7 percent Germans. Most of the German settlers had immigrated from Congress Poland. A small number of Czech settlers also had migrated here. Their main regional center was Kwasiłów. Although economically the area was developing rather quickly, upon the eve of the First World War it was still the most rural province in Western Russian Empire.

===World War I===
During World War I, Volhynia was the place of several battles, fought by the Austrians, Germans and the Polish Legions against Russia, eg. the Battle of Kostiuchnówka. (The village of Kostiuchnówka is known for the Battle of Kostiuchnówka, in which the Poles defeated the Russians, (and as the place of establishment of the accomplished Legia Warsaw football club, relocated to Warsaw only in 1920.))

After the 1917 February Revolution and the formation of the Russian Provisional Government, Ukrainian nationalists declared the autonomous Ukrainian People&#x27;s Republic. The territory of Volhynia was split in half by a frontline just west of the city of Lutsk. Due to an invasion of the Bolsheviks, the government of Ukraine was forced to retreat to Volhynia after the sack of Kyiv. Military aid from the Central Powers as a result of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk brought peace in the region and some degree of stability. Until the end of the war, the area saw a revival of Ukrainian culture after years of Russian oppression and the denial of Ukrainian traditions. After German troops were withdrawn, the whole region was engulfed by a new wave of military actions by Poles and Russians competing for control of the territory. The Ukrainian People&#x27;s Army was forced to fight on three fronts: Bolsheviks, Poles and a Volunteer Army of Imperial Russia.

===Interwar period===

In 1919, Volhynia became part of the Polish-controlled Volhynian District. In 1921, after the end of the Polish–Soviet War, the treaty known as the Peace of Riga divided Volhynia between Poland and the Soviet Union, with Poland retaining the larger part, in which the Volhynian Voivodeship was established with the capital in Łuck, and the largest city being Równe.

Most of eastern Volhynian Governorate became part of the Ukrainian SSR, eventually being split into smaller districts. During that period, a number of the Marchlewszczyzna Polish national districts was formed in the Soviet-controlled part of Volhynia. In 1931, the Vatican of the Roman Catholic Church established a Ukrainian Catholic Apostolic Exarchate of Volhynia, Polesia and Pidliashia, where the congregation practiced the Byzantine Rite in Ukrainian language. 

From 1935 to 1938, the government of the Soviet Union deported numerous nationals from Volhynia in a population transfer to Siberia and Central Asia, as part of the dekulakization, an effort to suppress peasant farmers in the region. These people included Poles of Eastern Volhynia (see Population transfer in the Soviet Union).

===World War II===

Following the signing of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact in 1939, and the subsequent invasion and division of Polish territories between the Reich and the USSR, the Soviet Union invaded and occupied the Polish part of Volhynia. In the course of the Nazi–Soviet population transfers which followed this (temporary) German-Soviet alliance, most of the ethnic German-minority population of Volhynia were transferred to those Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany. Following the mass deportations and arrests carried out by the NKVD, and repressive actions against Poles taken by Germany, including deportation to the Reich to forced labour camps, arrests, detention in camps and mass executions, by 1943 ethnic Poles constituted only 10–12% of the entire population of Volhynia.

During the German invasion, the Jewish population in Volhynia was approximately 460,000. About 400,000–450,000 Jews and 100,000 Poles (men, women and children) in Volhynia were massacred by the Ukrainian Insurgent Army and Ukraine collaborators. The Jews were shot and thousands buried in large pits. The main massacre took place between August and October 1942. It is estimated that about 1.5% survived the Holocaust. The number of Ukrainian victims of Polish retaliatory attacks until the spring of 1945 is estimated at approx. 2,000−3,000 in Volhynia.

The Germans operated the Stalag 346, Stalag 357 and Stalag 360 prisoner-of-war camps in Volhynia.

In 1945, Soviet Ukraine expelled ethnic Germans from Volhynia following the end of the war, claiming that Nazi Germany had used ethnic Germans in eastern Europe as part of its Generalplan Ost. The expulsion of Germans from eastern Europe was part of broader mass population transfers after the war.

The Soviet Union annexed Volhynia to Ukraine after the end of World War II. In 1944, the communists in Volyhnia suppressed the Ukrainian Catholic Apostolic Exarchate. Most of the remaining ethnic Polish population were expelled to Poland in 1945. Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union in the 1990s, Volhynia has been an integral part of Ukraine.

== Important relics ==
*Peresopnytsia Gospel

==Gallery==
== See also ==
*Volhynians
*Principality of Volhynia
*Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia
*Volhynian Voivodeship (1569–1795)
*Volhynian folk costume
*Ostrogski family

==References==
==Literature==
*Andriyashev, Alexander (1887). &quot;&amp;lsqb;Essay on the History of Volyn land&amp;rsqb;&quot; at Runivers.ru in Djvu and PDF formats. Kyiv: Imperial University of Saint Vladimir.
* .
*Merten, Ulrich (2015). &quot;Voices from the Gulag: Oppression of the German Minority in the Soviet Union&quot;. Lincoln, NE: American Historical Society of Germans from Russia. 
*Potocki, Jan (1805). at Polona. Saint Petersburg: Imperial Academy of Sciences.

== External links ==
*American Historical Society of Germans from Russia in Lincoln, Nebraska
*GCatholic - Diocese of Lodomeria, Ukraine
*GCatholic - Ukrainian Apostolic Exarchate of Volhynia, Polesia and Pidliashia
*, from the Roll &quot;Fame&quot; Family Genealogy website
*The Journey to Trochenbrod and Lozisht Aug 2006
*The Society for German Genealogy in Eastern Europe
*The Swiss Mennonite Cultural &amp; Historical Association
*Volhynia.com
*wolhynien.de </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7530" start="0" end="8" title="Volhynia" label="Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530" start="12" end="19" title="Volhynia" label="Volynia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28" end="33" title="#Names and etymology" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q900636" start="59" end="85" title="Central and Eastern Europe" label="Central and Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q167859" start="258" end="263" title="Volyn Oblast" label="Volyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q174187" start="268" end="280" title="Rivne Oblast" label="Rivne Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="477" end="507" title="Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="549" end="569" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q569868" start="608" end="626" title="Pale of Settlement" label="Pale of Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="661" end="675" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q156739" start="702" end="707" title="Rivne" label="Rivne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550" start="709" end="714" title="Lutsk" label="Lutsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q149024" start="716" end="723" title="Zviahel" label="Zviahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33544" start="729" end="738" title="Volodymyr (city)" label="Volodymyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369355" start="880" end="889" title="Lodomeria" label="Lodomeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q33544" start="908" end="917" title="Volodymyr (city)" label="Volodymyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q188940" start="1149" end="1161" title="Southern Bug" label="Southern Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q747537" start="1198" end="1210" title="Proto-Slavic language" label="Proto-Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33544" start="1293" end="1302" title="Volodymyr (city)" label="Volodymyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q156237" start="1351" end="1362" title="Western Bug" label="Western Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q939619" start="1431" end="1456" title="Volhynian-Podolian Upland" label="Volhynian-Podolian Upland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623781" start="1478" end="1494" title="Polesian Lowland" label="Polesian Lowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q157042" start="1505" end="1512" title="Pripyat (river)" label="Pripyat"/>
<link wikidata="Q191862" start="1540" end="1559" title="East European Plain" label="East European Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q156237" start="1573" end="1584" title="Western Bug" label="Western Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757262" start="1618" end="1621" title="Uzh (Pripyat)" label="Uzh"/>
<link wikidata="Q162741" start="1626" end="1633" title="Teteriv" label="Teteriv"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="1653" end="1673" title="partitions of Poland" label="partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548111" start="1745" end="1756" title="Sluch (Ukraine)" label="Sluch River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060325" start="1913" end="1929" title="Volhynian Upland" label="Volhynian Upland"/>
<link wikidata="Q928120" start="1956" end="1971" title="Podolian Upland" label="Podolian Upland"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="2207" end="2214" title="Galicia (Central Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11390" start="2224" end="2237" title="Lesser Poland" label="Lesser Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q191607" start="2255" end="2262" title="Podolia" label="Podolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208987" start="2396" end="2403" title="Polesia" label="Polesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q931565" start="2408" end="2416" title="Podlasie" label="Podlasie"/>
<link wikidata="Q167859" start="2478" end="2483" title="Volyn Oblast" label="Volyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q174187" start="2485" end="2490" title="Rivne Oblast" label="Rivne"/>
<link wikidata="Q40637" start="2508" end="2516" title="Zhytomyr Oblast" label="Zhytomyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q173407" start="2518" end="2526" title="Ternopil Oblast" label="Ternopil"/>
<link wikidata="Q171331" start="2531" end="2543" title="Khmelnytskyi Oblast" label="Khmelnytskyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q234184" start="2595" end="2600" title="Chełm" label="Chełm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550" start="2624" end="2629" title="Lutsk" label="Lutsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q156739" start="2631" end="2636" title="Rivne" label="Rivne"/>
<link wikidata="Q156704" start="2638" end="2643" title="Kovel" label="Kovel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33544" start="2645" end="2654" title="Volodymyr, Volyn Oblast" label="Volodymyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q849116" start="2656" end="2665" title="Kremenets" label="Kremenets"/>
<link wikidata="Q997429" start="2688" end="2705" title="Starokostiantyniv" label="Starokostiantyniv"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2736" end="2748" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q609042" start="2768" end="2774" title="shtetl" label="shtetl"/>
<link wikidata="Q702450" start="2805" end="2816" title="Trochenbrod" label="Trochenbrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905629" start="2821" end="2828" title="Lozisht" label="Lozisht"/>
<link wikidata="Q569868" start="2911" end="2929" title="Pale of Settlement" label="Pale of Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q192551" start="3086" end="3103" title="Primary Chronicle" label="Primary Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q911056" start="3140" end="3147" title="Dulebes" label="Dulebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017293" start="3149" end="3156" title="Buzhans" label="Buzhans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580069" start="3161" end="3171" title="Volhynians" label="Volhynians"/>
<link wikidata="Q168705" start="3212" end="3221" title="Al-Masudi" label="Al-Masudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q504531" start="3226" end="3243" title="Abraham ben Jacob" label="Abraham ben Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580069" start="3383" end="3393" title="Volhynians" label="Volhynians"/>
<link wikidata="Q741731" start="3433" end="3441" title="Saqaliba" label="Saqaliba"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="3773" end="3788" title="Pannonian Avars" label="Pannonian Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q193198" start="3953" end="3957" title="Olga of Kiev" label="Olga"/>
<link wikidata="Q32739" start="3991" end="4000" title="Drevlians" label="Drevlians"/>
<link wikidata="Q203501" start="4049" end="4053" title="Igor of Kiev" label="Igor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191999" start="4096" end="4102" title="pogost" label="pogost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235780" start="4114" end="4124" title="Luha River" label="Luha River"/>
<link wikidata="Q156237" start="4394" end="4405" title="Western Bug" label="Western Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235780" start="4429" end="4439" title="Luha River" label="Luha River"/>
<link wikidata="Q14974" start="4459" end="4477" title="Vladimir the Great" label="Vladimir the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q33544" start="4584" end="4593" title="Volodymyr (city)" label="Volodymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403551" start="4685" end="4692" title="Principality of Galicia" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q680472" start="4697" end="4705" title="Principality of Volhynia" label="Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q239502" start="4759" end="4775" title="Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia" label="Galicia–Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q353227" start="4882" end="4899" title="Kingdom of Poland (1320–1385)" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="4908" end="4932" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="5059" end="5064" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="5069" end="5072" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="5099" end="5104" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q472189" start="5109" end="5123" title="Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church" label="Greek Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9207346" start="5180" end="5215" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Lodomeria" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Lodomeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="5421" end="5430" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317441" start="5455" end="5460" title="Dutch people in Poland" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q106416" start="5462" end="5469" title="Frisians" label="Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763782" start="5579" end="5601" title="Lesser Poland Province, Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Lesser Poland Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="5609" end="5639" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q54041" start="5660" end="5687" title="Michał Korybut Wiśniowiecki" label="Michał Korybut Wiśniowiecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="5807" end="5814" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="5822" end="5847" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q997398" start="5902" end="5908" title="Korzec" label="Korzec"/>
<link wikidata="Q6320538" start="5912" end="5937" title="Józef Klemens Czartoryski" label="Józef Klemens Czartoryski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453505" start="5950" end="5975" title="Third Partition of Poland" label="Third Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333965" start="6030" end="6051" title="Volhynian Governorate" label="Volhynian Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="6059" end="6073" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q472189" start="6253" end="6284" title="Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church" label="Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="6356" end="6379" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q871568" start="6461" end="6492" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Lutsk" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Lutsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="6528" end="6540" title="Catherine II" label="Catherine II"/>
<link wikidata="Q473670" start="6578" end="6594" title="January Uprising" label="January Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q9173530" start="6651" end="6668" title="Battle of Salicha" label="Battle of Salicha"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="6808" end="6818" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147832" start="6843" end="6847" title="ethnic Jew" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="6861" end="6866" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="6884" end="6891" title="ethnic German" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="6941" end="6956" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="6976" end="6981" title="Czechs" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q932221" start="7046" end="7054" title="Kwasiłów" label="Kwasiłów"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7138" end="7153" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7244" end="7255" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q685455" start="7341" end="7355" title="Polish Legions in World War I" label="Polish Legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011177" start="7380" end="7403" title="Battle of Kostiuchnówka" label="Battle of Kostiuchnówka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065727" start="7421" end="7434" title="Kostiuchnówka" label="Kostiuchnówka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011177" start="7452" end="7475" title="Battle of Kostiuchnówka" label="Battle of Kostiuchnówka"/>
<link wikidata="Q193749" start="7574" end="7586" title="Legia Warsaw" label="Legia Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="7615" end="7621" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="7654" end="7673" title="February Revolution" label="February Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q239543" start="7699" end="7729" title="Russian Provisional Government" label="Russian Provisional Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q243610" start="7778" end="7810" title="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550" start="7896" end="7901" title="Lutsk" label="Lutsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419855" start="7913" end="7939" title="Soviet–Ukrainian War" label="invasion of the Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="8019" end="8023" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="8047" end="8061" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q179001" start="8081" end="8104" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk (Ukraine–Central Powers)" label="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q95736217" start="8215" end="8232" title="Ukrainian culture" label="Ukrainian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q186284" start="8390" end="8428" title="Polish–Soviet War" label="military actions by Poles and Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991716" start="8473" end="8501" title="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462746" start="8525" end="8537" title="Ukrainian Death Triangle" label="three fronts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797231" start="8677" end="8695" title="Volhynian District (1919–1920)" label="Volhynian District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076469" start="8770" end="8783" title="Peace of Riga" label="Peace of Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="8824" end="8836" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940320" start="8890" end="8911" title="Wołyń Voivodeship (1921–1939)" label="Volhynian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550" start="8948" end="8952" title="Łuck" label="Łuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q156739" start="8981" end="8986" title="Rivne" label="Równe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333965" start="9005" end="9026" title="Volhynian Governorate" label="Volhynian Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="9046" end="9059" title="Ukrainian SSR" label="Ukrainian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931455" start="9144" end="9160" title="Marchlewszczyzna" label="Marchlewszczyzna"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="9254" end="9261" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q20549144" start="9305" end="9379" title="Ukrainian Catholic Apostolic Exarchate of Volhynia, Polesia and Pidliashia" label="Ukrainian Catholic Apostolic Exarchate of Volhynia, Polesia and Pidliashia"/>
<link wikidata="Q617075" start="9418" end="9432" title="Byzantine Rite" label="Byzantine Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="9499" end="9511" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="9582" end="9589" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="9594" end="9606" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344973" start="9623" end="9637" title="dekulakization" label="dekulakization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9714" end="9739" title="Polish minority in Soviet Union#1921.E2.80.931938" label="Poles of Eastern Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85125" start="9745" end="9784" title="Population transfer in the Soviet Union" label="Population transfer in the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="9837" end="9860" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="9945" end="9950" title="Nazi Germany" label="Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q655017" start="10053" end="10085" title="Nazi–Soviet population transfers" label="Nazi–Soviet population transfers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276549" start="10226" end="10262" title="Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany" label="Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="10327" end="10331" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q695020" start="10700" end="10713" title="Massacres_of_Poles_in_Volhynia_and_Eastern_Galicia" label="100,000 Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q695020" start="10752" end="10766" title="Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia" label="were massacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q737212" start="10774" end="10798" title="Ukrainian Insurgent Army" label="Ukrainian Insurgent Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q321177" start="11199" end="11220" title="German prisoner-of-war camps in World War II" label="prisoner-of-war camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q156115" start="11411" end="11426" title="Generalplan Ost" label="Generalplan Ost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="11432" end="11472" title="Flight and expulsion of Germans (1944–1950)" label="expulsion of Germans from eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11493" end="11532" title="World War II evacuation and expulsion#Defeat of Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan" label="mass population transfers after the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q450355" start="11754" end="11772" title="Polish population transfers (1944–46)" label="expelled to Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="11792" end="11823" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381446" start="11910" end="11930" title="Peresopnytsia Gospel" label="Peresopnytsia Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580069" start="11960" end="11970" title="Volhynians" label="Volhynians"/>
<link wikidata="Q680472" start="11972" end="11996" title="Principality of Volhynia" label="Principality of Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q239502" start="11998" end="12025" title="Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia" label="Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586886" start="12027" end="12060" title="Volhynian Voivodeship (1569–1795)" label="Volhynian Voivodeship (1569–1795)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090339" start="12062" end="12084" title="Volhynian folk costume" label="Volhynian folk costume"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642242" start="12086" end="12102" title="Ostrogski family" label="Ostrogski family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077687" start="12236" end="12247" title="Runivers.ru" label="Runivers.ru"/>
<link wikidata="Q334677" start="12251" end="12255" title="Djvu" label="Djvu"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="12260" end="12263" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q84151" start="12279" end="12316" title="Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv" label="Imperial University of Saint Vladimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q367109" start="12503" end="12515" title="Jan Potocki" label="Potocki, Jan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691781" start="12527" end="12533" title="Polona" label="Polona"/>
<link wikidata="Q83172" start="12553" end="12581" title="Russian Academy of Sciences" label="Imperial Academy of Sciences"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405980" wikidata="Q285272" url="?curid=405980" title="Cockade">
<text>A cockade is a knot of ribbons, or other circular- or oval-shaped symbol of distinctive colours which is usually worn on a hat or cap. The word cockade derives from the French &quot;cocarde&quot;, from Old French &quot;coquarde&quot;, feminine of &quot;coquard&quot; (vain, arrogant), from &quot;coc&quot; (cock), of imitative origin. The earliest documented use was in 1709.

The first cockades were introduced in Europe in the 15th century. The armies of the European states used them to signal the nationality of their soldiers to discern allies from enemies. These first cockades were inspired by the distinctive coloured bands and ribbons that were used in the Late Middle Ages by knights, both in war and in tournaments, which had the same purpose, namely to distinguish the opponent from the fellow soldier. 

The cockade later became a revolutionary symbol par excellence during the insurrectional uprisings of the 18th and 19th centuries. Its main characteristic was that of being able to be clearly visible, thus giving way to unequivocally identify the political ideas of the person who wore it, as well as that of being, in case of need, better hideable than, for example, a flag.

==18th century==
In the 18th and 19th centuries, coloured cockades were used in Europe to show the allegiance of their wearers to some political faction, or to show their rank or to indicate a servant&#x27;s livery. Because individual armies might wear a variety of differing regimental uniforms, cockades were used as an effective and economical means of national identification.

A cockade was pinned on the side of a man&#x27;s tricorne or cocked hat, or on his lapel. Women could also wear it on their hat or in their hair.

In pre-revolutionary France, the cockade of the Bourbon dynasty was all white. In the Kingdom of Great Britain supporters of a Jacobite restoration wore white cockades, while the recently established Hanoverian monarchy used a black cockade. The Hanoverians also accorded the right to all German nobility to wear the black cockade in the United Kingdom.

During the 1780 Gordon Riots in London, the blue cockade became a symbol of anti-government feelings and was worn by most of the rioters.

During the American Revolution, the Continental Army initially wore cockades of various colors as an &quot;ad hoc&quot; form of rank insignia, as General George Washington wrote:

Before long however, the Continental Army reverted to wearing the black cockade they inherited from the British. Later, when France became an ally of the United States, the Continental Army pinned the white cockade of the French &quot;Ancien Régime&quot; onto their old black cockade; the French reciprocally pinned the black cockade onto their white cockade, as a mark of the French-American alliance. The black-and-white cockade thus became known as the &quot;Union Cockade&quot;.

In the Storming of the Bastille, Camille Desmoulins initially encouraged the revolutionary crowd to wear green. This colour was later rejected as it was associated with the Count of Artois. Instead, revolutionaries would wear cockades with the traditional colours of the arms of Paris: red and blue. Later, the Bourbon white was added to this cockade, thus producing the original cockade of France. Later, distinctive colours and styles of cockade would indicate the wearer&#x27;s faction; although the meanings of the various styles were not entirely consistent, and they varied somewhat by region and period.

The cockade of Italy is one of the national symbols of the coutry and is composed of the three colours of the Italian flag with the green in the centre, the white immediately outside and the red on the edge. The cockade, a revolutionary symbol, was the protagonist of the uprisings that characterized the Italian unification, being pinned on the jacket or on the hats in its tricolour form by many of the patriots of this period of Italian history. The Italian tricolour cockade appeared for the first time in Genoa on 21 August 1789, and with it the colours of the three Italian national colours. Seven years later, the first tricolour military banner was adopted by the Lombard Legion in Milan on 11 October 1796, and eight years later, the birth of the flag of Italy had its origins on 7 January 1797, when it became for the first time a national flag of an Italian sovereign State, the Cispadane Republic.

==European military==
From the 15th century, various European monarchy realms used cockades to denote the nationalities of their militaries. Their origin reverts to the distinctive colored band or ribbon worn by late medieval armies or jousting knights on their arms or headgear to distinguish friend from foe in the field of battle. Ribbon-style cockades were worn later upon helmets and brimmed hats or tricornes and bicornes just as the French did, and also on cocked hats and shakoes. Coloured metal cockades were worn at the right side of helmets; while small button-type cockades were worn at the front of kepis and peaked caps. In addition to the significance of these symbols in denoting loyalty to a particular monarch, the coloured cockade served to provide a common and economical field sign at a time when the colours of uniform coats might vary widely between regiments in a single army.
During the Napoleonic wars, the armies of France and Russia, had the imperial French cockade or the larger cockade of St. George pinned on the front of their shakos.

The Second German Empire (1870–1918) used two cockades on each army headgear: one (black-white-red) for the empire; the other for one of the monarchies the empire was composed of, which had used their own colors long before. The only exceptions were the Kingdoms of Bavaria and Württemberg, having preserved the right to keep their own armed forces which were not integrated in the Imperial Army. Their only cockades were either white-blue-white (Bavaria) or black-red-black (Württemberg).

The Weimar Republic (1919–1933) removed these, as they might promote separatism which would lead to the dissolution of the German nation-state into regional countries again. 
When the Nazis came to power, they rejected the democratic German colours of &quot;black-red-gold&quot; used by the Weimar Republic. Nazis reintroduced the imperial colours (in German: &quot;die kaiserlichen Farben&quot; or &quot;Reichsfarben&quot;) of black on the outside, white next, and a red center. The Nazi government used &quot;black-white-red&quot; on all army caps. These colours represented the biggest and the smallest countries of the Reich: large Prussia (black and white) and the tiny Hanseatic League city states of Hamburg, Bremen and Lübeck (white and red).

France began the first Air Service in 1909 and soon picked the traditional French cockade as the first national emblem, now usually termed a roundel, on military aircraft. During World War I, other countries adopted national cockades and used these coloured emblems as roundels on their military aircraft. These designs often bear an additional central device or emblem to further identify national aircraft, those from the French navy bearing a black anchor within the French cockade.

Hungarian revolutionaries wore cockades during the Hungarian revolution of 1848 and during the 1956 revolution. Because of this, Hungarians traditionally wear cockades on 15 March.

==Confederate States==
Echoing their use when Americans rebelled against Britain, cockades – usually made with blue ribbons and worn on clothing or hats – were widespread tokens of Southern support for secession preceding the American Civil War of 1861–1865.

==List of national cockades==


Below is a list of national cockades (colors listed from center to ring):

===Component states of the German Empire (1871–1918)===

The German Empire had, besides the national cockade, also cockades for several of its states, seen in the following table:
==See also==
*Cap badge
*Rosette (politics)
*Roundel

==References==
== References ==
* 


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q285272" start="2" end="9" title="Cockade" label="cockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q80151" start="123" end="126" title="hat" label="hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147804" start="130" end="133" title="cap" label="cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="666" end="682" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="686" end="693" title="Chivalry" label="knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q736161" start="714" end="725" title="Tournament (medieval)" label="tournaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196123" start="1481" end="1489" title="Military uniform" label="uniforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q763457" start="1625" end="1633" title="tricorne" label="tricorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q233104" start="1637" end="1647" title="cocked hat" label="cocked hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="1771" end="1778" title="House of Bourbon" label="Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="1809" end="1833" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="1850" end="1858" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="1923" end="1930" title="House of Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538124" start="2094" end="2106" title="Gordon Riots" label="Gordon Riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="2228" end="2247" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="2253" end="2269" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="2371" end="2388" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2522" end="2564" title="Franco-American relations#France and the American Revolution" label="France became an ally of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q234081" start="2632" end="2645" title="Ancien Régime" label="Ancien Régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539" start="2888" end="2912" title="Storming of the Bastille" label="Storming of the Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q249313" start="2914" end="2932" title="Camille Desmoulins" label="Camille Desmoulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758" start="3054" end="3069" title="Charles X of France" label="Count of Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925366" start="3152" end="3165" title="Coat of arms of Paris" label="arms of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981220" start="3261" end="3278" title="cockade of France" label="cockade of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3681911" start="3497" end="3513" title="cockade of Italy" label="cockade of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961014" start="3528" end="3558" title="national symbols of Italy" label="national symbols of the coutry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100652" start="3582" end="3595" title="National colours of Italy" label="three colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q42876" start="3603" end="3615" title="Italian flag" label="Italian flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="3798" end="3817" title="Italian unification" label="Italian unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791" start="3925" end="3940" title="history of Italy" label="Italian history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="4003" end="4008" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270222" start="4165" end="4179" title="Lombard Legion" label="Lombard Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="4183" end="4188" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42876" start="4249" end="4262" title="flag of Italy" label="flag of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q463289" start="4383" end="4401" title="Cispadane Republic" label="Cispadane Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="4457" end="4463" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q763457" start="4809" end="4817" title="tricorne" label="tricorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q233104" start="4823" end="4830" title="bicorne" label="bicorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q233104" start="4868" end="4878" title="cocked hat" label="cocked hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q153389" start="4884" end="4889" title="shako" label="shako"/>
<link wikidata="Q173603" start="4948" end="4954" title="helmet" label="helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135551" start="5016" end="5020" title="kepi" label="kepi"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="5316" end="5331" title="Napoleonic wars" label="Napoleonic wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5347" end="5353" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="5358" end="5364" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48438" start="5423" end="5433" title="St. George" label="St. George"/>
<link wikidata="Q153389" start="5463" end="5468" title="shako" label="shako"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="5483" end="5496" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="5967" end="5982" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="6147" end="6151" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="6638" end="6654" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="6655" end="6665" title="city state" label="city state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136958" start="6738" end="6749" title="History of the Armée de l&amp;#x27;Air (1909-1942)" label="Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049919" start="6856" end="6863" title="roundel" label="roundel"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="7139" end="7150" title="French navy" label="French navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="7202" end="7211" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="7253" end="7281" title="Hungarian revolution of 1848" label="Hungarian revolution of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="7297" end="7312" title="1956 revolution" label="1956 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="7565" end="7573" title="Slave and free states" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115346" start="7586" end="7595" title="Secession in the United States" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="7610" end="7628" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="7812" end="7825" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057683" start="7879" end="7900" title="States of the German Empire" label="several of its states"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975547" start="7945" end="7954" title="Cap badge" label="Cap badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q25205214" start="7956" end="7974" title="Rosette (politics)" label="Rosette (politics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049919" start="7976" end="7983" title="Roundel" label="Roundel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405981" wikidata="Q1933764" url="?curid=405981" title="Net worth">
<text>Net worth is the value of all the non-financial and financial assets owned by an individual or institution minus the value of all its outstanding liabilities. Financial assets minus outstanding liabilities equal net financial assets, so net worth can be expressed as the sum of non-financial assets and net financial assets. This concept can apply to companies, individuals, governments, or economic sectors such as the financial corporations sector, or even entire countries.

==By entity==

=== Calculation ===
Net worth is the excess of assets over liabilities. The assets that contribute to net worth can include homes, vehicles, various types of bank accounts, money market accounts, stocks and bonds. The liabilities are financial obligations such as loans, mortgages, and accounts payable (AP) that deplete resources.

===Companies===
Net worth in business is also referred to as equity. It is generally based on the value of all assets and liabilities at the carrying value which is the value as expressed on the financial statements. To the extent items on the balance sheet do not express their true (market) value, the net worth will also be inaccurate. On reading the balance sheet, if the accumulated losses exceed the shareholder&#x27;s equity, net worth becomes negative.

Net worth in this formulation does &quot;not&quot; express the market value of a firm; a firm may be worth more (or less) if sold as a going concern, or indeed if the business closes down.

Net worth vs. debt is a significant aspect of business loans. Business owners are required to &quot;trade on equity&quot; in order to further increase their net worth.

===Individuals===
For individuals, net worth or wealth refers to an individual&#x27;s net economic position: the value of the individual&#x27;s assets minus liabilities. Examples of assets that an individual would factor into their net worth are retirement accounts, other investments, home(s), and vehicles. Liabilities include both secured debt (such as a home mortgage) and unsecured debt (such as consumer debt or personal loans). Typically intangible assets such as educational degrees are not factored into net worth, even though such assets positively contribute to one&#x27;s overall financial position.

For a deceased individual, net worth can be used for the value of their estate when in probate.

Individuals with considerable net worth are described in the financial services industry as high-net-worth individuals and ultra high-net-worth individuals.

In personal finance, knowing an individual&#x27;s net worth can be important to understand their current financial standing and give a reference point for measuring future financial progress.

===Governments===
Balance sheets that include all assets and liabilities can also be constructed for governments. Compared with government debt, a government&#x27;s net worth is an alternative measure of the government&#x27;s financial strength. Most governments utilize an accrual-based accounting system in order to provide a transparent picture of government operational costs. Other governments may utilize cash accounting in order to better foresee future fiscal events. The accrual-based system is more effective, however, when dealing with the overall transparency of a government&#x27;s spending. Massive governmental organizations rely on consistent and effective accounting in order to identify total net worth.

===Countries===
A country&#x27;s net worth is calculated as the sum of the net worth of all companies and individuals resident in that country, plus the government&#x27;s net worth. For the United States, this measure is referred to as the financial position, and totalled $123.8 trillion as of 2014.

=== Importance ===
Net worth is a representation of where one stands financially. This can be used to help create budgets, influence wise spending, motivate one to pay off debt, and it can motivate someone to save and invest. Net worth is also important to look at when considering retirement.

==See also==
*Net operating assets

==References==
==External links==

* Net Worth Calculator</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1933764" start="0" end="9" title="Net worth" label="Net worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q46737" start="62" end="67" title="asset" label="asset"/>
<link wikidata="Q96776939" start="146" end="157" title="Liability (financial accounting)" label="liabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q178030" start="666" end="686" title="money market account" label="money market account"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210094" start="764" end="773" title="Mortgage loan" label="mortgages"/>
<link wikidata="Q250058" start="779" end="795" title="accounts payable" label="accounts payable"/>
<link wikidata="Q827451" start="887" end="893" title="Equity (finance)" label="equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901350" start="967" end="981" title="market value" label="carrying value"/>
<link wikidata="Q192907" start="1021" end="1041" title="financial statements" label="financial statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q46834" start="1070" end="1083" title="balance sheet" label="balance sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901350" start="1351" end="1363" title="market value" label="market value"/>
<link wikidata="Q565043" start="1423" end="1436" title="going concern" label="going concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186896" start="2332" end="2338" title="Estate (law)" label="estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500369" start="2347" end="2354" title="probate" label="probate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271714" start="2449" end="2474" title="high-net-worth individual" label="high-net-worth individual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271714" start="2480" end="2511" title="ultra high-net-worth individual" label="ultra high-net-worth individual"/>
<link wikidata="Q253613" start="2518" end="2534" title="personal finance" label="personal finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449734" start="3671" end="3689" title="Financial position of the United States" label="financial position"/>
<link wikidata="Q946865" start="4015" end="4025" title="retirement" label="retirement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508685" start="4042" end="4062" title="Net operating assets" label="Net operating assets"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405986" wikidata="Q1145280" url="?curid=405986" title="Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front">
<text>The Ethiopian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF; ) was an ethnic federalist political coalition in Ethiopia that existed from 1989 to 2019. It consisted of four political parties: Tigray People&#x27;s Liberation Front (TPLF), Amhara Democratic Party (ADP), Oromo Democratic Party (ODP) and Southern Ethiopian People&#x27;s Democratic Movement (SEPDM). After leading the overthrow of the People&#x27;s Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it dominated Ethiopian politics from 1991 to 2019. In November 2019, the EPRDF was dissolved, and Prime Minister and EPDRF chairman Abiy Ahmed merged three of the constituent parties (not including the TPLF) into his new Prosperity Party, which was officially founded on 1 December 2019.

== History ==
During the Ethiopian Civil War, the EPRDF was a rebel group battling the Derg, a military regime led by Mengistu Haile Mariam that was effectively in power from 1974 until it was replaced by the People&#x27;s Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in 1987. During this period, the Derg was responsible for the deaths of tens of thousands of opponents without trial in the Qey Shibir and the 1983–1985 famine in Ethiopia resulting in 400,000 deaths.

The EPRDF was formed by the union of the TPLF and the Ethiopian People&#x27;s Democratic Movement (EPDM) in early-1989. They were later joined by the OPDO (the Oromo members of the TPLF, EPLF, and EPDM) and the Ethiopian Democratic Officers&#x27; Revolutionary Movement (a small body of Derg officers captured by TPLF, most notably at Shire in February 1989, which was later disbanded after the establishment of the Transitional Government of Ethiopia).

Following the collapse of the People&#x27;s Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in the early 1990s, the EPRDF gained support from the United States. Michael Johns, an Africa expert with The Heritage Foundation, wrote in 1991 that &quot;there are some modestly encouraging signs that the front intends to abandon Mengistu&#x27;s autocratic practices&quot;.

=== Leadership ===
* Meles Legesse Zenawi Asres (8 May 1988 – 20 August 2012)
* Hailemariam Desalegn Boshe (16 September 2012 – 27 March 2018)
* Abiy Ahmed Ali (27 March 2018 – 1 December 2019)

== Organization ==
The EPRDF was an alliance of four political parties: 
* Oromo Democratic Party (ODP), which is based in the Oromia Region (formerly known as OPDO)
* Amhara Democratic Party (ADP) based in the Amhara Region (formerly known as ANDM)
* Southern Ethiopian People&#x27;s Democratic Movement (SEPDM) based in the Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples&#x27; Region
* Tigray People&#x27;s Liberation Front (TPLF) based in the Tigray Region

The EPRDF was led by a Council as well as an executive committee, whose members were selected every three years by a congress of the party. The four member parties had the same organizational structure. Government and party structures were closely intertwined.

The other five regions of Ethiopia were governed by parties which were either created or heavily influenced by the EPRDF. One of the earliest was the Afar People&#x27;s Democratic Organization in the Afar Region, which subsequently merged with other Afar political groups to create the Afar National Democratic Party (ANDP). These were the five regional parties:
* Afar National Democratic Party (ANDP) in Afar Region
* Argoba People&#x27;s Democratic Organization (APDO) for the Argobba people
* Hareri National League (HNL) in Harari Region
* Gambela People&#x27;s Democratic Movement (GPDM) in Gambela Region
* Ethiopian Somali People&#x27;s Democratic Party (ESPDP) in Somali Region
* Benishangul-Gumuz People&#x27;s Democratic Unity Front (BGPDUF) in Benishangul-Gumuz Region

==Ideology==
===Revolutionary democracy===
Revolutionary democracy replaced Marxism–Leninism as the EPRDF&#x27;s official ideology in the early 1990s, not because the front had lost their belief in Marxism, but rather because of the international situation (the Soviet Union was dissolved in 1991). The main message of Revolutionary Democracy, similar to that found in Marxist–Leninist thought, is that a vanguard party should rule because it represents the people and has &quot;supposedly superior knowledge of the nature of social development conferred on them by the EPRDF ideology.&quot; Similar to Marxism–Leninism, the EPRDF prefers to categorize society into classes such as the peasantry, the bourgeoisie, the proletariat and the comprador bourgeoisie and considers its main adversary to be imperialism, that is free market capitalist states.

The peasantry are considered the main class in Ethiopia, since they form a majority of the population, and they are considered the pillar of Revolutionary Democracy. Upon seizing power, the front was suspicious of the petite bourgeoisie class, believing that they were naturally inclined to oppose the front&#x27;s policies. Despite this, the front believed it could win over the petite bourgeoisie through economic incentives and successful policy. Importantly, if members of the petite bourgeoisie class oppose the EPRDF, the front will &quot;empty their &#x27;belly and pocket&#x27;&quot;. The urban proletariat are in contrast naturally inclined towards the EPRDF, and the EPRDF seeks to recruit members of these class so as to strengthen the front&#x27;s organizational links with the trade unions. The EPRDF asserts that the &quot;local investor&quot;, that is, the capitalist, will naturally be hostile towards the front and its policies, and the front should therefore try to persuade this class to become neutral. Religious organizations are deemed reactionary by the EPRDF.

Some people state that the EPRDF has not espoused a well-defined unified ideology or political philosophy. Its members held a variety of positions that could be broadly defined as being to the left of the opposition parties. The EPRDF traditionally identified itself with a number of general goals, namely rapid export-based economic growth; close cooperation with the United States in foreign and defense policies; close cooperation with China on economic and trade policies: and several newer issues, such as administrative reform. Administrative reform encompassed several themes, namely simplification and streamlining of government bureaucracy; privatization of state-owned enterprises; and adoption of measures, including tax reform, in preparation for the expected strain on the economy posed by a rapidly growing population. Other priorities in the early 1990s included the promotion of a more active and positive role for Ethiopia following the collapse of the People&#x27;s Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, the internationalization of Ethiopia&#x27;s economy by the liberalization and promotion of domestic demand (expected to lead to the industrialization) and the promotion of education. A business-inspired commitment to free enterprise was tempered by the insistence of protectionism and tariffs.

====Relation to liberalism====
The EPRDF opposes liberal democracy, and liberalism in general. Despite this, Revolutionary Democracy can be considered a mixture of communist and liberal thought. The front views liberal democracy and free market capitalism as decadent, and has a &quot;romantic attachment&quot; to the beliefs of Vladimir Lenin, who condemned liberal democracy as the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie (literally the dictatorship of the upper class) while supporting Lenin&#x27;s assertion of the need for a vanguard party which practices democratic centralism. It considers liberal democracy to be &quot;ill-fit and unsustainable&quot;, but ironically much of the front&#x27;s economic policies are based on the tacit acknowledgement of the need of some liberalism in the economic field.

====Relation to communism====
With the majority of EPRDF&#x27;s top leaders being former members of the Marxist–Leninist League of Tigray, a Hoxhaist organization led by among others Meles Zenawi, Marxist ideology still plays a prominent role in party discourse, with some even claiming that the front is hiding their ideology. Theodore M. Vestal claims that the front based its ideology on Marxist–Leninist revisionism, believing it explains the regime&#x27;s authoritarian nature. Of the communists traits in Revolutionary Democracy, most of them have been borrowed from Mao Zedong Thought, an ideology conceived by Chinese leader Mao Zedong.

== Election results ==
== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1145280" start="4" end="58" title="Ethiopian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Democratic Front" label="Ethiopian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145280" start="60" end="65" title="Ethiopian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Democratic Front" label="EPRDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130264" start="76" end="93" title="Ethnic federalism" label="ethnic federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q848197" start="94" end="113" title="political coalition" label="political coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="117" end="125" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699287" start="198" end="235" title="Tigray People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Front" label="Tigray People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966902" start="244" end="267" title="Amhara Democratic Party" label="Amhara Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186219" start="275" end="297" title="Oromo Democratic Party" label="Oromo Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186157" start="308" end="360" title="Southern Ethiopian People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Movement" label="Southern Ethiopian People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q940821" start="405" end="450" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Republic of Ethiopia" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Republic of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439061" start="455" end="464" title="dominant-party state" label="dominated"/>
<link wikidata="Q50365049" start="584" end="594" title="Abiy Ahmed" label="Abiy Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q78108696" start="673" end="689" title="Prosperity Party" label="Prosperity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q257724" start="766" end="785" title="Ethiopian Civil War" label="Ethiopian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q828005" start="828" end="832" title="Derg" label="Derg"/>
<link wikidata="Q192512" start="859" end="880" title="Mengistu Haile Mariam" label="Mengistu Haile Mariam"/>
<link wikidata="Q940821" start="950" end="995" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Republic of Ethiopia" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Republic of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610662" start="1120" end="1130" title="Qey Shibir" label="Qey Shibir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637896" start="1139" end="1167" title="1983–1985 famine in Ethiopia" label="1983–1985 famine in Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966902" start="1252" end="1295" title="Ethiopian People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Movement" label="Ethiopian People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186219" start="1348" end="1352" title="Oromo People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Organization" label="OPDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q743859" start="1533" end="1538" title="Shire, Ethiopia" label="Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q332071" start="1614" end="1649" title="Transitional Government of Ethiopia" label="Transitional Government of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1667" end="1675" title="Ethiopian Civil War#1990s" label="collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q940821" start="1683" end="1728" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Republic of Ethiopia" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Republic of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1783" end="1796" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q876787" start="1835" end="1858" title="The Heritage Foundation" label="The Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161184" start="2027" end="2053" title="Meles Zenawi" label="Meles Legesse Zenawi Asres"/>
<link wikidata="Q381071" start="2086" end="2112" title="Hailemariam Desalegn" label="Hailemariam Desalegn Boshe"/>
<link wikidata="Q50365049" start="2151" end="2165" title="Abiy Ahmed" label="Abiy Ahmed Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186219" start="2276" end="2298" title="Oromo Democratic Party" label="Oromo Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q202107" start="2328" end="2341" title="Oromia Region" label="Oromia Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966902" start="2369" end="2392" title="Amhara Democratic Party" label="Amhara Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q203009" start="2412" end="2425" title="Amhara Region" label="Amhara Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186157" start="2453" end="2505" title="Southern Ethiopian People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Movement" label="Southern Ethiopian People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q203193" start="2527" end="2584" title="Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples&amp;#x27; Region" label="Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples&amp;#x27; Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699287" start="2587" end="2624" title="Tigray People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Front" label="Tigray People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q200127" start="2645" end="2658" title="Tigray Region" label="Tigray Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057504" start="2937" end="2956" title="regions of Ethiopia" label="regions of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193494" start="3122" end="3133" title="Afar Region" label="Afar Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q211720" start="3172" end="3176" title="Afar people" label="Afar"/>
<link wikidata="Q382122" start="3208" end="3238" title="Afar National Democratic Party" label="Afar National Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q382122" start="3287" end="3317" title="Afar National Democratic Party" label="Afar National Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q193494" start="3328" end="3339" title="Afar Region" label="Afar Region"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3342" end="3386" title="Argoba People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Organization" label="Argoba People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q648031" start="3402" end="3416" title="Argobba people" label="Argobba people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135103" start="3419" end="3441" title="Hareri National League" label="Hareri National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033855" start="3451" end="3464" title="Harari Region" label="Harari Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134381" start="3467" end="3508" title="Gambela People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Movement" label="Gambela People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q207638" start="3519" end="3533" title="Gambela Region" label="Gambela Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q766610" start="3536" end="3583" title="Ethiopian Somali People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party" label="Ethiopian Somali People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q202800" start="3595" end="3608" title="Somali Region" label="Somali Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q817331" start="3611" end="3665" title="Benishangul-Gumuz People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Unity Front" label="Benishangul-Gumuz People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Unity Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q207635" start="3678" end="3702" title="Benishangul-Gumuz Region" label="Benishangul-Gumuz Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="3780" end="3796" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="3902" end="3909" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3966" end="3978" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="3983" end="4000" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolved in 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875977" start="4109" end="4123" title="Vanguardism" label="vanguard party"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="4390" end="4399" title="peasantry" label="peasantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="4405" end="4416" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q132603" start="4422" end="4433" title="proletariat" label="proletariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427496" start="4442" end="4463" title="Comprador" label="comprador bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="4503" end="4514" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="4524" end="4535" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="4536" end="4553" title="capitalism" label="capitalist states"/>
<link wikidata="Q75617" start="4774" end="4792" title="petite bourgeoisie" label="petite bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q132603" start="5153" end="5170" title="proletariat" label="urban proletariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="5346" end="5357" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="5614" end="5625" title="reactionary" label="reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4064179" start="5983" end="6000" title="Ethiopia–United States relations" label="close cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6010" end="6023" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100212" start="6057" end="6074" title="China-Ethiopia relations" label="close cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="6080" end="6085" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589204" start="6267" end="6289" title="Government of Ethiopia" label="government bureaucracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="6291" end="6304" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="6308" end="6330" title="state-owned enterprise" label="state-owned enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346630" start="6369" end="6379" title="tax reform" label="tax reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425941" start="6427" end="6434" title="Economy of Ethiopia" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6446" end="6472" title="Demographics of Ethiopia#Population" label="rapidly growing population"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6595" end="6603" title="Ethiopian Civil War#Conclusion" label="collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q940821" start="6611" end="6656" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Republic of Ethiopia" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Republic of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141064" start="6662" end="6682" title="internationalization" label="internationalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q645029" start="6717" end="6731" title="Economic liberalization" label="liberalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="6790" end="6807" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3580131" start="6830" end="6839" title="Education in Ethiopia" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="6875" end="6890" title="free enterprise" label="free enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="6925" end="6938" title="protectionism" label="protectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="6943" end="6949" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="7002" end="7019" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="7025" end="7035" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="7282" end="7296" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7337" end="7368" title="Liberal democracy#Dictatorship of the bourgeoisie" label="dictatorship of the bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q193852" start="7506" end="7527" title="democratic centralism" label="democratic centralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815743" start="7861" end="7894" title="Marxist–Leninist League of Tigray" label="Marxist–Leninist League of Tigray"/>
<link wikidata="Q589468" start="7898" end="7906" title="Hoxhaism" label="Hoxhaist"/>
<link wikidata="Q161184" start="7940" end="7952" title="Meles Zenawi" label="Meles Zenawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="7954" end="7970" title="Marxism" label="Marxist ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083688" start="8165" end="8176" title="Revisionism (Marxism)" label="revisionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="8330" end="8348" title="Mao Zedong Thought" label="Mao Zedong Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="8390" end="8400" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="405991" wikidata="Q7345402" url="?curid=405991" title="Robert Henley, 1st Earl of Northington">
<text>Robert Henley, 1st Earl of Northington, PC (c. 1708 – 14 January 1772), was the Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain. He was a member of the Whig Party in the parliament and was known for his wit and writing.

==Family==
Born the second son of Anthony Henley, Robert Henley was from a wealthy family in Hampshire. His grandfather, Sir Robert Henley, had been Master of the Court of the King&#x27;s Bench, essentially a defence counsel.

Henley&#x27;s father Anthony Henley was educated at Oxford and interested in literature. When he moved to London, he became the friend of the Earls of Dorset and Sunderland, as well as a friend of Swift, Pope, and Burnet. After becoming a married man, Anthony Henley had been the Member of Parliament for Andover in 1698. He died in August, 1711 and was succeeded in turn by his eldest son, Anthony and his second son, Robert.

==Early life==

Henley was educated at Westminster School and attended St. John&#x27;s College, Oxford. He gained a fellowship at All Souls College, Oxford in 1727, entered the Inner Temple to study law in 1729 and was called to the bar on 23 June 1732. He succeeded his elder brother in 1746, inheriting The Grange, Northington in Hampshire which had been built for his grandfather by Inigo Jones.

==Career==
He was elected a Member of Parliament for Bath in 1747 and became Recorder of the town in 1751. He was appointed Attorney General and knighted in 1756 and promoted the next year to Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, the last person to receive this title. Although as Lord Keeper he presided over the House of Lords, he was not made a peer until 1760 when he became Baron Henley of Grange in the County of Southampton. When George III ascended to power, Henley was appointed Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain in 1761 and made Earl of Northington in 1764.

The delay in raising him to the peerage was due to the hostility of George II, who resented Henley&#x27;s former support of the Prince of Wales&#x27;s faction, known as the Leicester House party; and it was in order that he might preside as Lord High Steward at the trial of the Earl Ferrers for murder in 1760 that he then received his patent. He resigned from his position in 1767 and died at his residence in Hampshire on 14 January 1772.

==Personal life==
In 1743, Henley had married Jane Huband who was the daughter of Sir John Huband of Ipsley of Warwickshire. He had three sons and five daughters. The names of his daughters were:

* Lady Catherine Henley (d. 9 Jan 1779); 
* Lady Bridget Henley (d. 13 March 1796), married 1) Robert Lane and 2) Capt. Hon. John Tollemache (30 March 1750 – 25 September 1777); 
* Jane Henley (d. February 1823); 
* Lady Elizabeth Henley (d. 20 August 1821); 
* Mary Henley (1753–1814), married 1) Edward Ligonier, 1st Earl Ligonier, and 2) Thomas Noel, 2nd Viscount Wentworth.

He was succeeded by his son Robert Henley, 2nd Earl of Northington.

==Cases==
*&quot;Vernon v Bethell&quot; (1762) 28 ER 838, &quot;necessitous men are not, truly speaking, free men, but, to answer a present exigency, will submit to any terms that the crafty may impose upon them.&quot;
*&quot;Shanley v Harvey&quot; (1763) 2 Eden 126, 127, as &quot;soon as a man sets foot on English ground he is free&quot;.
*&quot;Brown v Peck&quot; (1758) 1 Eden 140, provisions discouraging cohabitation were void against public policy, as where a will promised £5 a month to a beneficiary to split up from her husband, or £2 otherwise. She was entitled to the £5.
*&quot;Hussey v. Dillon&quot; 2 Amb 603, 604, testament and meaning of &quot;grandchildren&quot;
*1 Eden 5, &quot;The Court has always in cases of this nature considered the question of consent with great latitude, adhering to the spirit and not the letter. The maxim Qui tacet satis loquitur has therefore been respected, and constructive consents have been looked upon as entitled to as much regard as if conveyed in express terms&quot;.
*&quot;Earl of Buckinghamshire v Drury&quot;
*&quot;Pike v Hoare&quot;, 2 Eden, 182; Amb. 428, on conflict of laws, a will affecting lands in the Colonies &quot;is not triable&quot; in this country.
*&quot;Burgess v Wheate&quot; 1 Eden, 251

==Notes==
==References==
*&quot;A memoir of the life of Robert Henely, earl of Northington, lord high chancellor of Great Britain&quot;
*&quot;The Complete peerage of England, Scotland, Ireland, Great Britain and the United Kingdoms, Extant, Extinct or Dormant&quot;
*&quot;Burke&#x27;s Peerage, Baronetage &amp; Knightage&quot;
*&quot;re: Penancoet Family&quot;
*&quot;Complete Baronetage&quot;
*&quot;Burke&#x27;s Peerage and Baronetage&quot;
*&quot;A genealogical survey of the peerage of Britain as well as the royal families of Europe&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7345402" start="0" end="38" title="Robert Henley, 1st Earl of Northington" label="Robert Henley, 1st Earl of Northington"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="40" end="42" title="Privy Council of Great Britain" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="80" end="117" title="Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain" label="Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="142" end="152" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="160" end="170" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842415" start="245" end="259" title="Anthony Henley (1667–1711)" label="Anthony Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q838247" start="420" end="435" title="defence counsel" label="defence counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="544" end="550" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341516" start="905" end="923" title="Westminster School" label="Westminster School"/>
<link wikidata="Q609646" start="937" end="968" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q81092" start="996" end="1021" title="All Souls College, Oxford" label="All Souls College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233784" start="1043" end="1055" title="Inner Temple" label="Inner Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021687" start="1085" end="1102" title="call to the bar" label="called to the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737525" start="1171" end="1194" title="The Grange, Northington" label="The Grange, Northington"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="1198" end="1207" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q295929" start="1252" end="1263" title="Inigo Jones" label="Inigo Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075440" start="1319" end="1323" title="Bath (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631987" start="1390" end="1406" title="Attorney General of England" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869896" start="1458" end="1487" title="Lord Keeper of the Great Seal" label="Lord Keeper of the Great Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="1668" end="1689" title="County of Southampton" label="County of Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="1696" end="1706" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="1747" end="1784" title="Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain" label="Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="1900" end="1909" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q165349" start="1960" end="1982" title="Frederick, Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q848912" start="2005" end="2020" title="Leicester Square" label="Leicester House"/>
<link wikidata="Q510373" start="2073" end="2090" title="Lord High Steward" label="Lord High Steward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500873" start="2111" end="2123" title="Laurence Shirley, 4th Earl Ferrers" label="Earl Ferrers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23140" start="2386" end="2398" title="Warwickshire" label="Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q26911614" start="2567" end="2578" title="Robert Lane (died 1768)" label="Robert Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344143" start="2770" end="2804" title="Edward Ligonier, 1st Earl Ligonier" label="Edward Ligonier, 1st Earl Ligonier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792758" start="2813" end="2848" title="Thomas Noel, 2nd Viscount Wentworth" label="Thomas Noel, 2nd Viscount Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345403" start="2879" end="2917" title="Robert Henley, 2nd Earl of Northington" label="Robert Henley, 2nd Earl of Northington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922291" start="2937" end="2953" title="Vernon v Bethell" label="Vernon v Bethell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539249" start="3146" end="3162" title="Shanley v Harvey" label="Shanley v Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3269" end="3281" title="Brown v Peck" label="Brown v Peck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3512" end="3528" title="Hussey v. Dillon" label="Hussey v. Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3952" end="3983" title="Earl of Buckinghamshire v Drury" label="Earl of Buckinghamshire v Drury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3997" end="4009" title="Pike v Hoare" label="Pike v Hoare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4151" end="4167" title="Burgess v Wheate" label="Burgess v Wheate"/>
</links>
</doc>
