<doc id="384853" wikidata="Q1109101" url="?curid=384853" title="College of Arms">
<text>The College of Arms, or Heralds&#x27; College, is a royal corporation consisting of professional officers of arms, with jurisdiction over England, Wales, Northern Ireland and some Commonwealth realms. The heralds are appointed by the British Sovereign and are delegated authority to act on behalf of the Crown in all matters of heraldry, the granting of new coats of arms, genealogical research and the recording of pedigrees. The College is also the official body responsible for matters relating to the flying of flags on land, and it maintains the official registers of flags and other national symbols. Though a part of the Royal Household of the United Kingdom, the College is self-financed, unsupported by any public funds.

Founded by royal charter in 1484 by King Richard III of England, the College is one of the few remaining official heraldic authorities in Europe. Within the United Kingdom, there are two such authorities, the Court of the Lord Lyon in Scotland and the College of Arms for the rest of the United Kingdom. The College has had its home in the City of London since its foundation, and has been at its present location, on Queen Victoria Street, since 1555. The College of Arms also undertakes and consults on the planning of many ceremonial occasions such as coronations, state funerals, the annual Garter Service and the State Opening of Parliament. Heralds of the College accompany the sovereign on many of these occasions.

The College comprises thirteen officers or heralds: three Kings of Arms, six Heralds of Arms and four Pursuivants of Arms. There are also seven officers extraordinary, who take part in ceremonial occasions but are not part of the College. The entire corporation is overseen by the Earl Marshal, a hereditary office always held by the Duke of Norfolk.

==History==
===Foundation===

King Richard III&#x27;s interest in heraldry was indicated by his possession of two important rolls of arms. While still Duke of Gloucester and Constable of England for his brother (Edward IV) from 1469, he in the latter capacity supervised the heralds and made plans for the reform of their organisation. Soon after his accession to the throne he created Sir John Howard as Duke of Norfolk and Earl Marshal of England, who became the first Howard appointed to both positions.

In the first year of his reign, the royal heralds were incorporated under royal charter dated 2 March 1484, under the Latin name &quot;Le Garter regis armorum Anglicorum, regis armorum partium Australium, regis armorum partium Borealium, regis armorum Wallæ et heraldorum, prosecutorum, sive pursevandorum armorum.&quot; Translated as: &quot;the Garter King of Arms of England, the King of Arms of the Southern parts, the King of Arms of the Northern parts, the King of Arms of Wales, and all other heralds and pursuivants of arms&quot;. The charter then goes on to state that the heralds &quot;for the time being, shall be in perpetuity a body corporate in fact and name, and shall preserve a succession unbroken.&quot; This charter titled &quot;Literæ de incorporatione heraldorum&quot; is now held in the British Museum.
There has been some evidence that prior to this charter, the royal heralds had already in some ways behaved like a corporation as early as 1420. Nevertheless, the charter is the earliest surviving document to affirm the chapter as a corporate body of heralds. The charter outlines the constitution of the officers, their hierarchy, the privileges conferred upon them and their jurisdiction over all heraldic matters in the Kingdom of England.

The King empowered the College to have and use only one common seal of authority, and also instructed them to find a chaplain to celebrate mass daily for himself, Anne Neville, the Queen Consort, and his heir, Prince Edward. The College was also granted a house named Coldharbour (formerly Poulteney&#x27;s Inn) on Upper Thames Street in the parish of All-Hallows-the-Less, for storing records and living space for the heralds. The house, built by Sir John de Pulteney, four times Lord Mayor of London, was said to be one of the greatest in the City of London.

===Varying fortunes===

The defeat and death of Richard III at Bosworth field was a double blow for the heralds, for they lost both their patron, the King, and their benefactor, the Earl Marshal, who was also slain. The victorious Henry Tudor was crowned King Henry VII soon after the battle. Henry&#x27;s first Parliament of 1485 passed an Act of Resumption, in which large grants of crown properties made by his two predecessors to their supporters were cancelled. Whether this act affected the status of the College&#x27;s charter is debatable; however, the act did facilitate the de facto recovery of Coldharbour to the crown. Henry then granted the house to his mother Lady Margaret Beaufort, for life. This was because it was supposed that the house was granted personally to John Writhe the Garter King of Arms and not to the heralds as a corporation. As a result, the heralds were left destitute and many of their books and records were lost. Despite this ill treatment from the King, the heralds&#x27; position at the royal court remained, and they were compelled by the King to attend him at all times (albeit in rotation).

Of the reign of King Henry VIII, it has been said that: &quot;at no time since its establishment, was [the college] in higher estimation, nor in fuller employment, than in this reign.&quot; Henry VIII was fond of pomp and magnificence, and thus gave the heralds plenty of opportunity to exercise their roles in his court. In addition, the members of the College were also expected to be regularly despatched to foreign courts on missions, whether to declare war, accompany armies, summon garrisons or deliver messages to foreign potentates and generals. During his magnificent meeting with Francis I of France at the Field of the Cloth of Gold in 1520, Henry VIII brought with him eighteen officers of arms, probably all he had, to regulate the many tournaments and ceremonies held there.
Nevertheless, the College&#x27;s petitions to the King and to the Duke of Suffolk in 1524 and 1533 for the return of their chapter house were rejected, and the heralds were left to hold chapter in whichever palace the royal court happened to be at the time. They even resorted to meeting at each other&#x27;s houses, at various guildhalls and even a hospital. Furthermore, Henry VIII&#x27;s habit of raising ladies in the situation of subjects to queens, and then awarding them many heraldic augmentations, which also extended to their respective families, was considered harmful to the science of heraldry. The noted antiquarian and heraldist Charles Boutell commented in 1863, that the: &quot;Arms of Queen Anne Boleyn are the first which exemplify the usage, introduced by Henry VIII, of granting to his Consorts &#x27;Augmentations&#x27; to their paternal arms. It is a striking illustration of the degenerate condition of Heraldry under the second Tudor Sovereign.&quot;

It was also in this reign in 1530, that Henry VIII conferred on the College one of its most important duties for almost a century, the heraldic visitation. The provincial Kings of Arms were commissioned under a royal warrant to enter all houses and churches and given authority to deface and destroy all arms unlawfully used by any knight, esquire, or gentleman. Around the time of the Dissolution of the Monasteries this duty became even more necessary as the monasteries were previously repositories of local genealogical records. From then on, all genealogical records and the duty of recording them was subsumed by the College. These visitations were serious affairs, and many individuals were charged and heavily fined for breaking the law of arms. Hundreds of these visitations were carried out well into the 17th century; the last was in 1686.

===Reincorporation===

The College found a patroness in Mary I, although it must have been embarrassing for both sides, after the heralds initially proclaimed the right of her rival Lady Jane Grey to the throne. When King Edward VI died on 6 July 1553, Lady Jane Grey was proclaimed queen four days later, first in Cheapside then in Fleet Street by two heralds, trumpets blowing before them. However, when popular support swung to Mary&#x27;s side, the Lord Mayor of London and his councils accompanied by the Garter King of Arms, two other heralds, and four trumpeters returned to Cheapside to proclaim Mary&#x27;s ascension as rightful queen instead. The College&#x27;s excuse was that they had been compelled in their earlier act by the Duke of Northumberland (Lady Jane&#x27;s father-in-law, who was later executed), an excuse that Mary accepted.

The queen and her husband (and co-sovereign) Philip II of Spain then set about granting the College a new house called Derby Place or Derby House, under a new charter, dated 18 July 1555 at Hampton Court Palace. The house was built by Thomas Stanley, 1st Earl of Derby, who married Lady Margaret Beaufort in 1482 and was created the 1st Earl of Derby in 1485. The house was built in 1503 and was given to the Crown by the 3rd Earl in 1552/3 in exchange for some land. The charter stated that the house would: &quot;enable them [the College] to assemble together, and consult, and agree amongst themselves, for the good of their faculty, and that the records and rolls might be more safely and conveniently deposited.&quot; The charter also reincorporated the three kings of arms, six heralds and all other heralds and pursuivants, and their successors, into a corporation with perpetual succession. A new seal of authority, with the College&#x27;s full coat of arms was also engraved. On 16 May 1565, the name &quot;the House of the Office of Arms&quot; was used, thereafter in May 1566 &quot;our Colledge of Armes&quot;, and in January 1567 &quot;our House of the College of the office of arms&quot;.

Derby Place was situated in the parish of St Benedict and St Peter, south of St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral, more or less on the College&#x27;s present location. There are records of the heralds carrying out modifications to the structure of Derby Place over many years. However, little record of its appearance has survived, except the description that the buildings formed three sides of a quadrangle, entered through a gate with a portcullis on the west side. On the south range, roughly where Queen Victoria Street now stands, was a large hall on the western end. Derby Place&#x27;s hearth tax bill from 1663, discovered in 2009 at the National Archives at Kew, showed that the building had about thirty-two rooms, which were the workplace as well as the home to eleven officers of arms.

The reign of Mary&#x27;s sister Elizabeth I saw the college&#x27;s privileges confirmed by an act of Parliament in 1566. As well as the drawing up of many important internal statutes and ordinances for the College by Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, the Earl Marshal, dated 18 July 1568. The long reign saw the College distracted by the many quarrels between Garter William Dethick, Clarenceux Robert Cooke and York Herald Ralph Brooke about their rights and annulments. Disputes in which the other officers also took part, often occurred among the lesser heralds against each other. Historian Mark Noble wrote in 1805, that these fights often involved the use of &quot;every epithet that was disgraceful to themselves and their opponents.&quot; and that &quot;Their accusations against each other would fill a volume.&quot; During these years, the College&#x27;s reputation was greatly injured in the eyes of the public.

The reason behind these discords were laid on the imperfect execution of the reorganisation of the College in 1568 and the uncertainty over issue of granting arms to the new and emerging gentry of the era. An enquiry into the state of the College lasted for one year, finally reporting to William Cecil, Baron Burghley in 1596; as a consequence, many important measures of reform for the College were made in the reign of James I. Eventually, these animosities among the heralds in the College ended only after the expulsion of one and the death of another.

===Civil War===
When the English Civil War began in 1642 during the reign of King Charles I, the College was divided: three kings of arms, three heralds and one pursuivant sided with the King and the Royalists, while the other officers began to court the services of the Parliamentarian side. Nevertheless, the heralds petitioned Parliament in the same year, to protect their: &quot;Books of Record, Registers, Entries, Precedents, Arms, Pedigrees and Dignities.&quot; In 1643 the heralds joined the King at Oxford, and were with him at Naseby and followed him on all of his campaigns. Sir Edward Walker the Garter King of Arms (from 1645) was even appointed, with the permission of Parliament, to act as the King&#x27;s chief secretary at the negotiations at Newport. After the execution of Charles I, Walker joined Charles II in his exile in the Netherlands.

Meanwhile, on 3 August 1646 the Committee of Sequestration took possession of the College premises, and kept it under its own authority. Later in October, Parliament ordered the committee to directly remove those officers whose loyalties were with the King and to nominate their own candidates to fill these vacant offices. Those officers whose loyalty remained with the King were persecuted; first they were deprived of their offices, then of their emoluments, then a fine was imposed and some were even imprisoned. In spite of this, the institutional College was protected by the Parliamentarians, and their rights and work continued unabated. Edward Bysshe a Member of Parliament from Bletchingley was appointed Garter, thus &quot;Parliament which rejected its King created for itself a King of Arms&quot;. During this time the heralds continued their work and were even present on 26 June 1657 at Oliver Cromwell&#x27;s second installation ceremony as Lord Protector of the Commonwealth.

===Survival===

On 8 May 1660, the heralds at the command of the Convention Parliament proclaimed Charles II, King at Westminster Hall Gate. It was said that William Ryley, who was originally appointed Lancaster Herald by Charles I but then sided with Cromwell, did not even have a tabard with the Royal Arms, as his own had been &quot;plundered in the wars&quot;. He had to borrow a decorative one from the tomb of James I in Westminster Abbey instead; the garment was duly returned the next day. The Restoration of Charles II annulled all the Acts of the Parliament and all the actions of the Lord Protector, without penalising any of their supporters (except for the regicides). Accordingly, all the grant of arms of the Commonwealth College was declared null and void. Furthermore, all heralds appointed during the Interregnum lost their offices, while those appointed originally by Charles I returned to their places. The exception was Edward Bysshe, who was removed as Garter, but was instead appointed Clarenceux in 1661, much to the chagrin of Garter Edward Walker.

In 1666 as the Great Fire of London swept through the city, Derby Place, the College&#x27;s home since 1555, was completely gutted and destroyed. Fortunately the College&#x27;s library was saved, and at first was stored in the Palace of Whitehall, then later moved to the Palace of Westminster, where a temporary office was opened in an apartment called the Queen&#x27;s court. An announcement was also made in the &quot;London Gazette&quot; to draw public notice to the situation. Due to a shortage of funds, the planned rebuilding of a new College was delayed until 1670. It was then that Francis Sandford, the Rouge Dragon Pursuivant and Morris Emmett, the King&#x27;s bricklayer, were together able to design and begin construction of a new structure on the old site. The costs of the rebuilding was financed in stages, and the structure was erected slowly in parts. The heralds contributed significantly out of their own pockets; at the same time, they also sought subscriptions among the nobility, with the names of contributors recorded into a series of splendid manuscripts known as the Benefactors Books.
By 1683 the College part of the structure was finished. The new building was built out of plain bricks of three storeys, with basement and attic levels in addition. The College consists of an extensive range of quadrangular buildings. Apart from the hall, a porter&#x27;s lodge and a public office, the rest of the building was given over to the heralds as accommodation. To the east and south sides three terraced houses were constructed for leases, their façade in keeping with the original design. In 1699 the hall, which for some time had been used as a library, was transformed into the Earl Marshal&#x27;s Court or the Court of Chivalry; it remains so to this day. In 1776 some stylistic changes were made to the exterior of the building and some details, such as pediments and cornices were removed, transforming the building to the then popular but austere Neo-Classical style.

The magnificent coronation of James II in 1685 saw the College revived as an institution of state and the monarchy. However, the abrupt end of his reign saw all but one of the heralds taking the side of William of Orange and Mary II in the Glorious Revolution. The period from 1704 to 1706 saw not a single grant of arms being made by the College; this nadir was attributed to the changes in attitude of the times. The Acts of Union 1707 between England and Scotland, in the reign of Anne did not affect the jurisdiction or the rights of the College. The College of Arms and the Court of the Lord Lyon were to exist side by side in their respective realms. However, in the matter of precedence; the Lord Lyon, when in England, was to take immediate precedence behind Garter King of Arms.

===Comfortable decay===

The Hanoverian succession to the throne of Great Britain led to reigns with less ceremony than in any since the incorporation of the heralds. The only notable incident for the college in this period, during the reign of George I, happened in 1727 when an impostor called Robert Harman pretended to be a herald. The knave was prosecuted by the College in the county of Suffolk, and was sentenced to be pilloried in several market towns on public market days and afterwards to be imprisoned and pay a fine. This hefty sentence was executed, proving that the rights of the College were still respected. In 1737, during the reign of George II the College petitioned for another charter, to reaffirm their rights and remuneration; this effort proved unsuccessful. Apart from these events the influence of the College was greatly diminished.

In 1742 a Sugar House was built against the wall of the College. This structure was a fire risk and the cause of great anxiety among the heralds. In 1775 the College Surveyor drew attention to this problem, but to no avail. In February 1800, the College was asked by a Select Committee of the House of Commons to report to them the state of public records; again the heralds drew attention to the proximity of the Sugar House. Members of the committee inspected the College premises and reported to the House that the College must either be moved to a new building or secured against the risk of fire. Again nothing was done; in 1812 water seeped through the walls of the College damaging records. The Surveyor traced the leak back to a shed recently erected by Alderman Smith, owner of the Sugar House, who declared his readiness to do everything he could, but who actually did very little to rectify the situation. After years of negotiation the College, in 1820, bought the Sugar House from Smith for the sum of £1,500.

Great financial strains placed upon the College during these times were relieved when the extravagant Prince Regent (the future George IV) granted to the College an annual endowment by Royal Warrant on 29 February 1820. This generous endowment from the crown, the first since 1555, was applied towards the reparation and support of the College.
Despite the successes of the purchase of the Sugar House and the royal endowment, the College still looked upon the possibility of moving its location to a more suitable and fashionable place. John Nash was at the same time laying out his plans for a new London, and, in 1822, the College, through the Deputy Earl Marshal, asked the government for a portion of land in the new districts on which to build a house to keep their records. A petition from the College was given to the Lords of the Treasury setting out the herald&#x27;s reason for the move: &quot;that the local situation of the College is so widely detached from the proper scene of the official duties and occupations of Your Memorialists and from the residences of that class of persons by whom the records in their charge are chiefly and most frequently consulted.&quot;

Nash himself was asked by the College to design a new building near fashionable Trafalgar Square but Nash&#x27;s elaborate plan proved too costly and ambitious for the College. At the same time the College also asked Robert Abraham to submit to them a second plan for the building. When Nash heard that another architect was approached behind his back he reacted vehemently, and attacked the heralds. The College nevertheless continued with their plans. However they were constantly beset by conflicts between the different officers over the amount needed to build a new building. By 1827 the college still had no coherent plan; the Duke of Norfolk ordered the College to drop the matter altogether. By 1842 the heralds were reconciled with their location and once again commissioned Abraham to build a new octagonal-shaped Record Room on the site of the old Sugar House.

In 1861 a proposal was made to construct a road from Blackfriars to the Mansion House; this would have resulted in the complete demolition of the College. However, protests from the heralds resulted in only parts of the south east and south west wings being sliced off, requiring extensive remodelling. The College was now a three-sided building with an open courtyard facing the New Queen Victoria Street laid out in 1866. The terrace, steps and entrance porch were also added around this time.

===Reform===

On 18 October 1869, a warrant for a commission of inquiry into the state of the College was established. The warrant, issued on the behalf of the Duke of Norfolk, stated &quot;that it is desirable that the College of Arms should be visited, and an inquiry instituted with the view of ascertaining whether the Rules and Orders for the good government of the said College ... are duly obeyed and fulfilled ... and whether by change of circumstances or any other cause, any new Laws, Ordinances or Regulations are necessary to be made ... for the said College.&quot;
The commission had three members: Lord Edward Fitzalan-Howard (the Deputy Earl Marshal), Sir William Alexander (Queen&#x27;s Counsel) and Edward Bellasis (a Sergeant at Law).
Sir Bernard Burke (of the famous Burke&#x27;s Peerage), at the time Ulster King of Arms, gave the commission the advice that the College should &quot;be made a Government Department, let its Officers receive fixed salaries from Government, and let all its fees be paid into the public exchequer. This arrangement would, I am sure, be self-supporting and would raise at once the character of the Office and the status of the Heralds.&quot;
Burke&#x27;s suggestion for reform was the same arrangement that had already been applied to the Lord Lyon Court in Scotland in 1867, and was to be applied to his own office in 1871.
However unlike the Lyon Court, which was a court of law and part of the Scottish Judiciary, the College of Arms has always been an independent corporate body overseen by the Earl Marshal.
While the Lord Lyon depended on the Government for its reforms and statutes, the College has always been able to carry out changes from within itself.
The commission also drew attention to the fees, annulments and library of the College, as well as the general modernisation of the chapter as a whole.
When the commission made its report in 1870, it recommended many changes, and these were duly made in another warrant dated 27 April 1871.
Burke&#x27;s recommendation, however, was not implemented.
Despite the findings of this inquiry, the issues surrounding the status and position of the College continued. At the beginning of the 20th century these issues were once again brought to the forefront. In 1903 an inquiry was set up at the instructions of Arthur Balfour, soon to be Prime Minister. The committee of inquiry was to consist of eight members; Sir Algernon West was made chairman. They were tasked to investigate &quot;the constitution, duties and administration of the Heralds&#x27; College&quot;; the main issues being the anomalous position of the College, who are theoretically officials of the Royal Household, but actually derive their income from fees paid by private individuals for their services. Some of the members of the committee (a minority) wanted (like Burke thirty-four years earlier) to make officers of the College of Arms into &quot;salaried civil servants of the state&quot;. Despite concluding that some form of change was necessary, the inquiry categorically stated that any change &quot;is at the present time and in present circumstances impracticable.&quot; In 1905 the generous endowment from the Crown (as instituted by George IV) was stopped by the Liberal Government of the day as part of its campaign against the House of Lords and the class system.

A second inquiry was established in 1928 under the chairmanship of Lord Birkenhead. The inquiry was called soon after a secret memorandum, written in 1927, was circulated by the Home Office, criticising the constitution and workings of the heralds. The memorandum states that &quot;They have, as will be seen from this memorandum, in many cases attempted to interfere with the exercise by the Secretary of State of his constitutional responsibility for advising the Crown&quot;, and that the College had &quot;adopted practices in connection with matters within their jurisdiction which seem highly improper in themselves, and calculated to bring the royal prerogative into contempt.&quot; These accusations concern the actions of certain heralds, who overzealously advocate the cases of their paid clients, even against the opposition of the ministers of the day. Sir Anthony Wagner writes that &quot;The officers of these departments, no doubt, in the overconfident way of their generation, esteemed the College an anachronistic and anomalous institution overdue for reform or abolition.&quot; The memorandum ended by saying that &quot;the College of Arms is a small and highly organised luxury trade, dependent for its living on supplying the demand for a fancy article among the well to do: and like many such trades it has in very many cases to create the demand before it can supply it.&quot;

When the committee made their report in June 1928 they suggested several reforms to tackle the main issues which had brought the College into so much conflict with the Home Office. Firstly they concluded that the fees systems were adequate and no change was necessary in that regard. They justified this by stating that &quot;placing all or even a few of the Officers on a fixed salary outweigh any advantages which might be expected to result from the change.&quot; Secondly they concluded that from now on the College was to be entirely subordinated to the Home Office, and that a standing inter-departmental committee be established to settle any future conflicts.

===Present===

In 1934, on the 450th anniversary of the incorporation of the College of Arms, an exhibition was held at the College of the heralds&#x27; principal treasures and other associated interests. The exhibition was opened by the Earl Marshal and ran from 28 June to 26 July, during which time it received more than 10,000 visitors, including the Duke (George VI) and Duchess of York (Elizabeth).

In 1939 at the beginning of the Second World War the College&#x27;s records were moved to Thornbury Castle in Gloucestershire, the home of Major Algar Howard (the Norroy King of Arms). Meanwhile, on 10 and 11 May 1941 the College building was almost consumed by fire, which had already levelled all the buildings to the east of the College on Queen Victoria Street. The building was given up for lost, when a change in the wind saved it. At the end of the war, all of the records were returned safely to the College.

In 1943 the College was given new responsibilities when the office of Ulster King of Arms was annexed and combined with those of the Norroy King of Arms, creating a new office called Norroy and Ulster King of Arms; Sir Algar Howard thus became the first to hold this office.

Although the College building was saved from the war, its walls and roof were left in a perilous state. In 1954 a decision was forced upon heralds, whether to abandon the old building (which would have been profitable financially) or repair it on a scale far beyond the College&#x27;s resources. Eventually with the help of the Ministry of Works and a public subscription, the building was repaired in time for the College&#x27;s 4th centenary of being in possession of Derby Place. The present gates to the building were added in 1956, and came originally from Goodrich Court in Herefordshire. The new gates displayed the College&#x27;s arms and crest.
In the year of the quincentenary of the incorporation of the College of Arms, the College held a special service of thanksgiving at St Benet&#x27;s, Paul&#x27;s Wharf (the College&#x27;s official church since 1555) on 2 March 1984. The Kings of Arms, Heralds and Pursuivants, ordinary and extraordinary, of the College in full uniform processed from the College towards the church together with Queen Elizabeth II, the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl Marshal and the Earl of Arundel, the Deputy Earl Marshal.

On 5 February 2009 a fire broke out at the west wing on the third and fourth floor of the College building. Eight London Fire Brigade fire engines were able to bring the flames under control, in the meantime 35 people were evacuated from the building and a further 100 from adjacent buildings. No records or books of the College were damaged. Repairs to the smoke-damaged rooms and exterior brickwork were completed in December 2009.

==Roles==

===Ceremonial===

The College of Arms is a part of the Royal Household of the Sovereign of the United Kingdom. As such they accompany the monarch on various state occasions. These occasions are centred around the institution of the monarchy as the symbol of the state, and the expression of majesty and power through public pomp and ceremony. Currently the heralds appear in their full uniforms only twice a year: at the State Opening of Parliament and at the Garter Service at Windsor Castle in June. The organisation and planning of all State ceremonies falls within the prerogative of the Earl Marshal, the College&#x27;s chief. As a result, the heralds have a role to perform within every significant royal ceremony.

The (usually annual) State Opening of Parliament takes place at the Houses of Parliament. The heralds, including both ordinary and extraordinary officers, form the front part of the Royal Procession, preceding the Sovereign and other Great Officers of State. The procession starts at the bottom of the Victoria Tower, then proceeds up the Norman Porch to the Robing Chamber. Once the Sovereign has put on the Imperial State Crown, the heralds lead the monarch once again through the Royal Gallery into the House of Lords, remain with the monarch during the speech and accompany the monarch to the bounds of the Palace.

Garter Service or Garter Day is held in St George&#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle every June on the Monday of Royal Ascot week. On this occasion, new Companions of the Order of the Garter are personally invested with their insignia in the Throne Room of Windsor Castle by the Sovereign. All the members then have lunch in the Waterloo Chamber, wearing their blue velvet robes and black velvet hats with white plumes. Afterwards the members walk from the Upper Ward of the castle towards St George&#x27;s Chapel. During their procession they are led by members of the College of Arms in their tabards, the Military Knights of Windsor and contingents of the Sovereign&#x27;s Bodyguard. After the service, the members return to the Upper Ward by carriage. This ceremony is especially significant for the Garter King of Arms, the senior officer of the College, who is an officer of the Order.

Participation in these two annual ceremonies is considered the least time-consuming part of the herald&#x27;s roles. However at other times they are involved in some of the most important ceremonies concerning the life of the British monarch. After the death of a Sovereign the Accession Council (made up of Privy Councillors and other officers such as the Lord Mayor of London) meets at St. James&#x27;s Palace to make a formal proclamation of the accession of the next Sovereign. Traditionally, this proclamation is made by being physically read out. This task is assigned to the various members of the College by way of the Earl Marshal, who receives the text of the proclamation in person from the council. The proclamation is to be read at several locations in London. Traditionally the first reading is made from the Friary Court balcony at St James&#x27;s Palace. Another reading and ceremony is held at Temple Bar. There a detachment of heralds, accompanied by troops of the Royal Horse Guards, formally demand admission to the precinct of the City of London from the City Marshall and City Remembrancer. The barrier, consisting of a silken rope (in place of the ancient bar), is then removed and the detachment marches forward to meet the Lord Mayor and City Sheriffs, where the proclamation would be read. There are also other readings by members of the College at the corner of Chancery Lane, in Fleet Street, and at the Royal Exchange.

During the Coronation Ceremony, members of the College form part of the Royal procession as it enters Westminster Abbey. The members of the College walk in the procession in virtue of them being His Majesty&#x27;s &quot;Kings, Heralds and Pursuivants of Arms of England.&quot; They do so alongside their Scottish colleagues: the Lord Lyon, the Heralds and Pursuivants of Arms of the Lyon Court. The Garter King of Arms is usually placed next to the Lord Great Chamberlain in the procession; he has the duty of guiding, but not performing, the ceremony. Garter&#x27;s duties during the coronation ceremony are therefore not unlike those of a Master of Ceremonies. It is only during this ceremony that the Kings of Arms are allowed to wear their distinctive crowns, the only group of individuals, apart from the King and Queen, authorised to do so.

At State funerals the heralds once again take their place at the front of the royal procession as it enters the place of worship. Historically during the procession of royal funerals (usually of the Sovereign) the heralds would carry a piece of armour, representing the various marks of chivalry. These included the helm and crest, spurs, gauntlet, target (shield of arms), sword and a literal &#x27;coat of arms&#x27; (a heraldic surcoat). This procession of chivalry was an integral part of the heraldic royal funeral. One of the most solemn roles for the heralds during a royal funeral is the reading of the full list of the styles and titles of the deceased monarch. On 9 April 2002, Garter King of Arms Peter Gwynn-Jones read out the full styles and titles of Queen Elizabeth, The Queen Mother at the end of her funeral service at Westminster Abbey.

===Granting and proving descent of arms===
The granting of armorial bearings (coats of arms) within the United Kingdom is the sole prerogative of the British monarch. However, the monarch has delegated this power to two authorities: the Lord Lyon, with jurisdiction over Scotland, and the College of Arms, over England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Under the latter&#x27;s jurisdiction, the right to arms is acquired exclusively either by proving descent in an unbroken male line from someone registered as so entitled or by a new grant from the King of Arms. Technically, however, arms can also be gained by a grant from the Crown, by prescription (meaning in use since time immemorial), by succeeding to an office, or by marriage. The descent of arms closely follows the Law of heraldic arms, which is a branch of English law, interpreted by civil lawyers in the Court of Chivalry. Sir Edward Coke in his &quot;Commentary upon Littleton&quot; (1628) wrote that &quot;gentry and armes is the nature of gavelkinde, for they descend to all the sonnes.&quot; Arms in England therefore descend to all of the male lines, and not just the most senior alone (unlike in Scotland).

When a new grant of arms is to be made, it is granted through Letters Patent. The Crown delegates all of this authority to the King of Arms, however before any letters can be issued they must have a warrant from the Earl Marshal agreeing to the granting of arms. This has been the case since 1673, when the authority of the Earl Marshal, which the heralds had challenged, was established by a royal declaration stating, among other things, that no patents of arms should be granted without his consent. This established the present system whereby royal authority to approve candidates for grants of arms is exercised by the Earl Marshal, and royal authority to grant the arms themselves is exercised by the Kings of Arms. First a petition, called a memorial, is submitted to the Earl Marshal. This memorial will be drawn up for the petitioner by an officer of arms, if it is felt that such a petition would be accepted. Currently there are no set criteria for eligibility for a grant of arms; however the College recommends that &quot;awards or honours from the Crown, civil or military commissions, university degrees, professional qualifications, public and charitable services, and eminence or good standing in national or local life&quot; will be taken into account.
===History===

In the past this issue of eligibility has been a source of great conflict between the heralds; such submissions are made on an officer for clients basis, which meant some &quot;unsuitability&quot; was ignored in lieu of profit by past officers. Suitability rested on the phrase &quot;eminent men&quot;; originally the test applied was one of wealth or social status, as any man entitled to bear a coat of arms was expected to be a gentleman. By 1530, the heralds applied a property qualification, requiring successful candidates for a grant of arms to have an income from land of £10 per annum, or movable wealth of £300. However this was not always the case: in 1616 Ralph Brooke, York Herald, tricked Garter King of Arms, William Segar, into granting a coat of arms to Gregory Brandon, a common hangman, for a fee of 22 shillings (£1.10). When the king found out he had them both imprisoned at Marshalsea; they were freed a few days later.
===Current procedure===
The fee for the grant of arms is due when the memorial is submitted; the amount is set out in the Earl Marshal&#x27;s Warrant. As of 1 January 2024 the fees for a personal grant of arms, including a crest, is £8,950; a grant to a non-profit body is £18,415; and to a commercial company is £27,450. This grant may include a grant of a badge, supporters or a standard, depending on the letters patent. The fees mainly go towards commissioning the artwork and calligraphy on the vellum Letters Patent, which must be done by hand and is in a sense a work of art in itself, plus other administrative costs borne by the heralds, and for the upkeep of the College.

Once the Earl Marshal has approved the petition he will issue his Warrant to the King of Arms. This will allow them to proceed with the granting of the arms. Now the designing and formation of the arms begin. Although the King of Arms has full discretion over the composition of the arms, he will take into full account the wishes of the applicant. These will include allusions and references to the applicant&#x27;s life and achievements. The design of any new coat of arms must abide by all the rules of heraldry as well as being entirely original and distinct from all previous arms recorded in the College&#x27;s archives. A preliminary sketch will then be approved and sent to the petitioner for approval.
As soon as the composition of the blazon is agreed by both parties a final grant can be created. This takes the form of a handmade colourfully illuminated and decorated Letters Patent. The letter is written and painted in vellum by a College artist and scrivener. The grant is then signed and sealed by the King of Arms. It is then handed to the petitioner, authorising the use of arms blazoned therein as the perpetual property of himself and his heirs. A copy of the grant is always made for the College&#x27;s own register.

Once granted, a coat of arms becomes the hereditary and inheritable property of the owner and his descendants. But it can only be inherited by a legitimate male-line descendant of the original grantee of the arms. To establish the right to arms by descent, one must be able to prove that an ancestor had his arms recorded in the registers of the College. If there is a possibility of such an inheritance, one must first contact an officer-in-waiting at the College, who could then advise on the course of action and the cost of such a search. The research into a descent of arms requires details of paternal ancestry, which will involve the examination of genealogical records. First there is a search of the family name in the College&#x27;s archives, as coats of arms and family name has no connection, the officer could prove, through this method, that there is in fact no descent. However, if a connection is found the genealogy would be researched outside of the College&#x27;s archives to provide definitive evidence of descent from an armigerous individual.

===Change of names===
The College of Arms is also an authorised location for enrolling a change of name. In common law there is no obligation to undergo any particular formality to change one&#x27;s name. However, it is possible to execute a deed poll, more specifically a deed of change of name, as a demonstration of intention to adopt and henceforth use a new name, and deeds poll may be enrolled either in the High Court or in the College. On being enrolled the deed is customarily &#x27;gazetted&#x27;, that is published in the &quot;London Gazette&quot;. The deed poll is not entered on the registers, but is still published, if the name change only affects one&#x27;s given name.

===Change of name and arms===
It is also possible to change one&#x27;s coat of arms, with or without adopting or appending a new surname, by Royal Licence, that is to say a licence in the form of a warrant from the Crown directed to the Kings of Arms instructing them to exemplify the transferred arms or a version of them to the licensee in his or her new name. Royal Licences are issued on the advice of Garter King of Arms and are usually dependent on there being some constraining circumstances such as a testamentary injunction (a requirement in a will) or a good reason to wish to perpetuate a particular coat of arms. The Royal Licence is of no effect until and unless the exemplification is issued and recorded in the College. Royal Licences are gazetted and make a deed poll unnecessary.

===Genealogical records===

Due to the inheritable nature of coats of arms the College have also been involved in genealogy since the 15th century. The College regularly conduct genealogical research for individuals with families in the British Isles of all social classes. As the College is also the official repository of genealogical materials such as pedigree charts and family trees. The College&#x27;s extensive records within this realm of study dates back over five centuries. An individual could, if he so wishes, have his family&#x27;s pedigree placed inside the College&#x27;s records. This would require the services of an officer of the College who would then draft a pedigree. The officer would ensure that the pedigree was in the correct format and also advise the client on the documentary evidences necessary to supports such a draft. After this is done, the officer would submit the pedigree to a chapter of two other officers, who would then examine the pedigree for any mistakes or in some cases demand more research. After this examination is completed the pedigree would then be scrivened and placed into the pedigree register of the College.

===Roll of the Peerage===
The House of Lords Act 1999 removed the automatic right of hereditary peers to a seat in the House of Lords. Prior to the passage of this Act, anyone succeeding to a title in the peerage of England, Scotland, Ireland, Great Britain and the United Kingdom, would prove their succession by a writ of summons to Parliament. All peers receiving such writs were enrolled in the &quot;Register of Lords Spiritual and Temporal&quot;, a document maintained by the Clerk of the Parliaments. As a result of the Act, the Register of Lords Spiritual and Temporal only records the name of life peers and the 92 hereditary peers left in the House of Lords. This meant that the register was incomplete as it excludes most of the other hereditary peers, who are not part of the House of Lords.

On 1 June 2004 a Royal Warrant issued by Queen Elizabeth II states &quot;that it is desirable for a full record to be kept of all of Our subjects who are Peers&quot;, this new record would be named the &quot;Roll of the Peerage&quot;. The warrant was later published in the &quot;London Gazette&quot; on 11 June 2004. The warrant handed the responsibility of maintaining the roll to the Secretary of State for Constitutional Affairs, in 2007 this responsibility was assumed by the Crown Office within the newly created Ministry of Justice. The warrant also stipulated that the Secretary of State would act in consultation with the Garter King of Arms and the Lord Lyon King of Arms. The roll would then be published by the College of Arms; currently an online edition is available.

===Outside the UK===
The College of Arms states that it is the &quot;official heraldic authority for England, Wales, Northern Ireland and much of the Commonwealth including Australia and New Zealand&quot;. The position of New Zealand Herald Extraordinary was established in 1978, subordinate to the Garter Principal King of Arms. However, the official status of the college in Australia has not been confirmed by the federal government. The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet advised in 2018 that grants from the College of Arms were &quot;well established as one way Australians can obtain heraldic insignia if they wish to do so&quot;, but that they had the same status as those by &quot;a local artist, graphics studio or heraldry specialist&quot;. The policy of the Australian Heraldry Society is that the College of Arms does not have official heraldic authority over Australia, but that the federal government should establish a national body equivalent to the Canadian Heraldic Authority or South Africa&#x27;s Bureau of Heraldry.

==Earl Marshal==

The Earl Marshal is one of the Great Officers of State, and the office has existed since 1386. Many of the holders of the office have been related to each other; however, it was not until 1672 that the office became fully hereditary. In that year Henry Howard was appointed to the position by King Charles II. In 1677 he also succeeded to the Dukedom of Norfolk as the 6th Duke, thus combining the two titles for his successors.

The office originates from that of Marshal, one of the English monarch&#x27;s chief military officers. As such he became responsible for all matters concerning war and together with the Lord High Constable held the joint post as judges of the Court of Chivalry. After the decline of medieval chivalry, the role of Earl Marshal came to concern all matters of state and royal ceremonies. By the 16th century this supervision came to include the College of Arms and its heralds. Thus the Earl Marshal became the head and chief of the College of Arms; all important matters concerning its governance, including the appointment of new heralds, must meet with his approval. The Earl Marshal also has authority over the flying of flags within England and Wales, as does Lord Lyon King of Arms in Scotland. The Officers of Arms at the College of Arms maintain the only official registers of national and other flags and they advise national and local Government, and other bodies and individuals, on the flying of flags.

===Court of Chivalry===
The High Court of Chivalry or the Earl Marshal&#x27;s Court is a specialised civil court in England, presided over by the Earl Marshal. The first references made about the court was in 1348. The court has jurisdiction over all matters relating to heraldry as it legalises and enforce decisions of the College of Arms. The court considers all cases relating to questions of status, including disputes over social rank and the law of arms, for example complaints on the infringement of the use of another individual&#x27;s coat of arms. The Court of Chivalry meets on the premises of the College of Arms, however the last time it met was in 1954, the first time in 230 years.

==Heralds of the College==

The College of Arms is a corporation of thirteen heralds, styled Officers in Ordinary. This thirteen can be divided hierarchically into three distinctive ranks: three Kings of Arms, six Heralds of Arms and four Pursuivants of Arms. There are also presently seven Officers Extraordinary, who take part in ceremonial occasions but are not part of the College. As members of the Royal Household, the heralds are appointed at the pleasure of the Sovereign on the recommendation of the Earl Marshal. The Officers in Ordinary are appointed by Letters Patent under the Great Seal of the Realm, and the Officers Extraordinary by Royal Sign Manual; all appointments are announced in the &quot;London Gazette&quot;.

All of the officers in Ordinary of the College were first instituted at different dates (some even before the incorporation of the College), some originating as private servants of noblemen, some being Royal from the start. They take their names and badges from the titles and royal badges of the monarchs of England. The officers Extraordinary, however take their names from the titles and estates of the Earl Marshal, they were also created at different dates for ceremonial purposes.

===Wages===
The College is almost entirely self-financed, and receives no regular public funding. Its officers do have official salaries, which are paid by the Crown. These salaries were increased in the reign of King James I, but were reduced under William IV. These annual salaries reflected the living costs of the day; however today the amount is merely a nominal payment. In addition to their official duties, the heralds have for many centuries undertaken private practice in heraldry and genealogy, for which professional fees are charged. HM Treasury pays Garter King of Arms for work undertaken for the Government. the payments made to Sir Thomas Woodcock since his appointment as Garter totalled £651,515. Additionally, since 2018, the Treasury has provided Garter with an expenses fund of £35,000 per annum to cover business expenses such as secretarial support, cleaning and postage. As of 27 January 2021, Garter has received £74,579.02 to cover expenses.
Note: The right-hand column is merely the decimal equivalent of the 1831 column.

===Uniforms===
The most recognisable item of the herald&#x27;s wardrobe has always been their tabards. Since the 13th century, records of this distinctive garment were apparent. At first it is likely that the herald wore his master&#x27;s cast-off coat, but even from the beginning that would have had special significance, signifying that he was in effect his master&#x27;s representative. Especially when his master was a sovereign prince, the wearing of his coat would haven given the herald a natural diplomatic status. John Anstis wrote that: &quot;The Wearing the outward Robes of the Prince, hath been esteemed by the Consent of Nations, to be an extraordinary Instance of Favour and Honour, as in the Precedent of &quot;Mordecai&quot;, under a king of Persia.&quot; (a reference to the Book of Esther). The last King of England to have worn a tabard with his arms was probably King Henry VII. Today the herald&#x27;s tabard is a survivor of history, much like the judges&#x27; wigs and (until the last century) the bishop&#x27;s gaiters.
The tabards of the different officers can be distinguished by the type of fabric used to make them. A tabard of a King of Arms is made of velvet and cloth of gold, the tabard of a Herald of satin, and that of a Pursuivant of damask silk. The tabards of all heralds (Ordinary and Extraordinary) are inscribed with the Sovereign&#x27;s royal arms, richly embroidered. It was once the custom for pursuivants to wear their tabards with the sleeves at the front and back, in fact in 1576 a pursuivant was fined for presuming to wear his tabard like a herald, but this practice was ended during the reign of James II. Until 1888 all tabards were provided to the heralds by the Crown; however in that year a parsimonious Treasury refused to ask Parliament for funds for the purpose. Ever since then heralds either paid for their own tabards or bought the one used by their predecessors. The newest tabard was made in 1963 for the Welsh Herald Extraordinary. A stock of them is now held by the Lord Chamberlain, from which a loan &quot;during tenure of office&quot; is made upon each appointment. They are often sent to Ede &amp; Ravenscroft for repair or replacement. In addition, heralds and pursuivants wear black velvet caps with a badge embroidered.
Apart from the tabards, the heralds also wear scarlet court uniforms with gold embroidery during formal events; with white breeches and stockings for coronations and black for all other times together with black patent court shoes with gold buckles (the Scottish heralds wear black wool serge military style trousers with wide gold oak leaf lace on the side seams and black patent ankle boots; or for women, a long black skirt). The heralds are also entitled to distinctive sceptres, which have been a symbol of their office since the Tudor period. In 1906 new sceptres were made, most likely the initiative of Sir Alfred Scott-Gatty. These take the form of short black batons with gilded ends, each with a representation of the badges of the different offices of the heralds. In 1953 these were replaced by white staves, with gilded metal handles and at its head a blue dove in a golden coronet or a &quot;martinet&quot;. These blue martinets are derived from the arms of the College. Another of the heralds&#x27; insignia of office is the Collar of SS, which they wear over their uniforms. During inclement weather, a large black cape is worn. At state funerals, they would wear a wide sash of black silk sarsenet (a thin tissue of fine silk) over their tabards. (In ancient times, they would have worn long black hooded cloaks under their tabards.)

The three Kings of Arms have also been entitled to wear a crown since the 13th century. However, it was not until much later that the specific design of the crown was regulated. The silver-gilt crown is composed of sixteen acanthus leaves alternating in height, inscribed with a line from Psalm 51 in Latin: &quot;Miserere mei Deus secundum magnam misericordiam tuam&quot; (KJV: Have mercy upon me O God according to thy lovingkindness). Within the crown is a cap of crimson velvet, lined with ermine, having at the top a large tuft of tassels, wrought in gold. In medieval times the kings of arms were required to wear their crowns and attend to the Sovereign on four high feasts of the year: Christmas, Easter, Whitsuntide and All Saint&#x27;s Day. Today, the crown is reserved for the most solemn of occasions. The last time these crowns were worn was at the coronation of King Charles III and Queen Camilla in 2023. At other times, kings of arms wear a black bicorne trimmed with white ostrich feathers when performing duties outdoors, or a black velvet cap, depending on circumstances of occasion.

The New Zealand Herald of Arms Extraordinary is a special case when it comes to uniform. Although they do wear the tabard, they only do so when in the UK performing duties. When in New Zealand, they simply wear morning dress as official uniform, together with their chains and baton.

===Qualifications===

There are no formal qualifications for a herald, but certain specialist knowledge and discipline are required. Most of the current officers are trained lawyers and historians. Noted heraldist and writer Sir John Ferne wrote in &quot;The Glory of Generositie&quot; in 1586 that a herald &quot;ought to be a Gentlemen and an Old man not admitting into that sacred office everie glasier, painter &amp; tricker, or a meere blazonner of Armes: for to the office of a herald is requisite the skill of many faculties and professions of literature, and likewise the knowledge of warres.&quot; Some of the greatest scholars and eminent antiquarians of their age were members of the College, such as Robert Glover, William Camden, Sir William Dugdale, Elias Ashmole, John Anstis, Sir Anthony Wagner and John Brooke-Little.

Even with these examples, many controversial appointments were made throughout the College&#x27;s history. For example, in 1704 the architect and dramatist Sir John Vanbrugh was appointed Clarenceux King of Arms, although he knew little of heraldry and genealogy and was known to have ridiculed both. Nevertheless, he was also described as &quot;possibly the most distinguished man who has ever worn a herald&#x27;s tabard.&quot; Noted antiquarian William Oldys, appointed Norroy King of Arms in 1756, was described as being &quot;rarely sober in the afternoon, never after supper&quot;, and &quot;much addicted to low company&quot;.

===List of heralds===

====Officers in Ordinary====
====Officers Extraordinary====
==Armorial achievement of the College==
==See also==
;Other institutions linked to the College of Arms:
* St Benet Paul&#x27;s Wharf – The official church of the College
* Heralds&#x27; Museum – Former museum displaying objects from the College, situated within Waterloo Barracks, Tower of London (now closed).
* White Lion Society – founded in 1986 as a society to benefit the College of Arms through donations of useful items and publications.
* The Heraldry Society – An organisation devoted to the studying of heraldry. 

;Similar heraldic authorities in other parts of the world:
* Court of the Lord Lyon – Scotland, United Kingdom
* Canadian Heraldic Authority – Canada
* Genealogical Office – Republic of Ireland
* Council of Heraldry and Vexillology - French Community, Belgium
* Flemish Heraldic Council – Flemish Community, Belgium
* Bureau of Heraldry – South Africa
* National Archives of Sweden
* United States Army Institute of Heraldry

;Subjects under the jurisdiction of the College:
* English heraldry
* Welsh heraldry
* Northern Irish Heraldry
* Australian heraldry
* New Zealand heraldry

==Notes==
==References==
;Citations:
;Bibliography:
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==

== External links ==
* College of Arms Trust
* The National Archives&#x27; page for the College of Arms
* The White Lion Society
* College of Arms Foundation USA 
* The Heraldry Society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1109101" start="4" end="19" title="College of Arms" label="College of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109101" start="24" end="45" title="College of Arms" label="Heralds&amp;#x27; College"/>
<link wikidata="Q167037" start="58" end="69" title="corporation" label="corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247049" start="97" end="113" title="Officer of Arms" label="officers of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="138" end="145" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="147" end="152" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="154" end="170" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="180" end="198" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="234" end="251" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="British Sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="300" end="309" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="328" end="336" title="heraldry" label="heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="358" end="371" title="coat of arms" label="coats of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q47307" start="373" end="394" title="Genealogy" label="genealogical research"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242583" start="416" end="425" title="pedigree chart" label="pedigrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q56877" start="628" end="665" title="Royal Household of the United Kingdom" label="Royal Household of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="742" end="755" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="772" end="794" title="Richard III of England" label="Richard III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613815" start="845" end="865" title="heraldic authority" label="heraldic authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137768" start="940" end="962" title="Court of the Lord Lyon" label="Court of the Lord Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="966" end="974" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336843" start="1003" end="1011" title="Countries of the United Kingdom" label="the rest"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="1071" end="1085" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581969" start="1149" end="1170" title="Queen Victoria Street, London" label="Queen Victoria Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627975" start="1257" end="1276" title="Ceremony" label="ceremonial occasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q464122" start="1286" end="1296" title="Coronation of the British monarch" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603688" start="1299" end="1313" title="State funerals in the United Kingdom" label="state funerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="1326" end="1340" title="Garter Service" label="Garter Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550193" start="1349" end="1376" title="State Opening of Parliament" label="State Opening of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q900575" start="1512" end="1525" title="Kings of Arms" label="Kings of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q696819" start="1531" end="1546" title="Herald" label="Heralds of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q930086" start="1556" end="1575" title="Pursuivant" label="Pursuivants of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265164" start="1735" end="1747" title="Earl Marshal" label="Earl Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q521109" start="1788" end="1803" title="Duke of Norfolk" label="Duke of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="1841" end="1852" title="Richard III of England" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675712" start="1930" end="1943" title="roll of arms" label="rolls of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132247" start="1957" end="1975" title="Duke of Gloucester" label="Duke of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q955642" start="1980" end="2000" title="Constable of England" label="Constable of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q160341" start="2018" end="2027" title="Edward IV" label="Edward IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q953120" start="2192" end="2207" title="John Howard, 1st Duke of Norfolk" label="Sir John Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q521109" start="2211" end="2226" title="Duke of Norfolk" label="Duke of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265164" start="2231" end="2254" title="Earl Marshal of England" label="Earl Marshal of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517131" start="2277" end="2283" title="House of Howard" label="Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="2388" end="2401" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2432" end="2437" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="3122" end="3136" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q889137" start="3371" end="3385" title="Legal personality" label="corporate body"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="3561" end="3579" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="3645" end="3662" title="Seal (emblem)" label="seal of authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="3721" end="3725" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q229218" start="3745" end="3757" title="Anne Neville" label="Anne Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q719039" start="3763" end="3776" title="Queen Consort" label="Queen Consort"/>
<link wikidata="Q436676" start="3792" end="3805" title="Edward of Middleham, Prince of Wales" label="Prince Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142524" start="3850" end="3861" title="Coldharbour House" label="Coldharbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503695" start="3897" end="3916" title="Thames Street (London)" label="Upper Thames Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727833" start="3934" end="3954" title="All-Hallows-the-Less" label="All-Hallows-the-Less"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829085" start="4030" end="4050" title="Sir John de Pulteney" label="Sir John de Pulteney"/>
<link wikidata="Q73341" start="4063" end="4083" title="Lord Mayor of London" label="Lord Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q222013" start="4207" end="4221" title="Battle of Bosworth Field" label="Bosworth field"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="4404" end="4413" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q229202" start="4818" end="4840" title="Lady Margaret Beaufort" label="Lady Margaret Beaufort"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264985" start="4926" end="4937" title="John Writhe" label="John Writhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134237" start="5171" end="5182" title="royal court" label="royal court"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="5300" end="5310" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="5869" end="5888" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030061" start="5896" end="5922" title="Field of the Cloth of Gold" label="Field of the Cloth of Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q337635" start="6134" end="6149" title="Charles Brandon, 1st Duke of Suffolk" label="Duke of Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517659" start="6551" end="6573" title="Augmentation of honour" label="heraldic augmentations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075700" start="6712" end="6727" title="Charles Boutell" label="Charles Boutell"/>
<link wikidata="Q80823" start="6777" end="6788" title="Anne Boleyn" label="Anne Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5732698" start="7180" end="7199" title="heraldic visitation" label="heraldic visitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="7431" end="7461" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="Dissolution of the Monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548873" start="7786" end="7797" title="law of arms" label="law of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="7953" end="7959" title="Mary I of England" label="Mary I"/>
<link wikidata="Q162356" start="8079" end="8093" title="Lady Jane Grey" label="Lady Jane Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="8119" end="8128" title="Edward VI of England" label="Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068693" start="8212" end="8221" title="Cheapside" label="Cheapside"/>
<link wikidata="Q846686" start="8230" end="8242" title="Fleet Street" label="Fleet Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q347125" start="8637" end="8659" title="John Dudley, 1st Duke of Northumberland" label="Duke of Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="8794" end="8812" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q205666" start="8939" end="8959" title="Hampton Court Palace" label="Hampton Court Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q335295" start="8984" end="9017" title="Thomas Stanley, 1st Earl of Derby" label="Thomas Stanley, 1st Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277265" start="9086" end="9099" title="Earl of Derby" label="Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q377029" start="9171" end="9179" title="Edward Stanley, 3rd Earl of Derby" label="3rd Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576524" start="10029" end="10053" title="Old St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581969" start="10443" end="10464" title="Queen Victoria Street, London" label="Queen Victoria Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361901" start="10533" end="10543" title="hearth tax" label="hearth tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q392703" start="10586" end="10603" title="The National Archives (United Kingdom)" label="National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740301" start="10607" end="10610" title="Kew" label="Kew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="10771" end="10782" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q278130" start="10956" end="10986" title="Thomas Howard, 4th Duke of Norfolk" label="Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007791" start="11097" end="11119" title="William Dethick" label="Garter William Dethick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343086" start="11121" end="11144" title="Robert Cooke (officer of arms)" label="Clarenceux Robert Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245724" start="11149" end="11173" title="Ralph Brooke" label="York Herald Ralph Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769038" start="11332" end="11342" title="Mark Noble (biographer)" label="Mark Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q56304279" start="11848" end="11854" title="Landed gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q354309" start="11950" end="11979" title="William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley" label="William Cecil, Baron Burghley"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="12083" end="12090" title="James I of England" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="12245" end="12262" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="12302" end="12311" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="12420" end="12429" title="Cavalier" label="Royalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="12491" end="12511" title="Roundhead" label="Parliamentarian side"/>
<link wikidata="Q949724" start="12757" end="12763" title="Battle of Naseby" label="Naseby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345777" start="12806" end="12823" title="Edward Walker (officer of arms)" label="Sir Edward Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8689801" start="12964" end="12987" title="Treaty of Newport" label="negotiations at Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="13037" end="13047" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152924" start="13114" end="13140" title="Committee for Compounding with Delinquents" label="Committee of Sequestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q535158" start="13237" end="13247" title="Long Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342124" start="13728" end="13741" title="Edward Bysshe" label="Edward Bysshe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13744" end="13764" title="Member of Parliament (UK)#United Kingdom" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797239" start="13770" end="13782" title="Bletchingley (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Bletchingley"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="13983" end="13998" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q512196" start="14038" end="14052" title="Lord Protector" label="Lord Protector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987351" start="14060" end="14072" title="The Protectorate" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14140" end="14161" title="Convention Parliament (1660)#Convention Parliament of 1660" label="Convention Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="14502" end="14519" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="14573" end="14588" title="Stuart Restoration" label="The Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439921" start="14741" end="14754" title="List of regicides of Charles I" label="the regicides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558636" start="14894" end="14905" title="Interregnum (England)" label="Interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q164679" start="15165" end="15185" title="Great Fire of London" label="Great Fire of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q391620" start="15377" end="15396" title="Palace of Whitehall" label="Palace of Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="15422" end="15443" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137581" start="15571" end="15585" title="London Gazette" label="London Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863646" start="15741" end="15757" title="Francis Sandford (herald)" label="Francis Sandford"/>
<link wikidata="Q875016" start="16670" end="16684" title="terraced house" label="terraced house"/>
<link wikidata="Q190996" start="17034" end="17042" title="pediment" label="pediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q328092" start="17048" end="17055" title="cornice" label="cornice"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="17129" end="17148" title="Neo-Classical style" label="Neo-Classical style"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="17181" end="17189" title="James II of England" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="17354" end="17371" title="William III of England" label="William of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="17376" end="17383" title="Mary II of England" label="Mary II"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="17391" end="17410" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="17570" end="17588" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="17635" end="17639" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137768" start="17730" end="17752" title="Court of the Lord Lyon" label="Court of the Lord Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q777743" start="17834" end="17844" title="Orders of precedence in the United Kingdom" label="precedence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523599" start="17850" end="17859" title="Lord Lyon" label="Lord Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q316537" start="17969" end="17990" title="Hanoverian succession" label="Hanoverian succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="18185" end="18193" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q10682443" start="18366" end="18375" title="pillory" label="pilloried"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="18594" end="18603" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="19095" end="19111" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q130586" start="19954" end="19963" title="George IV" label="George IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q309905" start="20364" end="20373" title="John Nash (architect)" label="John Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q129143" start="21090" end="21106" title="Trafalgar Square" label="Trafalgar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341336" start="21227" end="21241" title="Robert Abraham (architect)" label="Robert Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638671" start="21643" end="21658" title="Bernard Howard, 12th Duke of Norfolk" label="Duke of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q880829" start="21936" end="21947" title="Blackfriars, London" label="Blackfriars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786933" start="21955" end="21968" title="Mansion House, London" label="Mansion House"/>
<link wikidata="Q547536" start="22540" end="22555" title="Henry Fitzalan-Howard, 15th Duke of Norfolk" label="Duke of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342919" start="22992" end="23019" title="Edward Fitzalan-Howard, 1st Baron Howard of Glossop" label="Lord Edward Fitzalan-Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529466" start="23047" end="23068" title="Sir William Alexander, 3rd Baronet" label="Sir William Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341852" start="23096" end="23111" title="Edward Bellasis (lawyer)" label="Edward Bellasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892968" start="23133" end="23150" title="Bernard Burke" label="Sir Bernard Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016410" start="23166" end="23186" title="Burke&amp;#x27;s Peerage" label="Burke&amp;#x27;s Peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q41487" start="23798" end="23810" title="court of law" label="court of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993654" start="23827" end="23845" title="Courts of Scotland" label="Scottish Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q19008" start="24699" end="24713" title="Arthur Balfour" label="Arthur Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="24726" end="24740" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724185" start="24800" end="24817" title="Algernon West" label="Sir Algernon West"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507478" start="25635" end="25664" title="Liberal Government 1905–1915" label="Liberal Government of the day"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="25701" end="25715" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408534" start="25724" end="25736" title="Social structure of the United Kingdom" label="class system"/>
<link wikidata="Q333683" start="25806" end="25821" title="F. E. Smith, 1st Earl of Birkenhead" label="Lord Birkenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="25917" end="25928" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="26132" end="26150" title="Home Secretary" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="26390" end="26407" title="royal prerogative" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308738" start="26604" end="26622" title="Anthony Wagner" label="Sir Anthony Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q822421" start="28046" end="28058" title="Bernard Fitzalan-Howard, 16th Duke of Norfolk" label="Earl Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="28169" end="28178" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="28201" end="28210" title="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796332" start="28304" end="28320" title="Thornbury Castle" label="Thornbury Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611538" start="28359" end="28371" title="Algar Howard" label="Algar Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110533" start="29336" end="29353" title="Ministry of Works (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583573" start="29570" end="29584" title="Goodrich Court" label="Goodrich Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116552" start="29794" end="29828" title="St Benet&amp;#x27;s, Paul&amp;#x27;s Wharf" label="St Benet&amp;#x27;s, Paul&amp;#x27;s Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="30057" end="30075" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q336947" start="30081" end="30096" title="Miles Fitzalan-Howard, 17th Duke of Norfolk" label="Duke of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q499613" start="30123" end="30138" title="Edward Fitzalan-Howard, 18th Duke of Norfolk" label="Earl of Arundel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091309" start="30280" end="30299" title="London Fire Brigade" label="London Fire Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q56877" start="30667" end="30682" title="Royal Households of the United Kingdom" label="Royal Household"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="30690" end="30721" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="Sovereign of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="30860" end="30879" title="Head of state" label="symbol of the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550193" start="31033" end="31060" title="State Opening of Parliament" label="State Opening of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="31090" end="31104" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q115665045" start="31516" end="31532" title="Procession" label="Royal Procession"/>
<link wikidata="Q110267513" start="31568" end="31591" title="Great Officers of State" label="Great Officers of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858077" start="31636" end="31650" title="Victoria Tower" label="Victoria Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358618" start="31743" end="31763" title="Imperial State Crown" label="Imperial State Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="31887" end="31897" title="Speech from the throne" label="the speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449634" start="31994" end="32033" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q723336" start="32062" end="32078" title="Royal Ascot" label="Royal Ascot week"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="32120" end="32139" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773736" start="32274" end="32294" title="the Waterloo Chamber" label="the Waterloo Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857895" start="32557" end="32584" title="Military Knights of Windsor" label="Military Knights of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571571" start="32608" end="32634" title="Sovereign&amp;#x27;s Bodyguard" label="Sovereign&amp;#x27;s Bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q235356" start="32695" end="32703" title="carriage" label="carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q842994" start="33095" end="33115" title="Demise of the Crown" label="death of a Sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q338994" start="33120" end="33137" title="Accession Council" label="Accession Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="33150" end="33167" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Councillors"/>
<link wikidata="Q272162" start="33230" end="33253" title="St. James&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="St. James&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503373" start="33665" end="33677" title="Friary Court" label="Friary Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q125555724" start="33753" end="33763" title="Temple Bar, London" label="Temple Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053108" start="33825" end="33843" title="Royal Horse Guards" label="Royal Horse Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124029" start="33936" end="33953" title="City Remembrancer" label="City Remembrancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495002" start="34105" end="34118" title="Sheriffs of the City of London" label="City Sheriffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q404351" start="34231" end="34244" title="Chancery Lane" label="Chancery Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q846686" start="34249" end="34261" title="Fleet Street" label="Fleet Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241240" start="34274" end="34288" title="Royal Exchange, London" label="Royal Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q464122" start="34302" end="34321" title="Coronation of the British monarch" label="Coronation Ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="34393" end="34410" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798290" start="34740" end="34762" title="Lord Great Chamberlain" label="Lord Great Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q497240" start="34932" end="34952" title="Master of Ceremonies" label="Master of Ceremonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q170984" start="35047" end="35052" title="crown (headgear)" label="crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603688" start="35142" end="35155" title="State funerals in the United Kingdom" label="State funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q910873" start="35455" end="35459" title="Helmet (heraldry)" label="helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q668732" start="35464" end="35469" title="Crest (heraldry)" label="crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q740732" start="35471" end="35475" title="spur" label="spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432712" start="35478" end="35486" title="Gauntlet (glove)" label="gauntlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q331357" start="35488" end="35511" title="Escutcheon (heraldry)" label="target (shield of arms)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12791" start="35513" end="35518" title="sword" label="sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675826" start="35570" end="35577" title="surcoat" label="surcoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075349" start="35847" end="35864" title="Peter Gwynn-Jones" label="Peter Gwynn-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643369" start="35883" end="35900" title="List of titles and honours of Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon" label="styles and titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="35904" end="35937" title="Queen Elizabeth, The Queen Mother" label="Queen Elizabeth, The Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="36054" end="36071" title="armorial bearings" label="armorial bearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="36073" end="36086" title="coat of arms" label="coats of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635276" start="36665" end="36680" title="time immemorial" label="time immemorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548873" start="36767" end="36787" title="Law of heraldic arms" label="Law of heraldic arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493627" start="36997" end="37006" title="gavelkind" label="gavelkind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="37231" end="37245" title="Letters Patent" label="Letters Patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q749212" start="38886" end="38895" title="gentleman" label="gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q535393" start="39179" end="39192" title="William Segar" label="William Segar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39226" end="39241" title="Gregory Brandon" label="Gregory Brandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603875" start="39351" end="39361" title="Marshalsea" label="Marshalsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q668732" start="39620" end="39625" title="Crest (heraldry)" label="crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429148" start="39755" end="39760" title="Heraldic badge" label="badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q725975" start="39762" end="39771" title="supporter" label="supporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q446776" start="39778" end="39786" title="Heraldic flag" label="standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q378274" start="39897" end="39903" title="vellum" label="vellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="39904" end="39918" title="Letters Patent" label="Letters Patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="40825" end="40831" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318187" start="41044" end="41053" title="scrivener" label="scrivener"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343619" start="42474" end="42488" title="Name change" label="change of name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182303" start="42627" end="42636" title="deed poll" label="deed poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249975" start="42658" end="42680" title="deed of change of name" label="deed of change of name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128539" start="42799" end="42809" title="High Court" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137581" start="42924" end="42938" title="London Gazette" label="London Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="43060" end="43070" title="given name" label="given name"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="43284" end="43293" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186812" start="43827" end="43835" title="gazetted" label="gazetted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182303" start="43847" end="43856" title="deed poll" label="deed poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q47307" start="43985" end="43994" title="genealogy" label="genealogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242583" start="44226" end="44240" title="pedigree chart" label="pedigree chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q189977" start="44246" end="44257" title="family tree" label="family tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q120826" start="45067" end="45090" title="House of Lords Act 1999" label="House of Lords Act 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q808719" start="45122" end="45137" title="hereditary peer" label="hereditary peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11009654" start="45242" end="45260" title="peerage of England" label="peerage of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q66004929" start="45262" end="45270" title="Peerage of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859616" start="45272" end="45279" title="Peerage of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375309" start="45281" end="45294" title="Peerage of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q863009" start="45303" end="45317" title="Peerage of the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45353" end="45368" title="Hereditary peer#Writs of summons" label="writ of summons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131874" start="45519" end="45543" title="Clerk of the Parliaments" label="Clerk of the Parliaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="45639" end="45648" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260113" start="46229" end="46274" title="Department for Constitutional Affairs" label="Secretary of State for Constitutional Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131866" start="46323" end="46335" title="Clerk of the Crown in Chancery" label="Crown Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983190" start="46361" end="46380" title="Ministry of Justice (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015421" start="46847" end="46879" title="New Zealand Herald Extraordinary" label="New Zealand Herald Extraordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191489" start="47066" end="47110" title="Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Australia)" label="Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="47602" end="47629" title="Canadian Heraldic Authority" label="Canadian Heraldic Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998381" start="47653" end="47671" title="Bureau of Heraldry" label="Bureau of Heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q336670" start="47939" end="47951" title="Henry Howard, 6th Duke of Norfolk" label="Henry Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q521109" start="48035" end="48053" title="Duke of Norfolk" label="Dukedom of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q111837" start="48157" end="48164" title="Marshal" label="Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q955642" start="48308" end="48327" title="Lord High Constable of England" label="Lord High Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="48414" end="48422" title="chivalry" label="chivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178351" start="49164" end="49186" title="High Court of Chivalry" label="High Court of Chivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q900575" start="50030" end="50043" title="Kings of Arms" label="Kings of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q696819" start="50049" end="50064" title="Herald" label="Heralds of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q930086" start="50074" end="50093" title="Pursuivant" label="Pursuivants of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114830" start="50425" end="50448" title="Great Seal of the Realm" label="Great Seal of the Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375085" start="50484" end="50501" title="Royal Sign Manual" label="Royal Sign Manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137581" start="50547" end="50561" title="London Gazette" label="London Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149517" start="50847" end="50859" title="Royal Badges of England" label="royal badges"/>
<link wikidata="Q130822" start="51308" end="51318" title="William IV of the United Kingdom" label="William IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q378159" start="51707" end="51722" title="Thomas Woodcock (officer of arms)" label="Thomas Woodcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q535449" start="52203" end="52209" title="tabard" label="tabard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219173" start="52633" end="52644" title="John Anstis" label="John Anstis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136380" start="52837" end="52845" title="Mordecai" label="Mordecai"/>
<link wikidata="Q131068" start="52903" end="52917" title="Book of Esther" label="Book of Esther"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53081" end="53098" title="Court dress#Judges" label="judges&amp;#x27; wigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526862" start="53146" end="53152" title="gaiter" label="gaiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q165762" start="53472" end="53499" title="royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom" label="Sovereign&amp;#x27;s royal arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="53893" end="53903" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355456" start="54141" end="54157" title="Lord Chamberlain" label="Lord Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336719" start="54267" end="54288" title="Ede &amp;amp; Ravenscroft" label="Ede &amp;amp; Ravenscroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178449" start="54456" end="54470" title="Court uniform and dress in the United Kingdom" label="court uniforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q152065" start="54876" end="54883" title="sceptre" label="sceptre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645894" start="55013" end="55035" title="Alfred Scott-Gatty" label="Sir Alfred Scott-Gatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014830" start="55072" end="55077" title="Baton (symbol)" label="baton"/>
<link wikidata="Q481243" start="55443" end="55455" title="Livery collar" label="Collar of SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q170984" start="55813" end="55818" title="Crown (headgear)" label="crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349033" start="56044" end="56052" title="Psalm 51" label="Psalm 51"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="56129" end="56132" title="King James Version" label="KJV"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345" start="56249" end="56255" title="Stoat" label="ermine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446130" start="56468" end="56479" title="Whitsuntide" label="Whitsuntide"/>
<link wikidata="Q587" start="56484" end="56504" title="All Saint&amp;#x27;s Day" label="All Saint&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q113857620" start="56617" end="56665" title="Coronation of Charles III and Camilla" label="coronation of King Charles III and Queen Camilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q233104" start="56718" end="56725" title="bicorne" label="bicorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146387" start="57070" end="57083" title="morning dress" label="morning dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101269" start="57369" end="57383" title="John Ferne" label="Sir John Ferne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344815" start="57856" end="57869" title="Robert Glover (officer of arms)" label="Robert Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q364239" start="57871" end="57885" title="William Camden" label="William Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q783318" start="57887" end="57906" title="William Dugdale" label="Sir William Dugdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q471406" start="57908" end="57921" title="Elias Ashmole" label="Elias Ashmole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219173" start="57923" end="57934" title="John Anstis" label="John Anstis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308738" start="57936" end="57954" title="Anthony Wagner" label="Sir Anthony Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223351" start="57959" end="57977" title="John Brooke-Little" label="John Brooke-Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q333398" start="58136" end="58153" title="John Vanbrugh" label="Sir John Vanbrugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016330" start="58428" end="58441" title="William Oldys" label="William Oldys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116552" start="58804" end="58830" title="St Benet Paul&amp;#x27;s Wharf" label="St Benet Paul&amp;#x27;s Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q250522" start="58870" end="58890" title="Heralds&amp;#x27; Museum" label="Heralds&amp;#x27; Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="58979" end="58994" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995023" start="59011" end="59029" title="White Lion Society" label="White Lion Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739421" start="59146" end="59166" title="The Heraldry Society" label="The Heraldry Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613815" start="59233" end="59253" title="heraldic authority" label="heraldic authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137768" start="59285" end="59307" title="Court of the Lord Lyon" label="Court of the Lord Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="59337" end="59364" title="Canadian Heraldic Authority" label="Canadian Heraldic Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531582" start="59376" end="59395" title="Genealogical Office" label="Genealogical Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993905" start="59420" end="59455" title="Council of Heraldry and Vexillology" label="Council of Heraldry and Vexillology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2194060" start="59486" end="59510" title="Flemish Heraldic Council" label="Flemish Heraldic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998381" start="59542" end="59560" title="Bureau of Heraldry" label="Bureau of Heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724971" start="59578" end="59605" title="National Archives of Sweden" label="National Archives of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579238" start="59608" end="59648" title="United States Army Institute of Heraldry" label="United States Army Institute of Heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q730150" start="59701" end="59717" title="English heraldry" label="English heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982026" start="59720" end="59734" title="Welsh heraldry" label="Welsh heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938900" start="59737" end="59760" title="Heraldry of Northern Ireland" label="Northern Irish Heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q111992762" start="59763" end="59782" title="Australian heraldry" label="Australian heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15713061" start="59785" end="59805" title="New Zealand heraldry" label="New Zealand heraldry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384857" wikidata="Q5188177" url="?curid=384857" title="Hybrid genre">
<text>A hybrid genre is a literary or film genre that blends themes and elements from two or more different genres. Hybrid genre works are also referred to as cross-genre, multi-genre, mixed genre, or fusion genre. Some hybrid genres have acquired their own specialised names, such as comedy drama (&quot;dramedy&quot;), romantic comedy (&quot;rom-com&quot;), horror Western, and docudrama.

&quot;A Dictionary of Media and Communication&quot; describes hybrid genre as &quot;the combination of two or more genres&quot;, which may combine elements of more than one genre and/or which may &quot;cut across categories such as fact and fiction&quot;.

Hybrid genres are a longstanding element in the fictional process. An early literature example is William Blake&#x27;s &quot;Marriage of Heaven and Hell&quot;, with its blend of poetry, prose, and engravings. In cinema, the merging of two or more separate genres attracts a broader range of audience type.

==Examples==
===Literature===
In contemporary literature, Dimitris Lyacos&#x27;s trilogy &quot;Poena Damni&quot; combines fictional prose with drama and poetry in a multilayered narrative developing through the different characters of the work.

Many contemporary women of color have published cross-genre works, including Theresa Hak Kyung Cha, Giannina Braschi, Guadalupe Nettel, and Bhanu Kapil. Giannina Braschi creates linguistic and structural hybrids of comic fantasy and tragic comedy in Spanish, Spanglish, and English prose and poetry. Carmen Maria Machado mixes psychological realism and science fiction with both humor and elements of gothic horror. 

Dean Koontz considers himself a cross-genre writer, not a horror writer: &quot;I write cross-genre books-suspense mixed with love story, with humor, sometimes with two tablespoons of science fiction, sometimes with a pinch of horror, sometimes with a sprinkle of paprika...&quot;

===Film===
Examples of hybrid genre films include:
*&quot;Grease&quot; (1978; musical, comedy, romance, coming-of-age)
*&quot;Who Framed Roger Rabbit&quot; (1988; live action, animation, mystery) 
*&quot;Back to the Future 3&quot; (1990; science fiction and western)

*&quot;Punch-Drunk Love&quot; (2002; rom-com, psychological drama, musical, screwball comedy)
*&quot;Shaun of the Dead&quot; (2004; horror, survival, comedy)
*&quot;Let the Right One In&quot; (2008; horror (vampire), romance, coming-of-age, Nordic noir)

*&quot;Drive&quot; (2011; art-house drama, B-movie)

*&quot;Deadpool&quot; (2016; superhero, action, comedy)&quot;&quot;

*&quot;Elle&quot; (2016; erotic thriller, Black comedy, satire)

*&quot;Logan&quot; (2017; superhero, Western)

*&quot;The Killing of a Sacred Deer&quot; (2017; horror, Greek tragedy, dark comedy)

*&quot;Parasite&quot; (2019; comedy, drama, thriller)&quot;&quot;
*&quot;Everything Everywhere All at Once&quot; (2022; action, fantasy, sci-fi)

===TV series===
*&quot;Lost&quot; (2004-2010; adventure, mystery, science fiction, serial drama, supernatural, survival, thriller)

==List of named hybrid genres==

*Action comedy (action and comedy)
*Action drama (action and drama)
*Comedy drama (comedy and drama)
*Comedy-horror (comedy and horror)
*Comic fantasy (comedy and fantasy)
*Comic science fiction (comedy and science fiction)
*Crime drama (crime and drama)
*Crime fantasy (crime and fantasy)
*Dark fantasy (horror and fantasy)
*Docudrama (dramatised documentary)
*Docufiction (documentary and fiction)
*Ethnofiction (ethnography and fiction)
*Fantasy Western (fantasy and Western)
*Horror Western (horror and Western)
*Romantic comedy (romance and comedy)
*Romantic fantasy (romance and fantasy)
*Science fantasy (science fiction and fantasy)
*Science fiction Western (science fiction and Western)
*Tragicomedy (tragedy and comedy)
*Zombie comedy (zombie fiction and comedy)
==See also==
*Genre-busting
*Menippean satire
*Northrop Frye

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* Film Genres at Filmsite</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5188177" start="2" end="14" title="Hybrid genre" label="hybrid genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q223393" start="20" end="28" title="literary genre" label="literary"/>
<link wikidata="Q201658" start="32" end="42" title="film genre" label="film genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188177" start="153" end="164" title="Hybrid genre" label="cross-genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188177" start="166" end="177" title="Hybrid genre" label="multi-genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188177" start="179" end="190" title="Hybrid genre" label="mixed genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188177" start="195" end="207" title="Hybrid genre" label="fusion genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="279" end="291" title="comedy drama" label="comedy drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="315" end="330" title="romantic comedy" label="romantic comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q108280930" start="354" end="368" title="horror Western" label="horror Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q622370" start="374" end="383" title="docudrama" label="docudrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q41513" start="741" end="754" title="William Blake" label="William Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132673" start="768" end="795" title="Marriage of Heaven and Hell" label="Marriage of Heaven and Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q712771" start="1008" end="1023" title="Dimitris Lyacos" label="Dimitris Lyacos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1045" end="1056" title="Dimitris Lyacos#Poena Damni" label="Poena Damni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782868" start="1273" end="1294" title="Theresa Hak Kyung Cha" label="Theresa Hak Kyung Cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q452761" start="1296" end="1312" title="Giannina Braschi" label="Giannina Braschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118678" start="1314" end="1330" title="Guadalupe Nettel" label="Guadalupe Nettel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667597" start="1336" end="1347" title="Bhanu Kapil" label="Bhanu Kapil"/>
<link wikidata="Q452761" start="1349" end="1365" title="Giannina Braschi" label="Giannina Braschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q56418" start="1455" end="1464" title="Spanglish" label="Spanglish"/>
<link wikidata="Q29559684" start="1496" end="1516" title="Carmen Maria Machado" label="Carmen Maria Machado"/>
<link wikidata="Q286328" start="1523" end="1544" title="Psychological fiction" label="psychological realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="1549" end="1564" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="1597" end="1610" title="Gothic fiction" label="gothic horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q272076" start="1614" end="1625" title="Dean Koontz" label="Dean Koontz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="1672" end="1678" title="Horror fiction" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q267721" start="1953" end="1959" title="Grease (film)" label="Grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="1973" end="1980" title="Musical film" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054574" start="1990" end="1997" title="Romance film" label="romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975633" start="1999" end="2012" title="Coming of age film" label="coming-of-age"/>
<link wikidata="Q379873" start="2021" end="2044" title="Who Framed Roger Rabbit" label="Who Framed Roger Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q517386" start="2058" end="2069" title="live action" label="live action"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="2071" end="2080" title="animated film" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200678" start="2082" end="2089" title="Mystery film" label="mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q230552" start="2099" end="2119" title="Back to the Future 3" label="Back to the Future 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="2133" end="2148" title="science fiction film" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q172980" start="2153" end="2160" title="western film" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q580716" start="2170" end="2186" title="Punch-Drunk Love" label="Punch-Drunk Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q108102008" start="2209" end="2228" title="psychological drama" label="psychological drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q248583" start="2239" end="2255" title="screwball comedy" label="screwball comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q858724" start="2264" end="2281" title="Shaun of the Dead" label="Shaun of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="2295" end="2301" title="Horror film" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q15898171" start="2303" end="2311" title="Survival film" label="survival"/>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="2313" end="2319" title="comedy film" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q144756" start="2328" end="2348" title="Let the Right One In (film)" label="Let the Right One In"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137852" start="2370" end="2377" title="vampire film" label="vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429985" start="2404" end="2415" title="Nordic noir" label="Nordic noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q732960" start="2425" end="2430" title="Drive (2011 film)" label="Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="2444" end="2459" title="arthouse film" label="art-house drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q223770" start="2461" end="2468" title="B-movie" label="B-movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631090" start="2478" end="2486" title="Deadpool" label="Deadpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535153" start="2500" end="2509" title="superhero film" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="2511" end="2517" title="action film" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q19544495" start="2547" end="2551" title="Elle (2016 film)" label="Elle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439025" start="2565" end="2580" title="erotic thriller" label="erotic thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="2582" end="2594" title="Black comedy" label="Black comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745430" start="2596" end="2602" title="Satire (film and television)" label="satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q24053263" start="2612" end="2617" title="Logan (2017 film)" label="Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27492140" start="2659" end="2687" title="The Killing of a Sacred Deer" label="The Killing of a Sacred Deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34620" start="2709" end="2722" title="Greek tragedy" label="Greek tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q61448040" start="2745" end="2753" title="Parasite (2019 film)" label="Parasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="2775" end="2780" title="drama film" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484376" start="2782" end="2790" title="Thriller film" label="thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q83808444" start="2811" end="2844" title="Everything Everywhere All at Once" label="Everything Everywhere All at Once"/>
<link wikidata="Q157394" start="2866" end="2873" title="fantasy film" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23567" start="2907" end="2911" title="Lost (TV series)" label="Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q21802675" start="2930" end="2939" title="Adventure fiction" label="adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644030" start="2981" end="2993" title="Supernatural fiction" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678111" start="3050" end="3063" title="Action comedy" label="Action comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762165" start="3065" end="3071" title="action (fiction)" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q40831" start="3076" end="3082" title="comedy" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="3085" end="3097" title="Action drama" label="Action drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="3110" end="3115" title="drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="3118" end="3130" title="Comedy drama" label="Comedy drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q224700" start="3151" end="3164" title="Comedy-horror" label="Comedy-horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="3177" end="3183" title="Horror fiction" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637212" start="3186" end="3199" title="Comic fantasy" label="Comic fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="3212" end="3219" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q761469" start="3222" end="3243" title="Comic science fiction" label="Comic science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="3256" end="3271" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="3274" end="3285" title="Crime drama" label="Crime drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937792" start="3320" end="3325" title="crime fiction" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q794912" start="3340" end="3352" title="Dark fantasy" label="Dark fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q622370" start="3375" end="3384" title="Docudrama" label="Docudrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="3397" end="3408" title="documentary" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q472637" start="3411" end="3422" title="Docufiction" label="Docufiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253" start="3440" end="3447" title="fiction" label="fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059309" start="3450" end="3462" title="Ethnofiction" label="Ethnofiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="3464" end="3475" title="ethnography" label="ethnography"/>
<link wikidata="Q115775801" start="3490" end="3505" title="Fantasy Western" label="Fantasy Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="3519" end="3526" title="Western (genre)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q108280930" start="3529" end="3543" title="Horror Western" label="Horror Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="3566" end="3581" title="Romantic comedy" label="Romantic comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q858330" start="3583" end="3590" title="Romance novel" label="romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q930383" start="3604" end="3620" title="Romantic fantasy" label="Romantic fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080374" start="3644" end="3659" title="Science fantasy" label="Science fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433678" start="3691" end="3714" title="Science fiction Western" label="Science fiction Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q192881" start="3746" end="3757" title="Tragicomedy" label="Tragicomedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="3759" end="3766" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747837" start="3780" end="3793" title="Zombie comedy" label="Zombie comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633346" start="3795" end="3809" title="zombie apocalypse" label="zombie fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533536" start="3836" end="3849" title="Genre-busting" label="Genre-busting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994242" start="3851" end="3867" title="Menippean satire" label="Menippean satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q354256" start="3869" end="3882" title="Northrop Frye" label="Northrop Frye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449176" start="3956" end="3964" title="Filmsite" label="Filmsite"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384860" wikidata="Q2302280" url="?curid=384860" title="Texas Christian University">
<text>Texas Christian University (TCU) is a private research university in Fort Worth, Texas, United States. It was established in 1873 by brothers Addison and Randolph Clark as the AddRan Male &amp; Female College. It is affiliated with the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ).

The campus is located on about 4 miles (6.5 km) from downtown Fort Worth. The university consists of nine constituent colleges and schools. It is classified among &quot;R2: Doctoral Universities – High research activity&quot;. According to the National Science Foundation, the university received approximately $19 million in research and development funding in 2022, ranking it 298th in the nation for research revenue and expenditures. 

TCU&#x27;s mascot is Superfrog, based on the Texas state reptile: the horned frog. For most varsity sports, TCU competes in the Big 12 conference of the NCAA&#x27;s Division I. As of fall 2024, the university enrolled around 12,938 students, with 11,049 being undergraduates.

==History==

===Origins in Fort Worth, 1869–1873===
The East Texas brothers Addison and Randolph Clark, with the support of their father Joseph A. Clark, first founded Texas Christian University. The Clarks were scholar-preacher/teachers associated with the Restoration Movement. These early leaders of the Restoration Movement were the spiritual ancestors of the modern Disciples of Christ and the Churches of Christ, as well as being major proponents of education.

Upon their return from service in the Confederacy during the Civil War, brothers Addison and Randolph embarked on a mission to establish a children&#x27;s preparatory school in Fort Worth. This educational institution, known as the Male &amp; Female Seminary of Fort Worth, was in operation from 1869 to 1874. The Clarks shared a collective vision of creating a higher education institution that would embody Christian values while maintaining a non-sectarian and intellectually open-minded spirit. To realize this vision, they procured five city blocks in downtown Fort Worth in 1869.

But from 1867 to 1874, the character of Fort Worth changed substantially due to the commercial influence of the Chisholm Trail, the principal route for moving Texas cattle to the Kansas rail heads. An influx of cattle, men, and money transformed the sleepy frontier village. The area around the property purchased by the Clarks for their college soon housed stretch of saloons, gambling halls, dance parlors, and brothels. By 1872, it had acquired it the nickname of &quot;Hell&#x27;s Half Acre&quot;. The Clarks found an alternative site for their college at Thorp Spring, a small community in Hood County to the southwest near the frontier of Comanche and Kiowa territory.

===Move to Thorp Spring, 1873–1895===


In 1873 the Clark brothers moved South to Thorp Spring and founded Add-Ran Male &amp; Female College. TCU recognizes 1873 as its founding year, as it continues to preserve the original college through the AddRan College of Liberal Arts.

Add-Ran College was one of the first coeducational institutions of higher education west of the Mississippi River. The college expanded quickly from its first enrollment in Fall 1873 of 13 students. Shortly thereafter, annual enrollment ranged from 200 to 400. At one time more than 100 counties of Texas were represented in the student body. The Clark brothers also recruited prestigious professors from all over the South to join them at Thorp Spring.

In 1889 Add-Ran College formed an official partnership with what would become the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), though the church never enjoyed any administrative role at TCU. In 1889 the school was renamed Add-Ran Christian University.

===Move to Waco, roots of rivalry, 1895–1910===
The need for a larger population and transportation base prompted the university to relocate to Waco from 1895 to 1910; it purchased the campus of the defunct Waco Female College. The institution was renamed Texas Christian University in 1902, often called TCU. It was during this 15-year sojourn in Waco that TCU in 1896 entered the ranks of intercollegiate football and adopted its school colors of purple and white, as well as its distinctive Horned Frog mascot. A rivalry developed between TCU and nearby Baylor University.

===Return to Fort Worth, 1910–present===
In 1910 a fire of unknown origin destroyed the university&#x27;s Main Administration building. A rebuilding project was planned, but before reconstruction could begin, a group of enterprising Fort Worth businessmen offered the university $200,000 in rebuilding money ($6,614,210 in 2024) and a campus as an inducement to return to Fort Worth.

The TCU campus in Fort Worth in 1910–11 consisted of four buildings: Clark Hall and Goode Hall, the men&#x27;s dormitories; Jarvis Hall, the women&#x27;s dormitory; and the Main Administration building (now Reed Hall).

The university received its first charitable endowment in 1923, from Mary Couts Burnett, the recent widow of Samuel Burk Burnett, a rancher, banker, and oilman. Burnett received half of her late husband&#x27;s estate of $6 million ($110 million in 2024), and in her 1923 will, she bequeathed her entire estate, including a half-interest in the substantial 6666 (&quot;Four Sixes&quot;) Ranch, to TCU. Mary Couts Burnett Library is named after her.

==Campus==
TCU&#x27;s campus sits on of developed campus (325 acres total) which is located four miles (6.5 km) from downtown Fort Worth.

The TCU campus is divided into roughly three areas: a residential area, an academic area, and Worth Hills. The two main areas of campus, the residential and academic areas, are separated by University Drive, an oak-lined street that bisects the campus. Residence halls, the Student Union, and the Campus Commons are all located to the West of University Drive, while the library, chapel, and most academic buildings are located to the east of it. All of TCU&#x27;s surrounding streets are lined by live oaks.
Roughly half of TCU undergraduate students live on campus. Housing is divided among 16 residence halls and on-campus apartment complexes.

The neo-classical beaux-arts architecture at TCU incorporates features consistent with much of the Art Deco-influenced architecture of older buildings throughout Fort Worth. Most of the buildings at TCU are constructed with a specially blended golden brick tabbed by brick suppliers as &quot;TCU buff.&quot; Nearly all of the buildings have red-tile roofs, while the oldest buildings on campus are supported by columns of various styles.

A notable exception to this rule is Robert Carr Chapel, which was the first building on campus to be constructed of bricks other than TCU buff. The chapel is built of a distinctive salmon-colored brick, a deviation that caused alumni to protest when the building opened in 1953.

TCU is home to the Starpoint School, a laboratory school for students in grades 1–6 with learning differences. Starpoint&#x27;s goal is to develop advanced educational techniques for helping students with learning disabilities. KinderFrogs School, an early-intervention laboratory pre-school for children with Down syndrome, is housed in the same building as Starpoint. TCU is the only university in the nation with two on-campus laboratory schools in special education. The laboratory schools, both programs of the College of Education, are located near Sherley Hall and Colby Hall.

Since 2006, much of the campus has been under construction, and many buildings have been either renovated or replaced. The old Student Center was demolished in 2008 and replaced with Scharbauer Hall, which opened in 2010 and houses the bulk of AddRan College&#x27;s offices and classrooms. Renovations to Erma Lowe Hall, the building that houses the School for Classical &amp; Contemporary Dance, were completed in 2011. A new academic building for Brite Divinity School – the W. Oliver and Nell A. Harrison Building – was completed in 2012. 

The 717-seat Van Cliburn Concert Hall at TCU opened in 2022; the TCU Music Center had opened in 2020.

==Academics==

===Undergraduate admissions===
The 2022 annual ranking of &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; categorizes TCU as &quot;more selective&quot;. For the Class of 2027 (enrolled fall 2023), TCU received 20,517 applications and accepted 8,740 (42.6%). Of those accepted, 2,488 enrolled, a yield rate (the percentage of accepted students who choose to attend the university) of 28.5%. TCU&#x27;s freshman retention rate is 94.3%, with 85.6% going on to graduate within six years.

The enrolled first-year class of 2025 had the following standardized test scores: the middle 50% range (25th–75th percentile) of SAT scores was 1140–1345, while the middle 50% range of ACT scores was 26–31. 

The university experienced a record number of applicants in 2011, when over 19,000 students applied (a 5,000-student increase from 2010). The applicant pool also set a record with 60% applicants from out of state, whereas usually 1/3 of applicants were from out-of-state. While heightened national recognition due to TCU&#x27;s victory in the 2011 Rose Bowl is one contributing factor, the university has experienced a steady growth for some time. In 2000, only 4,500 students applied. In 2023, out-of-state students accounted for 52 percent of the undergraduate student body, with the majority of those students coming from California. 

High school seniors who have been accepted must maintain solid academic performance senior year during the spring and not show signs of senioritis; in 2012, national media reported on a letter the admissions dean had sent to 100 college-bound seniors, threatening to rescind offers of admission without satisfactory letters of explanation for the slump.

===Reputation and rankings===



TCU is classified as a Doctoral University: Higher Research Activity by the Carnegie Foundation. TCU is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools. , TCU is ranked by U.S. News &amp; World Report as No. 105 (tied) among National Universities.

===Academic divisions===
The university offers 117 undergraduate majors, 62 master&#x27;s programs, and 25 doctoral programs. Among the university&#x27;s most popular majors are Business, which accounts for roughly 25% of TCU undergraduates, and Journalism/Strategic Communications, which accounts for roughly 20% of TCU undergraduates. Nursing and Education are also popular majors, and many students choose to major in more than one field.

*AddRan College of Liberal Arts
*Bob Schieffer College of Communication
*College of Education
*College of Fine Arts
*College of Science and Engineering
*Harris College of Nursing and Health Sciences
*M. J. Neeley School of Business
*Anne Burnett Marion School of Medicine
*School of Interdisciplinary Studies
*John V. Roach Honors College

In addition, TCU hosts the Brite Divinity School, a separate institution run by the Disciples of Christ that is housed on TCU&#x27;s campus and whose students have full access and use of TCU facilities. In 2015, TCU and the University of North Texas Health Science Center announced the creation of an MD-granting medical school jointly administered by the two institutions. The school accepted its first class of 60 students in 2019 with plans for 240 students when fully enrolled.

The Neeley School of Business ranked as the No. 25 best undergraduate business school in the country in2023 by &quot;Poets and Quants.&quot; 

TCU is an educational partner to the US military and serves host to reserve officer training corps (ROTC) programs for two different service branches, the US Air Force ROTC&#x27;s Detachment 845 &quot;Flying Frogs&quot; and the US Army ROTC&#x27;s &quot;Horned Frog Battalion&quot;. Since 1951, nearly 1000 TCU graduates have received Army commissions through the ROTC program.

During World War II, TCU was one of 131 colleges and universities nationally that took part in the V-12 Navy College Training Program which offered students a path to a Navy commission.

The university operates the 450-acre southern white rhinoceros preserve, TCU Rhino Initiative. Doctor Michael Slattery established it in 2014.

==Student life==
===Student body===

The student population at TCU in 2024–2025 is 12,938, with 11,049 undergraduates and 1,889 graduate students. Women make up about 61% of the student population, while men make up about 39%. Undergraduates matriculate from all fifty states, including Texas at 48%. 
The fields of nursing, education, and advertising-public relations tend to be the majors that attract the most women, while business, political science, and a host of liberal arts majors are more balanced. A few areas of study at TCU, such as engineering and the sciences, are typically disproportionate with men, though even in those areas the percentage of female students tends to be higher than those of other comparable universities.

The student and faculty populations are overwhelmingly non-Hispanic white, but the minority population has seen increased rates over the past few years, especially for Hispanics. The school has also tried to achieve stronger diversity by hosting &quot;Black Senior Weekend&quot;, &quot;Hispanic Senior Experience&quot;, and offering full scholarships to a select number of exceptional minority high school students in North Texas with economically disadvantaged backgrounds.

===Student organizations and events===
TCU sponsors over 200 official student organizations including Amnesty International, Habitat for Humanity, Invisible Children and others. Students may also compete in intramural sports including basketball and shuffleboard, or join various other sport-hobby groups, such as the TCU Quidditch League.

Many students involve themselves in various campus ministries, such as Disciples on Campus, a Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) student group. Other groups include Ignite, a nondenominational campus ministry; Catholic Community, a large and active group; TCU Wesley, a Methodist group; the Latter-Day Saint Student Association (LDSSA); and Cru, a nondenominational evangelical student ministry. Most religious groups on campus are Christian-based, although TCU also sponsors , a Jewish student group, and the Muslim Students Association (MSA). Additionally, each year TCU Housing and Residential Life allows students to apply to live in the Interfaith Living Learning Community (LLC), in which the residents spend the year living alongside neighbors of various religious beliefs.

At the beginning of each fall semester, TCU&#x27;s student government holds a large concert on the Campus Commons. In 2008, TCU celebrated completion of the Brown-Lupton Union by hosting popular country artist Pat Green. In Fall of 2009, it held a concert by OneRepublic following a football victory over Texas State. Lady Antebellum performed in 2010, and The Fray in 2011. Blake Shelton performed in 2012, Little Big Town in 2013 and Jason Derulo performed in the campus commons in 2014. These fall concerts are free to all students.

===Student media===
The Bob Schieffer College of Communication circulates a number of student-run publications:
* &quot;Skiff x 360&quot;.
* TCU360.com,
* &quot;Image Magazine&quot; is TCU&#x27;s student magazine, published once a semester and focuses on investigative, in-depth campus issues.
* &quot;The Horned Frog&quot; is the school yearbook.
* TCU broadcasts its own radio station, KTCU-FM 88.7, &quot;The Choice.&quot; KTCU can be heard throughout much of Fort Worth/Dallas, and offers programming which includes music, talk, and live broadcasts Horned Frog football, basketball, and baseball games.

Other student-run media include:
*&quot;eleven40seven&quot;.

===Greek life===
Approximately 50% of undergraduate students are active in TCU&#x27;s Greek system: there are dozens of fraternities and sororities on campus. 
===Sustainability===
A &quot;Purple Bike&quot; program was instituted to allow students to use purple bicycles free of charge as an alternative to motor vehicles. Scharbauer Hall, which opened for classes in 2010, is a Gold US Green Building Council&#x27;s Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certified facility.

In 2010 TCU faculty and staff held a conference for Service-Learning for Sustainability and Social Justice with keynote speaker Robert Egger, founder of D.C. Central Kitchen. Also, sustainability and social justice are emphasized areas in the curriculum and programs offered by the Department of Sociology and Anthropology located in Scharbauer Hall.

==Athletics==

TCU competes in NCAA Division I athletics as a member of the Big 12 Conference (Big XII). For most of its history (1923–1996), TCU was a member of the now defunct Southwest Conference (SWC). Prior to joining the Big XII in 2012, TCU spent seven years in the Mountain West Conference (MWC) (2005–2011), where they were the only school to join from a conference other than the Western Athletic Conference (WAC), having come from Conference USA (C-USA), of which they were a member from 2001 to 2005. Before joining C-USA, TCU teams competed in the WAC for five years, from 1996 to 2001, after the SWC dissolved.

TCU&#x27;s varsity sports have eight men&#x27;s and twelve women&#x27;s squads. Men&#x27;s sports include baseball, basketball, football, golf, swimming &amp; diving, track &amp; field, cross country, and tennis. Women&#x27;s sports include basketball, volleyball, beach volleyball, golf, swimming &amp; diving, cross country, track &amp; field, triathlon, soccer, rifle, equestrian, and tennis.

In recent years the university has made significant upgrades to its athletics facilities, including construction of the Abe-Martin Academic Enhancement Center, which was completed in August 2008. The university finished reconstruction of the entire Amon G. Carter Football Stadium in September 2012, with an additional expansion on the east side of the stadium being completed in 2019. The Daniel-Meyer Coliseum underwent a reconstruction and was completed as Ed and Rae Schollmaier Arena for the 2015–16 basketball season, with expanded seating, concessions, office and locker room space, better sight lines, and luxury fan facilities.

===Football===
The Horned Frogs have won two national championships, one in 1935 and the other in 1938. The Horned Frogs also competed in the 2023 College Football Playoff National Championship game, losing 65-7 to the Georgia Bulldogs. Additionally, the team has captured eighteen conference championships. Many notable football players have played for TCU, including Sammy Baugh, Davey O&#x27;Brien, Jim Swink, Bob Lilly, LaDainian Tomlinson, and Andy Dalton.

===Rivalries===
The oldest rivalry, which has become nationally famous since TCU joined the Big 12 Conference, is The Revivalry with Baylor University. The Revivalry is unique in that it is a major FBS rivalry between two church affiliated schools. It is also one of the oldest rivalries in the nation, with the series currently led by TCU 59-54-7 since 1899.

The TCU Horned Frogs also share a historic rivalry with the Southern Methodist University Mustangs, located in Fort Worth&#x27;s sister (and rival) city, Dallas. In football, teams from TCU and SMU have competed annually in the Battle for the Iron Skillet since 1946 when, during pre-game festivities, an SMU fan was frying Frog Legs as a joke before the game. A TCU fan, seeing this as a desecration of their &quot;Horned Frog&quot;, told him that eating the frog legs was going well beyond the rivalry and that they should let the game decide who would get the skillet and the frog legs. SMU won the game, and the skillet and frog legs went to SMU that year. The tradition spilled over into the actual game and the Iron Skillet is now passed to the winner as the rivalry&#x27;s traveling trophy.

West Virginia University has become a rival largely due to the schools&#x27; cohort entry into the Big 12 Conference together in 2012, combined with a toggle of extremely close, dramatic, last-minute wins in their football match ups to date. The rivalry with Boise State University, with which TCU competed on the national stage in the 2000s as the two most prominent &quot;BCS Busters&quot;, and which also shared one year together as members of the Mountain West Conference, has also become a major, if periodic, rival. TCU and Boise State competed as the most effective BCS Busters before the demise of the BCS system. In 2011, as members of the Mountain West, TCU won the only in-conference game between the two schools, winning with no time left on a missed Boise State field goal. The rivalry with Boise State will be played only sporadically in the future due to TCU&#x27;s move to the &quot;Power Conference&quot; Big 12 and Boise State&#x27;s remaining status as the consensus leader of the &quot;mid-major&quot; programs in the &quot;Group of Five&quot; Conferences.

==Notable faculty==
*Stanley Block, Emeritus Professor of Finance
*Teresa Abi-Nader Dahlberg, academic administrator and engineering professor
*Lydia Mackay, professor of theatre and American voice and stage actress
*David Moessner, A. A. Bradford Chair and professor of religion
*Gene A. Smith, historian
*Steven E. Woodworth, American Civil War historian

==Alumni==

TCU has more than 100,000 living alumni.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*TCU Athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2302280" start="0" end="26" title="Texas Christian University" label="Texas Christian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302280" start="28" end="31" title="Texas Christian University" label="TCU"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="38" end="45" title="private university" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="46" end="65" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="69" end="86" title="Fort Worth, Texas" label="Fort Worth, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681244" start="142" end="149" title="Addison Clark" label="Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302280" start="176" end="208" title="Texas Christian University" label="AddRan Male &amp;amp; Female College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="236" end="274" title="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)" label="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303439" start="330" end="349" title="downtown Fort Worth" label="downtown Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223026" start="423" end="433" title="Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education" label="classified"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="521" end="548" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q748410" start="787" end="798" title="Texas horned lizard" label="horned frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q858430" start="845" end="851" title="Big 12" label="Big 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="870" end="874" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="882" end="892" title="Division I (NCAA)" label="Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576428" start="1050" end="1060" title="East Texas" label="East Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681244" start="1070" end="1077" title="Addison Clark" label="Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q585110" start="1252" end="1272" title="Restoration Movement" label="Restoration Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="1365" end="1384" title="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)" label="Disciples of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="1500" end="1511" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q477217" start="2161" end="2175" title="Chisholm Trail" label="Chisholm Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q25203438" start="2522" end="2543" title="Hell&amp;#x27;s Half Acre (Fort Worth)" label="Hell&amp;#x27;s Half Acre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2609" end="2621" title="Granbury micropolitan area#Communities" label="Thorp Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q485912" start="2644" end="2655" title="Hood County, Texas" label="Hood County"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="2694" end="2702" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q117100" start="2707" end="2712" title="Kiowa" label="Kiowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="3540" end="3578" title="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)" label="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="3850" end="3854" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco"/>
<link wikidata="Q29075795" start="3913" end="3932" title="Waco Female College" label="Waco Female College"/>
<link wikidata="Q812573" start="4263" end="4280" title="Baylor University" label="Baylor University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="4516" end="4526" title="Fort Worth" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779255" start="4957" end="4975" title="Mary Couts Burnett" label="Mary Couts Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q18646023" start="4997" end="5016" title="Samuel Burk Burnett" label="Samuel Burk Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303439" start="5454" end="5473" title="downtown Fort Worth" label="downtown Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q52387698" start="5974" end="5983" title="live oaks" label="live oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="6223" end="6231" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="6286" end="6296" title="Fort Worth" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q860740" start="7048" end="7069" title="learning disabilities" label="learning disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q47715" start="7153" end="7166" title="Down syndrome" label="Down syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q366355" start="7985" end="7996" title="Van Cliburn" label="Van Cliburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="8154" end="8182" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053540" start="8378" end="8388" title="Yield (college admissions)" label="yield rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896798" start="8493" end="8507" title="University student retention" label="retention rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="8698" end="8701" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="8754" end="8757" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q543429" start="9126" end="9135" title="Rose Bowl Game" label="Rose Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080043" start="9553" end="9563" title="senioritis" label="senioritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491651" start="9881" end="9900" title="Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching" label="Carnegie Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569646" start="9927" end="9971" title="Southern Association of Colleges and Schools" label="Southern Association of Colleges and Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974596" start="10712" end="10743" title="Neeley School of Business" label="M. J. Neeley School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q108392086" start="10745" end="10783" title="Burnett School of Medicine" label="Anne Burnett Marion School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969329" start="10879" end="10900" title="Brite Divinity School" label="Brite Divinity School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895977" start="11076" end="11123" title="University of North Texas Health Science Center" label="University of North Texas Health Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974596" start="11339" end="11364" title="Neeley School of Business" label="Neeley School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475036" start="11452" end="11468" title="Poets and Quants" label="Poets and Quants"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11864" end="11876" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905616" start="11956" end="11990" title="V-12 Navy College Training Program" label="V-12 Navy College Training Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762455" start="12081" end="12106" title="southern white rhinoceros" label="southern white rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493922" start="13348" end="13359" title="North Texas" label="North Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="13508" end="13529" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192147" start="13531" end="13551" title="Habitat for Humanity" label="Habitat for Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224187" start="13553" end="13571" title="Invisible Children" label="Invisible Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="13841" end="13879" title="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)" label="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q578100" start="14092" end="14095" title="Cru (Christian organization)" label="Cru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="14231" end="14237" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942967" start="14261" end="14294" title="Muslim Students Association" label="Muslim Students Association (MSA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143495" start="14743" end="14752" title="Pat Green" label="Pat Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438730" start="14792" end="14803" title="OneRepublic" label="OneRepublic"/>
<link wikidata="Q389870" start="14851" end="14866" title="Lady Antebellum" label="Lady Antebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q271513" start="14890" end="14898" title="The Fray" label="The Fray"/>
<link wikidata="Q94831" start="14908" end="14921" title="Blake Shelton" label="Blake Shelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q607317" start="14941" end="14956" title="Little Big Town" label="Little Big Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q243639" start="14969" end="14981" title="Jason Derulo" label="Jason Derulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338565" start="15458" end="15465" title="KTCU-FM" label="KTCU-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="15826" end="15838" title="Fraternities and sororities" label="Greek system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="16614" end="16629" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q858430" start="16659" end="16676" title="Big 12 Conference" label="Big 12 Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571245" start="16761" end="16781" title="Southwest Conference" label="Southwest Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786588" start="16856" end="16880" title="Mountain West Conference" label="Mountain West Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q984286" start="16973" end="17000" title="Western Athletic Conference" label="Western Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125149" start="17025" end="17039" title="Conference USA" label="Conference USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q115608190" start="18386" end="18437" title="2023 College Football Playoff National Championship" label="2023 College Football Playoff National Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927996" start="18463" end="18479" title="Georgia Bulldogs" label="Georgia Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q372640" start="18613" end="18624" title="Sammy Baugh" label="Sammy Baugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q582850" start="18626" end="18644" title="Davey O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Davey O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198422" start="18646" end="18655" title="Jim Swink" label="Jim Swink"/>
<link wikidata="Q250725" start="18657" end="18666" title="Bob Lilly" label="Bob Lilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q537463" start="18668" end="18687" title="LaDainian Tomlinson" label="LaDainian Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q129605" start="18693" end="18704" title="Andy Dalton" label="Andy Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q858430" start="18799" end="18816" title="Big 12 Conference" label="Big 12 Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874620" start="18821" end="18834" title="Baylor–TCU football rivalry" label="The Revivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q812573" start="18840" end="18857" title="Baylor University" label="Baylor University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752504" start="19072" end="19088" title="TCU Horned Frogs" label="TCU Horned Frogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752542" start="19128" end="19166" title="SMU Mustangs" label="Southern Methodist University Mustangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="19222" end="19228" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870182" start="19296" end="19323" title="Battle for the Iron Skillet" label="Battle for the Iron Skillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258910" start="19392" end="19401" title="frog leg" label="Frog Legs"/>
<link wikidata="Q115376" start="19867" end="19891" title="West Virginia University" label="West Virginia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q891082" start="20126" end="20148" title="Boise State University" label="Boise State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q895447" start="20235" end="20258" title="BCS Buster" label="&amp;quot;BCS Busters&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q895447" start="20477" end="20480" title="Bowl Championship Series" label="BCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826532" start="20760" end="20788" title="Power Five conferences" label="&amp;quot;Power Conference&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q56293230" start="20905" end="20942" title="Group of Five conferences" label="&amp;quot;Group of Five&amp;quot; Conferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599483" start="20966" end="20979" title="Stanley Block" label="Stanley Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q123913201" start="21012" end="21037" title="Teresa Abi-Nader Dahlberg" label="Teresa Abi-Nader Dahlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707653" start="21089" end="21101" title="Lydia Mackay" label="Lydia Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q130617043" start="21162" end="21176" title="David Moessner" label="David Moessner"/>
<link wikidata="Q51224510" start="21226" end="21239" title="Gene A. Smith" label="Gene A. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q23664269" start="21252" end="21271" title="Steven E. Woodworth" label="Steven E. Woodworth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384864" wikidata="Q2092954" url="?curid=384864" title="Question (character)">
<text>The Question is a name used by several fictional characters appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics. Created by Steve Ditko, the Question first appeared in Charlton Comics&#x27; &quot;Blue Beetle&quot; #1 (June 1967), and was acquired by DC Comics in the early 1980s and incorporated into the DC Universe.

The Question&#x27;s secret identity was originally Vic Sage, later retconned as Charles Victor Szasz. However, after the events of the 2006–2007 miniseries &quot;52&quot;, Sage&#x27;s protégé [[Renee Montoya]] took up his mantle and became his successor. Following The New 52 relaunch, Question was reintroduced as an unknown mystical entity and Sage as a government agent, before being restored to his traditional detective persona and name after the events of DC Rebirth.

As conceived by Ditko, the Question was an adherent of Objectivism during his career as a Charlton hero, much like Ditko&#x27;s earlier creation, Mr. A. In the 1987–1990 solo series from DC, the character developed a Zen-like philosophy. Since then, various writers have added their own philosophical stances to the Question.

The Vic Sage incarnation of Question has appeared in various media outside comics, including television series and films. Jeffrey Combs, Nicholas Guest, and David Kaye have voiced the character in animation.

==Publication history==
In 1967, Steve Ditko created the character of Mr. A as an undiluted expression of his values, ethics and Objectivist philosophy. Later that year, Ditko was hired by Charlton Comics to revive their superhero character Blue Beetle. Due to their below-average per-page payment rates to artists, Charlton gave more creative freedom to artists who pursued offbeat or idiosyncratic ideas. Ditko created the Question as a less-radical version of Mr. A who could be acceptable to the Comics Code Authority. The character was included as a back-pages feature in the new &quot;Blue Beetle&quot; comic book.

However, Charlton discontinued its &quot;action hero&quot; line in December 1967 after only four issues of &quot;Blue Beetle&quot; had been published. A three-part Question story, which Ditko had already penciled, appeared in the one-shot comic book &quot;Mysterious Suspense&quot; (October 1968). The fifth and final issue of &quot;Blue Beetle&quot;, featuring the Question, was published in November of the same year. In 1985, after DC Comics had acquired the right to Charlton&#x27;s characters, the Question reappeared in &quot;Crisis on Infinite Earths&quot;. In February 1987, DC launched a new &quot;The Question&quot; comic book, scripted by Dennis O&#x27;Neil and penciled by Denys Cowan. This series, which ran for 36 regular issues and two annuals, was replaced in September 1990 by &quot;The Question Quarterly&quot;, which ran for five issues. The Question has since then remained a recurring character of the DC Universe. A six-issue &quot;The Question&quot; limited series was published by DC in 2005. A four-issue limited series titled &quot;The Question: The Deaths of Vic Sage&quot; was published under the DC Black Label imprint beginning in 2019, written by Jeff Lemire and penciled by Cowen and covers by Bill Sienkiewicz.

Aside from appearing in his own titles, The Question has appeared sporadically in DC comics and media and has undergone several reboots.

==Fictional character biography==
===Charlton Comics===
Based in Hub City, Vic Sage made his mark as an outspoken and aggressive investigative journalist. Not long after starting his TV appearances, he began to investigate Dr. Arby Twain.

Sage was approached by Aristotle Rodor, his former professor, currently a scientist. Rodor told Sage about an artificial skin he had co-developed with Dr. Twain called Pseudoderm. Pseudoderm was intended to work as an applied skin-like bandage with the help of a bonding gas, but it had unforeseen toxicity which was sometimes fatal when applied to open wounds. Rodor and Twain agreed to abandon the project and parted ways, but Professor Rodor discovered that Dr. Twain had decided to proceed with an illegal sale of the invention to Third World nations, regardless of the risk to human health.

Sage resolved to stop him but had no way of going after Dr. Twain without exposing himself. Rodor suggested that Sage use a mask made of Pseudoderm to cover his famous features. Armed with information, and more importantly a disguise, Sage eventually caught up with Dr. Twain, stopping the transaction and extracting a confession, then leaving Twain bound in Pseudoderm. On television, Sage reported on Dr. Twain&#x27;s illegal activities.

Sage decided that this new identity would be useful for future investigations, and partnered with Professor Rodor, who supplied the Pseudoderm and eventually modified the bonding gas to change the color of Sage&#x27;s hair and clothing. The two men became good friends, with Sage affectionately referring to Rodor as &quot;Tot&quot;.

Compared to other superhero characters of the Silver Age of Comic Books, The Question was more ruthless in his methods. For example, when he was fighting some criminals in a sewer and knocked them into a deep and fast-moving water flow, he declined to pull them out despite their real danger of drowning. Instead, he left to notify the police to retrieve them in case they survived the ordeal.

The Question&#x27;s most frequent foe was Max Bine, a.k.a. Banshee. Introduced in &quot;Blue Beetle&quot; (vol. 4) #2 (August 1967), Bine was the apprentice of a circus performer named the Flying Dundo. After designing a cape that enabled the wearer to fly, Dundo was slain by his pupil and Max Bine became the costumed Banshee, using his mentor&#x27;s invention to terrorize towns he crossed. The Banshee met his match when he reached Crown City and sparred with the Question on several occasions.

The Question briefly appeared alongside his fellow Charlton &quot;Action Heroes&quot; as part of the Sentinels of Justice published by AC Comics.

===DC Comics===
The Charlton characters were acquired by DC Comics while the former company was in decline in 1983. The Question appeared briefly in 1985&#x27;s &quot;Crisis On Infinite Earths&quot; and in a three-issue arc of DC&#x27;s Blue Beetle revival.

====O&#x27;Neil series====

DC gave the Question his own solo series in 1987, written by Dennis O&#x27;Neil and primarily drawn by Denys Cowan. The series was published for 36 issues, two annuals, and five &quot;Quarterly&quot; specials. In &quot;The Question&quot; #1, the Question was defeated in personal combat, first by the martial arts mercenary Lady Shiva. He was then beaten severely by the villain&#x27;s hired thugs, shot in the head with a pellet gun, and thrown into the river to drown. Lady Shiva then rescued him and gave him directions to meet wheelchair-bound Richard Dragon as soon as he recovered enough to get out of bed. Once there, Sage learned both martial arts and eastern philosophy. When he returned to the city, he resumed his journalist and superhero careers with adventures that tended to illustrate various philosophic points. To further illustrate those ideas, Dennis O&#x27;Neil had a reading recommendation in the letters page of each issue.

In the O&#x27;Neil series, Vic Sage is an investigative reporter for the news station KBEL in Hub City. He uses the identity of the Question to get the answers his civilian identity cannot. Unlike other vigilante superheroes, O&#x27;Neil&#x27;s Question is primarily focused on the politics of his city, and rather than hunting down the perpetrators of petty theft, he tends to fight the corrupt government of Hub City. O&#x27;Neil&#x27;s Hub City is noted as being &quot;synonymous with venality, corruption, and violence&quot;, perhaps even surpassing Gotham City as the most dismal city in the DC Universe-version of the US.

For the majority of the series, Vic Sage is covertly assisting the good-hearted Myra Fermin to win the seat of Hub City Mayor. His interest in Myra extends beyond admiration, as the two shared a relationship before his near-death experience with Lady Shiva and his training under Richard Dragon. Upon his return, he discovers she has married the corrupt drunkard and mayor of Hub City, Wesley Fermin. Despite Myra&#x27;s losing the election by one vote, she becomes mayor when her competition is found dead as a result of what is called &quot;the worst tornado in history&quot;. At her victory speech, her husband Wesley shoots her for supporting what he believes to be Communist beliefs, putting her into a coma and sending Hub City further into chaos with no government and no police force. Sage dons the guise of the Question, acting as the city&#x27;s only form of justice for a short while before the mayor wakes from her coma. Gang warfare in the weeks following the election leads Sage to Lady Shiva, first as a combatant, and then enlisting her help as an ally of sorts to get in a position to talk to the gang leaders. As Myra adjusts into her role as mayor of Hub City, she and Sage begin to rekindle their relationship, though Myra tells Sage she will not act on her feelings until she leaves office. Despite their long-term friendship, she never connects that Sage and &quot;the man without a face&quot; are one and the same until the end of his time at Hub City.

O&#x27;Neil&#x27;s Question is conflicted on how far to go in enforcing justice, often feeling tempted to kill. He resists this temptation during his time in Hub City, realizing that part of his desire to go so far is just to see what it feels like to take a life. His relationship with his mentor, Aristotle Rodor, is one of many things that keep him from going over the edge and back towards the darkness he had shown in his youth on the streets of Hub City.

Eventually, during a hallucinogenic trip, his subconscious tells him through images of his mother that he has to leave Hub City to ever be able to live happily. This viewpoint is bolstered by the societal collapse of the city. Around the same time, Richard Dragon comes to see Vic, as Richard has sensed that Vic is on the verge of a major turning point in his life, and convinces Vic that living in Hub City is killing him. In an agreement with Richard, Lady Shiva arrives with a helicopter to usher The Question and Aristotle Rodor away, at which point she decides to stay in Hub City and embrace the chaos. Vic nearly convinces Myra to come with him and escape the chaos of the city. Myra remembers the people of the city who need her, mainly the children. She leaves Jackie, her mentally handicapped daughter, in Sage&#x27;s care and goes back to do what she can.

After leaving Hub City, Vic takes Jackie with him to South America, hoping to rid himself of his &quot;No Face&quot; alter ego and find a land free of the clutter and corruption that filled Hub City. However, Vic quickly gets drawn into a drug war which ultimately forces him to kill to save Jackie&#x27;s life.

Jackie becomes ill and Sage returns with her to Hub City. Despite medical care, Jackie dies.

&quot;The Question&quot; Annual #2 retroactively altered the character&#x27;s origin by revealing that Sage was an orphan who was left on the steps of a Catholic church as a baby. He was named Charles Victor Szasz by the nuns who found him, and later changed his name to Vic Sage after becoming a television reporter. As a youth he developed a reputation as a troublemaker, and prided himself on defiantly enduring the physical abuse of the orphanage where he was housed. He eventually managed to get into college where he studied journalism, but his higher learning did not mellow his violent tendencies, such as when he beat up his pusher for giving him LSD which caused the frightening experience of doubting his own senses under its influence.

====Minor Appearances====
After O&#x27;Neil&#x27;s series, the Question guest starred in various other DC titles. He appeared as a main character in the 1991 &quot;The Brave and the Bold&quot; mini-series together with Green Arrow and John Butcher fighting against a terrorist organization and a radical Native American movement, as well as being a member of L.A.W. (Living Assault Weapons) in 1999 together with other Charlton Comics characters Blue Beetle, Judomaster, Captain Atom, Peacemaker, Nightshade, and Sarge Steel against a godlike villain known as the Avatar. He also teamed up with antihero Azrael against a former Question villain in a story created again by O&#x27;Neil and Cowan.

During the &quot;Cry for Blood&quot; Huntress arc and other smaller appearances surrounding it, the Question was active in Gotham City, during which time he expressed an interest in Huntress, both romantically and in her development as a crimefighter. In an attempt to help her find peace, he takes her to his old mentor to undergo the same training he himself underwent in the O&#x27;Neil series but is frustrated by Huntress&#x27; continued acceptance of killing as a solution.

Huntress later worked closely with Sage&#x27;s successor as the Question, Renee Montoya, and is saddened to hear of Sage&#x27;s death. She credits him with &quot;saving her from herself&quot;, and misses him.

====Veitch miniseries====
The 2005 &quot;Question&quot; mini-series, authored by Rick Veitch, reimagines the character as a self-taught urban shaman whose brutal and at times lethal treatment of enemies arises from a warrior ethos, rather than Objectivist philosophy. The Question &quot;walks in two worlds&quot; when sent into visionary trances by Rodor&#x27;s gas, now retconned as a hallucinogen. In these trances, cities (Chicago, where he is a TV anchor, and then Metropolis, where the series takes him) &quot;speak&quot; to him through visual coincidences and overheard snatches of street conversation. Regarding himself as a spiritual warrior, he is now comfortable killing his enemies when this seems useful and poetically just. He uses his skills and his alternative moral code first to detect and then to foil a plot by Lex Luthor not only to assassinate Superman (using chi energy which Sage can detect) but to prevent his return from the dead (which Superman had recently achieved following his death in DC&#x27;s notorious Doomsday event) by damning his soul upon death. Sage is revealed to have a lifelong infatuation with fellow journalist Lois Lane, which he does not divulge to her. Superman accepts the Question&#x27;s visionary drug use, and expresses gratitude for his assistance, but forces him to leave the city after several unheeded warnings about killing, and also after noticing Sage&#x27;s attraction to Lois Lane.

====&quot;52&quot;====
In &quot;52&quot;, Sage recruits and trains Renee Montoya as his replacement before dying of lung cancer. In this incarnation, he is wry, cheerful, and avuncular, although still enigmatic. He displays no discernible philosophical commitments, aside from a determination to recruit Montoya and to have her decide who she is and who she will become. In &quot;Blackest Night&quot;, Sage temporarily returns as a Black Lantern.

====The New 52====
In September 2011, The New 52 rebooted DC&#x27;s continuity. In the new timeline, two versions of Vic Sage exist on the main New 52 DC Universe Earth.

====Trinity of Sin Question====
The first version of the New 52 Question was introduced in &quot;New 52: FCBD Special Edition&quot;. He&#x27;s a mysterious man that was teleported from an unknown location in time and space, along with Pandora and Judas Iscariot (The Phantom Stranger), to stand trial for unstated crimes against humanity. Nothing is known of Question&#x27;s true identity or past or crimes, though he claimed to have thousands of followers who he claimed would avenge him. His judges, the first seven wizards (later known as the Quintessence) who harnessed magic on Earth, punished Question by erasing his face, rendering him blind and mute. They then erased his memory and teleported him to the 21st century to spend the rest of his existence tormented by his disfigurement, forgotten, and not knowing who he was.

This version of Question resurfaced during the Trinity of Sin storyline, where he is shown investigating the Secret Society of Super-Villains. Having regained his ability to speak and see, this version of Question (initially) speaks only in questions and believes that his true identity can be restored if he can stop the Secret Society and its backers, Crime Syndicate of America members Outsider (Earth-3&#x27;s Alfred Pennyworth) and triple agent Atomica.

When Atomica manipulates Superman into murdering Doctor Light by triggering his heat vision power by stabbing his brain with a sliver of kryptonite, Question breaks into the facility where Superman is being held. Using a gas mask-based setup similar to the one used by Nemesis, Question impersonates Steve Trevor and frees Superman, while presenting a lead towards who caused Superman to kill Doctor Light. The lead turns out to be a dead end, but it places Question in with the various Justice League factions when Pandora attempts to seek their help to open the skull-shaped box that various forces are coveting.

During the battle between the League factions that ensues for the box, Pandora rejects Question&#x27;s desire to open the box and possibly learn his true identity. She implies that Question would be a threat to all if he ever had his memory and identity restored.

The battle between the various Leagues ends when Atomica reveals her true nature and helps Outsider open the skull box, which in truth was a pocket dimension containing the rest of the Crime Syndicate. Freed, the Crime Syndicate imprisoned this version of the Question along with the bulk of the Justice League, Justice League of America, and Justice League Dark inside the Firestorm matrix. Question and the rest of the League were freed once the Crime Syndicate and Secret Society were defeated by a group of villains united by Lex Luthor.

The character was then featured in the six-part mini-series &quot;Trinity of Sin&quot;, but only featured in a supporting role, where he was constantly complaining about how Pandora and Phantom Stranger did not care about helping him find out his true identity. This version of the Question was last seen in &quot;Trinity of Sin&quot; #6, the final issue of the series and his true identity was later revealed to be Narcissus by Geoff Johns.

====Suicide Squad Vic Sage====
A second version of the Question appeared in the New 52&#x27;s &quot;Suicide Squad&quot; (vol. 5) #1, with no ties to the version of the Question seen in &quot;Trinity War&quot; or &quot;Trinity of Sin&quot;. This version is Vic Sage, a government agent recruited from the private sector to co-run the Suicide Squad with Amanda Waller. Sage is a corrupt, amoral bureaucrat who sees the Suicide Squad serving as a go-to sabotage group; engaging in wetwork assignments against foreign corporate interests under the guise of regular super-villain carnage. He also seeks to &quot;improve&quot; the group; dismissive of Harley Quinn and Deadshot, he recruits Deathstroke and Joker&#x27;s Daughter as their replacements. He also recruits Black Manta into the group too and alters his helmet so that every person he sees is Aquaman to motivate him into being a more prolific killer.

Deathstroke and Joker&#x27;s Daughter betray the team on their first mission headed by both Sage and Waller. Sage panics and attempts to kill the entire team to prevent the mutiny from exposing the Squad. Waller prevents this from happening and in response to his actions, Waller has Sage banished from having any active say over mission and membership selection. Sage responds by agreeing to work with a corrupt multi-national corporation, which seeks to exploit the new objectives of the team to eliminate business rivals and whistleblowers. Sage arranges for Waller to be demoted to field commander, forcing Waller and the team to go AWOL to get proof of Sage and his corporate backers&#x27; agenda. In the end, Waller agrees to give the multi-national corporation a pass in exchange for them betraying their patsy. Vic Sage is then arrested, but not before he murders Waller&#x27;s assistant who tries to stop Sage from killing Waller after learning his corporate allies sold him out to save themselves.

====DC Rebirth/DC Universe====
Following &quot;Infinite Frontier&quot; after the event &quot;Doomsday Clock&quot;, Vic Sage as Question was re-established with his previous character history and a member of the Suicide Squad and later Checkmate. The two heroes who go by the name The Question were reintroduced in the &quot;Event Leviathan&quot; miniseries by Brian Michael Bendis. Lois Lane created two detective teams to investigate the major suspects for the secret identity of a new villain, codename Leviathan. The first one contained Vic Sage, the original Question; the second, secret team, was later revealed to be headed up by the second Question, Renee Montoya. Sage and Montoya have a heartfelt reunion in &quot;Lois Lane #3&quot;.

The Question and Batman also had a team-up in &quot;Batman: Urban Legends #14&quot;. In this story, the Question asked the assistance of Batman to investigate a conspiracy theory in Gotham City relating to Wayne Enterprises. The two had a brief struggle after the Question began framing Bruce Wayne of financial fraud, forcing the Batman to reveal his secret identity to the Question. The story ends with the Question revealing that he planned the meeting to prove Wayne was Batman.

==Powers and abilities==
The Question is an almost superhuman vigilante armed with his iconic pseudoderm mask, fedora and trench coat. The pseudoderm mask gives the Question the appearance of someone without a face, which is useful for scaring people, has slight protection against damages, and moldable enough for use in disguises. The Question is also armed with a binary gas that he can summon from his belt, gloves, or calling cards, which can change the appearance of his hair and costume, be used as a smokescreen, and amplify his shamanistic powers.

The Question is also a talented and intuitive detective, honed by years of experience as an investigative journalist. Though shown not to be on par with Batman, the Question has solved mysteries, infiltrated enemy territory, and used his intellect to outwit master criminals like the Riddler. Throughout the years, beginning with Dennis O&#x27;Neil and further explored by Rick Veitch, the Question has possessed mystical and supernatural abilities. He can mentally enhance the healing of injuries, sense danger, block pain, communicate with spirits, locate enemies and create astral projections. All of these abilities allow the Question to face powerful and superhuman opponents.

The &quot;New 52&quot; version possesses the power of teleportation.

==Philosophies==
The Question has become iconic in comic books for having a long history of being incorporated with various philosophical stances, courtesy of the various writers who wrote him. When Steve Ditko created him in the 1960s, he used the Question to convey his objectivist beliefs, a philosophy from Ayn Rand that states that morality should be objective. This made the Question an uncompromising and merciless vigilante. When Dennis O&#x27;Neil began writing the character in the 80s, he rewrote the Question, mellowing him down and changing him from being a brutal superhero to one who followed Zen Buddhism. O&#x27;Neil was knowledgeable of Eastern philosophy from reading literature such as &quot;Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance&quot; and he wrote the Question to be a more meditative and world-weary hero.

The Question continued to slide in between violence and meditation until Rick Veitch gave the Question a more mystical, urban shamanistic characterization in 2005. Veitch had already used magic and occultism during his tenure on &quot;Swamp Thing&quot;, where in one issue, he referenced French journalists Pauwels and Bergier&#x27;s 1960 occult treatise, &quot;The Morning of the Magicians&quot;. He incorporated those characteristics in the Question. At one point in the comic, Veitch also referenced Frederich Nietzsche&#x27;s &quot;Übermensch&quot;. When Greg Rucka wrote the character in the series &quot;52&quot;, he revised Sage&#x27;s characterisation, giving him a more positivist but fatalistic outlook and a jovial personality.

Outside the canon DC Comics, different mediums and series have different interpretations and portrayals of the character. &quot;Justice League Unlimited&quot; portrays the Question as a paranoid and cynical conspiracy theorist. This portrayal became a hit amongst fans, becoming a part of the canonicity of the character later on in &quot;Batman: Urban Legends #14&quot;. Frank Miller wrote a version of the character in 2001 who was a libertarian and anti-authoritarian spokesperson, dwelling as well into conspiracies, manifestos, and technophobia.

==Reception==
Throughout his long history, the Question has been received well by both critics and consumers. Jamie Lovett from &quot;Comic Book&quot; ranked the character #3 in his &quot;5 Greatest Detectives In Comics&quot;, stating, &quot;Every mystery begins by asking the question, and no one knows that better than the Question himself.&quot; Carl Hannigan from &quot;Vocal&quot; ranked the character and his comics at #1 in his &quot;Top 5 Most Unique Superhero Comics You&#x27;ve Never Heard Of&quot;, stating that his varying philosophies is a &quot;character trait [that] makes the Question so special when it comes to comic book history. Even with all the different philosophies and personalities the Question went through in his history, the one thing that remained consistent is his ability to mold himself into whatever the writers want him to be.&quot;

Timothy Donohoo from &quot;Comic Book Resources&quot; considered the character to be the most underrated street-level character in DC Comics, stating that he was more grounded and realistic than others of his kind like Batman and Green Arrow, and that &quot;Sage is also unique among comic book heroes in that he is meant to embody a certain mindset or philosophy.&quot; Ewan Peterson from &quot;What Culture&quot; praised O&#x27;Neil&#x27;s run, saying &quot;[his] and Cowan&#x27;s reappraisal of the classic Steve Ditko creation ranks among the finest DC works of all time, and one more than deserving of the kind of status more commonly associated with the likes of Frank Miller&#x27;s Daredevil, O&#x27;Neil and Neal Adams&#x27; Batman, or even their run on Green Arrow too.&quot;

==Homages==
* Rorschach: Alan Moore&#x27;s comic book series &quot;Watchmen&quot; was originally planned to use a number of Charlton Comics characters, including the Question. When DC, the owner of the characters, found out that he intended to kill the Question, along with a number of the other characters, he was asked to make new characters. The Question became Rorschach.
** In &quot;The Question&quot; #17, Vic picks up a copy of &quot;Watchmen&quot; to read on a trip and initially sees Rorschach as being quite cool. After Vic is beaten up trying to emulate Rorschach&#x27;s brutal style of justice, he concludes that &quot;Rorschach sucks&quot;.
* The Question was featured in Frank Miller&#x27;s &quot;&quot; as a libertarian, anti-government conspirator. Frank Miller&#x27;s interpretation of Sage, as a nod to Ditko and Alan Moore, is Randian and preachy, at one point going on television for a series of humorous &quot;Crossfire&quot;-style exchanges with the Emerald Archer, Green Arrow, who is often portrayed as a liberal progressive. He is also shown as a technophobe, monitoring the dark conspiracy Batman and his allies must face, while writing on an old-fashioned typewriter.
* The Fact: In volume 2, issue #42, during Grant Morrison&#x27;s run of &quot;The Doom Patrol&quot;, Flex Mentallo describes a number of his former teammates. Among them was the Fact, whose appearance and name recall those of the Question. He reappears in the &quot;Flex Mentallo&quot; miniseries.

===52 Multiverse===
In the final issue of &quot;52&quot; (2007), a new DC Multiverse is revealed, originally consisting of 52 alternate realities, including a new &quot;Earth-4&quot;. While this new world resembles the pre-Crisis Earth-Four, including unnamed characters who look like the Question and the Charlton characters, writer Grant Morrison has stated this is not the pre-Crisis Earth-Four. Describing the conception of Earth-4, Grant Morrison alluded that its interpretation of Vic Sage would resemble the classic Charlton incarnation, with tones borrowed from Rorschach and &quot;Watchmen&quot;. A number of other alternate universes in the &quot;52&quot; Multiverse may also contain versions of the Question from DC Comics previous Elseworlds stories or from variant &quot;themed&quot; universes, such as the gender-reversed world of Earth-11.

In Grant Morrison&#x27;s &quot;Multiversity&quot; series, the Vic Sage/Question is one of the core protagonists in Pax Americana, an issue of that limited series set in the New 52&#x27;s Earth 4 continuity, along with the Blue Beetle, Peacemaker, Nightshade, and Captain Atom.

On Earth-9, &quot;The Question&quot; is the name of a global surveillance network.

==Other versions==
* In the alternate timeline of &quot;Flashpoint&quot;, Question is a member of the Resistance.
* An alternate Question appeared in the four-issue limited series titled &quot;The Question: The Deaths of Vic Sage&quot; published under the DC Black Label imprint beginning in 2019, written by Jeff Lemire and penciled by Denys Cowen and covers by Bill Sienkiewicz.

==In other media==
===Television===
* The Question appears in &quot;Justice League Unlimited&quot;, voiced by Jeffrey Combs. This version is a data broker for the Justice League and a paranoid conspiracy theorist who is distrusted and ridiculed by other League members. He later enters a relationship with ex-Leaguer Huntress while helping her seek revenge on Steven Mandragora in exchange for her help in investigating Project Cadmus.
* The Question appears in &quot;&quot;, voiced by Nicholas Guest.
* The Question was intended to appear in an Arrowverse series until Marc Guggenheim revealed in December 2017 that DC Films has plans for the character, preventing The CW from using him.

===Film===
* The Question appears in &quot;Scooby-Doo! &amp; Batman: The Brave and the Bold&quot;, voiced again by Jeffrey Combs. This version is a member of the Mystery Analysts of Gotham, a detectives-only club formed by Batman.
* The Question appears in &quot;DC Showcase: Blue Beetle&quot;, voiced by David Kaye.
* The Question appears in &quot;Justice League: Crisis on Infinite Earths&quot;, voiced again by David Kaye.&quot;&quot; Following the destruction of the multiverse, he refuses to be reborn in the Monoverse, choosing to die rather than live in a &quot;false&quot; universe.

===Video games===
* The Question appears as a playable character in &quot;Lego Batman 3: Beyond Gotham&quot;, voiced by Liam O&#x27;Brien.
* The Question appears as a character summon in &quot;Scribblenauts Unmasked: A DC Comics Adventure&quot;.
* Vic Sage appears in &quot;&quot;, voiced by David Dastmalchian.

==Collected editions==
The Steve Ditko series of The Question is featured in a hardback edition:
* &quot;Action Heroes Archives&quot;, Vol. 2 (DC Archives Edition) by Steve Ditko (author, illustrator); hardcover: 384 pages; publisher: DC Comics, 2007 ()

The Question&#x27;s 1980s series has been collected into different editions:
* &quot;The Question vol. 1: Zen and Violence&quot; (collects &quot;The Question&quot; #1–6, 176 pages, softcover, October 2007, )
* &quot;The Question vol. 2: Poisoned Ground&quot; (collects &quot;The Question&quot; #7–12, 176 pages, softcover, May 2008, )
* &quot;The Question vol. 3: Epitaph for a Hero&quot; (collects &quot;The Question&quot; #13–18, 176 pages, softcover, November 2008, )
* &quot;The Question vol. 4: Welcome to Oz&quot; (collects &quot;The Question&quot; #19–24, 176 pages, softcover, April 2009, )
* &quot;The Question vol. 5: Riddles&quot; (collects &quot;The Question&quot; #25–30)
* &quot;The Question vol. 6: Peacemaker&quot; (collects &quot;The Question&quot; #31–36, 160 pages, softcover, May 2010)
* &quot;The Question by Dennis O&#x27;Neil and Denys Cowan Omnibus Vol 1&quot; HC (collects &quot;The Question&quot; #1-27, &quot;Green Arrow Annual&quot; #1, &quot;The Question Annual&quot; #1, &quot;Detective Comics&quot; Annual #1, 952 pages, hardcover, June 2022, )
* &quot;The Question by Dennis O&#x27;Neil and Denys Cowan Omnibus Vol 2&quot; HC (collects &quot;The Question&quot; #28-36, &quot;Azrael Plus&quot; #1, &quot;Green Arrow Annual&quot; #2-3, &quot;Question Quarterly&quot; #1-5, &quot;Showcase &#x27;95&quot; #3, &quot;The Brave and the Bold&quot; #1-6, &quot;The Question Annual&quot; #2, &quot;The Question Returns&quot; #1, &quot;Who&#x27;s Who&quot; #12, 872 pages, hardcover, November 2023, )

Collections featuring the Renee Montoya Question:
* &quot;The Question: Five Books of Blood&quot; (collects &quot;Crime Bible: The Five Lessons of Blood&quot; (2007–2008) #1–5, 128 pages, hardcover, June 2008, )
* &quot;The Question: Pipeline&quot; (collects &quot;Detective Comics&quot; #854–863, 128 pages, softcover, February 2011, )

==References==
==External links==
* 
*Question at Don Markstein&#x27;s Toonopedia. Archived from the original on November 4, 2016
* International Catalog of Superheroes entry on the Question
* Article on the history/legacy of the Question from the Comics 101 article series by Scott Tipton.
* Alan Moore interview at TwoMorrows that discusses (among other things) the Question, Steve Ditko, and Charlton Comics.
* The Question&#x27;s secret origin on dccomics.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2092954" start="0" end="12" title="Question (character)" label="The Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253" start="39" end="48" title="fictional" label="fictional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114502" start="73" end="93" title="American comic books" label="American comic books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="107" end="116" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q355652" start="129" end="140" title="Steve Ditko" label="Steve Ditko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279731" start="173" end="188" title="Charlton Comics" label="Charlton Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q885626" start="201" end="212" title="Blue Beetle" label="Blue Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152150" start="310" end="321" title="DC Universe" label="DC Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092954" start="375" end="383" title="Question (character)" label="Vic Sage"/>
<link wikidata="Q517361" start="391" end="400" title="Retroactive continuity" label="retconned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092954" start="404" end="424" title="Question (character)" label="Charles Victor Szasz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634704" start="486" end="488" title="52 (comics)" label="52"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092954" start="516" end="533" title="Question (character)" label="[[Renee Montoya]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636082" start="589" end="599" title="The New 52" label="The New 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q179256" start="650" end="665" title="Narcissus (mythology)" label="mystical entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q23647053" start="786" end="796" title="DC Rebirth" label="DC Rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q74950" start="854" end="865" title="Objectivism" label="Objectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152028" start="945" end="950" title="Mr. A" label="Mr. A"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="1016" end="1019" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q452288" start="1248" end="1261" title="Jeffrey Combs" label="Jeffrey Combs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984875" start="1263" end="1277" title="Nicholas Guest" label="Nicholas Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018199" start="1283" end="1293" title="David Kaye (voice actor)" label="David Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q355652" start="1368" end="1379" title="Steve Ditko" label="Steve Ditko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152028" start="1405" end="1410" title="Mr. A" label="Mr. A"/>
<link wikidata="Q74950" start="1464" end="1475" title="Objectivism" label="Objectivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279731" start="1524" end="1539" title="Charlton Comics" label="Charlton Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q885626" start="1576" end="1587" title="Blue Beetle" label="Blue Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114564" start="1835" end="1856" title="Comics Code Authority" label="Comics Code Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="2392" end="2401" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q522623" start="2489" end="2514" title="Crisis on Infinite Earths" label="Crisis on Infinite Earths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189414" start="2607" end="2625" title="Dennis O&amp;#x27;Neil" label="Dennis O&amp;#x27;Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259848" start="2642" end="2653" title="Denys Cowan" label="Denys Cowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152150" start="2880" end="2891" title="DC Universe" label="DC Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276653" start="3082" end="3096" title="DC Black Label" label="DC Black Label"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686329" start="3135" end="3146" title="Jeff Lemire" label="Jeff Lemire"/>
<link wikidata="Q862461" start="3183" end="3199" title="Bill Sienkiewicz" label="Bill Sienkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q430544" start="4999" end="5024" title="Silver Age of Comic Books" label="Silver Age of Comic Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q885626" start="5436" end="5447" title="Blue Beetle" label="Blue Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955466" start="5949" end="5969" title="Sentinels of Justice" label="Sentinels of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600597" start="5983" end="5992" title="AC Comics" label="AC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q522623" start="6162" end="6187" title="Crisis On Infinite Earths" label="Crisis On Infinite Earths"/>
<link wikidata="Q885626" start="6232" end="6243" title="Blue Beetle" label="Blue Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189414" start="6343" end="6361" title="Dennis O&amp;#x27;Neil" label="Dennis O&amp;#x27;Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259848" start="6385" end="6396" title="Denys Cowan" label="Denys Cowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825487" start="6606" end="6616" title="Lady Shiva" label="Lady Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934793" start="6830" end="6844" title="Richard Dragon, Kung Fu Master" label="Richard Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q307043" start="6942" end="6960" title="eastern philosophy" label="eastern philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q732858" start="7783" end="7794" title="Gotham City" label="Gotham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152150" start="7826" end="7837" title="DC Universe" label="DC Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q848369" start="9843" end="9855" title="subconscious" label="subconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q517361" start="11108" end="11129" title="retcon" label="retroactively altered"/>
<link wikidata="Q688982" start="11986" end="12008" title="The Brave and the Bold" label="The Brave and the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q611993" start="12041" end="12052" title="Green Arrow" label="Green Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q465140" start="12118" end="12150" title="American Indian Movement" label="radical Native American movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820149" start="12181" end="12187" title="L.A.W. (comics)" label="L.A.W."/>
<link wikidata="Q2279731" start="12241" end="12256" title="Charlton Comics" label="Charlton Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765094" start="12268" end="12279" title="Ted Kord" label="Blue Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q366881" start="12281" end="12291" title="Judomaster" label="Judomaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q514912" start="12293" end="12305" title="Captain Atom" label="Captain Atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q838258" start="12307" end="12317" title="Peacemaker (character)" label="Peacemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876803" start="12319" end="12329" title="Nightshade (DC Comics)" label="Nightshade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3950546" start="12335" end="12346" title="Sarge Steel" label="Sarge Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q794106" start="12426" end="12432" title="Azrael (DC Comics)" label="Azrael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723547" start="12556" end="12564" title="Huntress (DC Comics)" label="Huntress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431609" start="13291" end="13302" title="Rick Veitch" label="Rick Veitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="13352" end="13358" title="shaman" label="shaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q517361" start="13581" end="13587" title="retcon" label="retcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="13636" end="13643" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474926" start="13679" end="13689" title="Metropolis (comics)" label="Metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q694790" start="14040" end="14050" title="Lex Luthor" label="Lex Luthor"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="14075" end="14083" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q202742" start="14091" end="14094" title="Qi" label="chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q126680" start="14246" end="14254" title="Doomsday (comics)" label="Doomsday"/>
<link wikidata="Q845922" start="14365" end="14374" title="Lois Lane" label="Lois Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634704" start="14685" end="14687" title="52 (comics)" label="52"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500238" start="14720" end="14733" title="Renee Montoya" label="Renee Montoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443912" start="15033" end="15047" title="Blackest Night" label="Blackest Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648096" start="15085" end="15098" title="Black Lantern" label="Black Lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636082" start="15139" end="15149" title="The New 52" label="The New 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543624" start="15377" end="15381" title="Free Comic Book Day" label="FCBD"/>
<link wikidata="Q81018" start="15519" end="15533" title="Judas Iscariot" label="Judas Iscariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785114" start="15535" end="15555" title="The Phantom Stranger" label="The Phantom Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15778" end="15797" title="Ganthet#The Quintessence" label="first seven wizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q600113" start="16214" end="16246" title="Secret Society of Super-Villains" label="Secret Society of Super-Villains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393736" start="16459" end="16485" title="Crime Syndicate of America" label="Crime Syndicate of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856301" start="16614" end="16626" title="Doctor Light (Arthur Light)" label="Doctor Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q421669" start="16702" end="16712" title="kryptonite" label="kryptonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991116" start="16834" end="16841" title="Nemesis (DC Comics)" label="Nemesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437734" start="16865" end="16877" title="Steve Trevor" label="Steve Trevor"/>
<link wikidata="Q735744" start="17742" end="17756" title="Justice League" label="Justice League"/>
<link wikidata="Q735744" start="17758" end="17783" title="Justice League of America" label="Justice League of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230093" start="17789" end="17808" title="Justice League Dark" label="Justice League Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q918145" start="17820" end="17836" title="Firestorm" label="Firestorm matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q179256" start="18405" end="18414" title="Narcissus (mythology)" label="Narcissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376074" start="18418" end="18429" title="Geoff Johns" label="Geoff Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q616136" start="18532" end="18545" title="Suicide Squad" label="Suicide Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994660" start="18784" end="18797" title="Amanda Waller" label="Amanda Waller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990199" start="18910" end="18917" title="wetwork" label="wetwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q511769" start="19095" end="19103" title="Deadshot" label="Deadshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181328" start="19117" end="19128" title="Deathstroke" label="Deathstroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547702" start="19133" end="19154" title="Joker&amp;#x27;s Daughter" label="Joker&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538991" start="19195" end="19206" title="Black Manta" label="Black Manta"/>
<link wikidata="Q623059" start="19280" end="19287" title="Aquaman" label="Aquaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q104882419" start="20396" end="20413" title="Infinite Frontier" label="Infinite Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q39073232" start="20442" end="20456" title="Doomsday Clock (comics)" label="Doomsday Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q429248" start="20584" end="20593" title="Checkmate (comics)" label="Checkmate"/>
<link wikidata="Q720012" start="20709" end="20729" title="Brian Michael Bendis" label="Brian Michael Bendis"/>
<link wikidata="Q657304" start="22000" end="22013" title="visiting card" label="calling cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q967352" start="22085" end="22096" title="Smoke bomb" label="smokescreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127717" start="22227" end="22251" title="investigative journalist" label="investigative journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="22288" end="22294" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q836789" start="22419" end="22426" title="Riddler" label="Riddler"/>
<link wikidata="Q204043" start="22872" end="22885" title="teleportation" label="teleportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="23012" end="23033" title="philosophy" label="philosophical stances"/>
<link wikidata="Q74950" start="23160" end="23171" title="objectivism" label="objectivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q132524" start="23199" end="23207" title="Ayn Rand" label="Ayn Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189414" start="23326" end="23344" title="Dennis O’Neil" label="Dennis O&amp;#x27;Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="23496" end="23508" title="Zen Buddhism" label="Zen Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q307043" start="23543" end="23561" title="Eastern philosophy" label="Eastern philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189446" start="23600" end="23641" title="Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance" label="Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431609" start="23794" end="23805" title="Rick Veitch" label="Rick Veitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900168" start="23841" end="23858" title="Urban shamanism" label="urban shamanistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="23919" end="23928" title="occultism" label="occultism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427625" start="23956" end="23967" title="Swamp Thing" label="Swamp Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="24224" end="24243" title="Frederich Nietzsche" label="Frederich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q43484" start="24257" end="24267" title="Übermensch" label="Übermensch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759151" start="24280" end="24290" title="Greg Rucka" label="Greg Rucka"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="24400" end="24410" title="positivism" label="positivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q29253" start="24415" end="24425" title="fatalism" label="fatalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669712" start="24589" end="24613" title="Justice League Unlimited" label="Justice League Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="24668" end="24687" title="conspiracy theorist" label="conspiracy theorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q207676" start="24833" end="24845" title="Frank Miller" label="Frank Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="24897" end="24908" title="libertarian" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030234" start="24913" end="24931" title="anti-authoritarian" label="anti-authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042900" start="24998" end="25010" title="technophobia" label="technophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939488" start="25387" end="25392" title="Voice Media Group" label="Vocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985197" start="25909" end="25929" title="Comic Book Resources" label="Comic Book Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q97274323" start="26278" end="26290" title="What Culture" label="What Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q327553" start="26571" end="26580" title="Daredevil (Marvel Comics character)" label="Daredevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346769" start="26682" end="26691" title="Rorschach (comics)" label="Rorschach"/>
<link wikidata="Q205739" start="26693" end="26703" title="Alan Moore" label="Alan Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="26711" end="26721" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q128444" start="26735" end="26743" title="Watchmen" label="Watchmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207676" start="27353" end="27365" title="Frank Miller (comics)" label="Frank Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q132524" start="27514" end="27518" title="Ayn Rand" label="Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188592" start="27599" end="27608" title="Crossfire (U.S. TV program)" label="Crossfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q611993" start="27656" end="27667" title="Green Arrow" label="Green Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q943047" start="27906" end="27920" title="Grant Morrison" label="Grant Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q664261" start="27945" end="27956" title="Doom Patrol" label="Doom Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746593" start="27964" end="27977" title="Flex Mentallo" label="Flex Mentallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746593" start="28129" end="28142" title="Flex Mentallo" label="Flex Mentallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634704" start="28210" end="28212" title="52 (comics)" label="52"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152142" start="28233" end="28246" title="DC Multiverse" label="DC Multiverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518097" start="28285" end="28307" title="Worlds of the 52 multiverse" label="52 alternate realities"/>
<link wikidata="Q522623" start="28381" end="28391" title="pre-Crisis" label="pre-Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q943047" start="28496" end="28510" title="Grant Morrison" label="Grant Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q194712" start="28905" end="28915" title="Elseworlds" label="Elseworlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q943047" start="29021" end="29035" title="Grant Morrison" label="Grant Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q17409116" start="29049" end="29061" title="Multiversity" label="Multiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636082" start="29191" end="29197" title="New 52" label="New 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q885626" start="29240" end="29251" title="Blue Beetle" label="Blue Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q838258" start="29253" end="29263" title="Peacemaker (character)" label="Peacemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876803" start="29265" end="29275" title="Nightshade (DC Comics)" label="Nightshade"/>
<link wikidata="Q514912" start="29281" end="29293" title="Captain Atom" label="Captain Atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682866" start="29299" end="29306" title="Tangent Comics" label="Earth-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465328" start="29436" end="29446" title="Flashpoint (comics)" label="Flashpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276653" start="29636" end="29650" title="DC Black Label" label="DC Black Label"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686329" start="29689" end="29700" title="Jeff Lemire" label="Jeff Lemire"/>
<link wikidata="Q862461" start="29743" end="29759" title="Bill Sienkiewicz" label="Bill Sienkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669712" start="29830" end="29854" title="Justice League Unlimited" label="Justice League Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q452288" start="29872" end="29885" title="Jeffrey Combs" label="Jeffrey Combs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418159" start="29905" end="29916" title="data broker" label="data broker"/>
<link wikidata="Q735744" start="29925" end="29939" title="Justice League" label="Justice League"/>
<link wikidata="Q114471" start="30079" end="30087" title="Huntress (Helena Bertinelli)" label="Huntress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642509" start="30182" end="30196" title="Project Cadmus" label="Project Cadmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984875" start="30248" end="30262" title="Nicholas Guest" label="Nicholas Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q113094863" start="30308" end="30318" title="Arrowverse" label="Arrowverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797964" start="30332" end="30347" title="Marc Guggenheim" label="Marc Guggenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="30428" end="30434" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30495" end="30543" title="Scooby-Doo! &amp;amp; Batman: The Brave and the Bold" label="Scooby-Doo! &amp;amp; Batman: The Brave and the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405799" start="30715" end="30726" title="DC Showcase" label="DC Showcase"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018199" start="30757" end="30767" title="David Kaye (voice actor)" label="David Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30801" end="30842" title="Justice League: Crisis on Infinite Earths" label="Justice League: Crisis on Infinite Earths"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31118" end="31146" title="Lego Batman 3: Beyond Gotham" label="Lego Batman 3: Beyond Gotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q908941" start="31164" end="31181" title="Liam O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Liam O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31237" end="31282" title="Scribblenauts Unmasked: A DC Comics Adventure" label="Scribblenauts Unmasked: A DC Comics Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203767" start="31336" end="31354" title="David Dastmalchian" label="David Dastmalchian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293067" start="33523" end="33554" title="Don Markstein&amp;#x27;s Toonopedia" label="Don Markstein&amp;#x27;s Toonopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q782994" start="33750" end="33762" title="Scott Tipton" label="Scott Tipton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384865" wikidata="Q1576091" url="?curid=384865" title="Miserere (Allegri)">
<text>Miserere (full title: Miserere mei, Deus, Latin for &quot;Have mercy on me, O God&quot;) is a setting of Psalm 51 (Psalm 50 in Septuagint numbering) by Italian composer Gregorio Allegri. It was composed during the reign of Pope Urban VIII, probably during the 1630s, for the exclusive use of the Sistine Chapel during the Tenebrae services of Holy Week, and its mystique was increased by unwritten performance traditions and ornamentation. It is written for three choirs, two of five and four voices respectively, with a third choir singing plainsong responses, each singing alternately and joining to sing the ending in one of the most recognised and enduring examples of polyphony, in this case in a 9-part rendition.

==History==
Composed around 1638, Allegri&#x27;s setting of the &quot;Miserere&quot; was amongst the falsobordone settings used by the choir of the Sistine Chapel during Holy Week liturgy, a practice dating back to at least 1514. At some point, several myths surrounding the piece came to the fore, stemming probably from the fact that the Renaissance tradition of ornamentation as practised in the Sistine Chapel was virtually unknown outside of the Vatican by the time the piece became well-known. This alleged secrecy is advanced by an oft repeated statement that there were only &quot;three authorised copies outside the Vatican, held by Emperor Leopold I, the King of Portugal, and Padre Martini.&quot; However, copies of the piece were available in Rome, and it was also frequently performed elsewhere, including such places as London, where performances dating as far back as c. 1735 are documented, to the point that by the 1760s, it was considered one of the works &quot;most usually&quot; performed by the &quot;Academy of Ancient Music&quot;.

From the same supposed secrecy stems a popular story, backed by a letter written by Leopold Mozart to his wife on 14 April 1770, that at fourteen years of age, while visiting Rome, his son Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart first heard the piece during the Wednesday service, and later that day, wrote it down entirely from memory. Doubt has however been cast on much of this story, as the &quot;Miserere&quot; was known in London, which Mozart had visited in 1764-65, that Mozart had seen Martini on the way to Rome, and that Leopold&#x27;s letter (the only source of this story) contains several confusing and seemingly contradictory statements. Less than three months after hearing the song and transcribing it, Mozart had gained fame for his musical work and was summoned back to Rome by Pope Clement XIV, who showered praise on him for his feats of musical genius, and later awarded him the Chivalric Order of the Golden Spur on 4 July 1770.

The original ornamentations that made the work famous were Renaissance techniques that preceded the composition itself, and it was these techniques that were closely guarded by the Vatican. Few written sources (not even Charles Burney&#x27;s) showed the ornamentation, and it was this that created the legend of the work&#x27;s mystery. The Roman priest Pietro Alfieri published an edition in 1840 including ornamentation, with the intent of preserving the performance practice of the Sistine choir in both Allegri&#x27;s and Tommaso Bai&#x27;s (1714) settings. The work was also transcribed by Felix Mendelssohn in 1831 and Franz Liszt, and various other 18th and 19th century sources, with or without ornamentation, survive.
The version most performed today, with the famous &quot;top C&quot; in the second-half of the 4-voice falsobordone, is based on that published by William Smyth Rockstro in the first edition of the &quot;Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians&quot; (1880) and later combined with the first verse of Burney&#x27;s 1771 edition by Robert Haas(1932). Since this version was popularised after the publication in 1951 of Ivor Atkins&#x27; English version and a subsequent recording based upon this by the Choir of King&#x27;s College, Cambridge, Allegri&#x27;s &quot;Miserere&quot; has remained one of the most popular a cappella choral works performed.

==Recordings==
The &quot;Miserere&quot; is one of the most frequently recorded pieces of late Renaissance music. An early and celebrated recording of it is the one from March 1963 by the Choir of King&#x27;s College, Cambridge, conducted by David Willcocks, which was sung in English, and featured the then-treble Roy Goodman. This recording was originally part of a gramophone LP recording entitled &quot;Evensong for Ash Wednesday&quot;, but the &quot;Miserere&quot; has subsequently been re-released on various compilation discs.

In 2015, the Sistine Chapel Choir released their first CD, including the 1661 Sistine codex version of the &quot;Miserere&quot; recorded in the chapel itself.

Performances of the whole work usually last between 12 and 14 minutes.

In December 2008, BBC Four broadcast &quot;Sacred Music: The Story of Allegri&#x27;s Miserere&quot;, presented by Simon Russell Beale, with a performance by The Sixteen conducted by Harry Christophers.

==Music==
The work is set as a falsobordone, a technique then commonly used for performing psalm tones in a polyphonic manner. Allegri&#x27;s setting is based upon the Tonus peregrinus. Verses alternate between a five-part setting sung by the first choir (verses 1, 5, 9, 13, 17) and a four-part setting sung by the second (verses 3, 7, 11, 15, 19), interspersed with plain-chant renderings of the other verses. Both choirs come together for a nine-voice finale in verse 20. The original vocal forces for the two choirs were SATTB and SATB, but at some point in the 18th-century one of the two tenors was transposed up an octave, giving the SSATB setting which is most frequently performed today.

==Text==
===Original===
The original translation of the psalm used for the piece was in Latin:
&lt;poem lang=&quot;la&quot; style=&quot;margin-left: 2em;&quot;&gt;
Miserere mei, Deus: secundum magnam misericordiam tuam.
Et secundum multitudinem miserationum tuarum, dele iniquitatem meam.
Amplius lava me ab iniquitate mea: et a peccato meo munda me.
Quoniam iniquitatem meam ego cognosco: et peccatum meum contra me est semper.
Tibi soli peccavi, et malum coram te feci: ut justificeris in sermonibus tuis, et vincas cum judicaris.
Ecce enim in iniquitatibus conceptus sum: et in peccatis concepit me mater mea.
Ecce enim veritatem dilexisti: incerta et occulta sapientiae tuae manifestasti mihi.
Asperges me hyssopo, et mundabor: lavabis me, et super nivem dealbabor.
Auditui meo dabis gaudium et laetitiam: et exsultabunt ossa humiliata.
Averte faciem tuam a peccatis meis: et omnes iniquitates meas dele.&lt;br&gt;
Cor mundum crea in me, Deus: et spiritum rectum innova in visceribus meis.
Ne proiicias me a facie tua: et spiritum sanctum tuum ne auferas a me.
Redde mihi laetitiam salutaris tui: et spiritu principali confirma me.
Docebo iniquos vias tuas: et impii ad te convertentur.
Libera me de sanguinibus, Deus, Deus salutis meae: et exsultabit lingua mea justitiam tuam.
Domine, labia mea aperies: et os meum annuntiabit laudem tuam.
Quoniam si voluisses sacrificium, dedissem utique: holocaustis non delectaberis.
Sacrificium Deo spiritus contribulatus: cor contritum, et humiliatum, Deus, non despicies.
Benigne fac, Domine, in bona voluntate tua Sion: ut aedificentur muri Ierusalem.
Tunc acceptabis sacrificium justitiae, oblationes, et holocausta: tunc imponent super altare tuum vitulos.
&lt;/poem&gt;

===English translation===
This translation is from the 1662 &quot;Book of Common Prayer&quot; and is used in Ivor Atkins&#x27; English edition of the &quot;Miserere&quot; (published by Novello):

&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left: 2em;&quot;&gt;Have mercy upon me, O God: after Thy great goodness.
According to the multitude of Thy mercies, do away mine offences.
Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness: and cleanse me from my sin.
For I acknowledge my faults: and my sin is ever before me.
Against Thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that Thou mightest be justified in Thy saying, and clear when Thou art judged.
Behold, I was shapen in wickedness: and in sin hath my mother conceived me.
But lo, Thou requirest truth in the inward parts: and shalt make me to understand wisdom secretly.
Thou shalt purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: Thou shalt wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
Thou shalt make me hear of joy and gladness: that the bones which Thou hast broken may rejoice.
Turn Thy face from my sins: and put out all my misdeeds.&lt;br&gt;
Make me a clean heart, O God: and renew a right spirit within me.
Cast me not away from Thy presence: and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.
O give me the comfort of Thy help again: and stablish me with Thy free Spirit.
Then shall I teach Thy ways unto the wicked: and sinners shall be converted unto Thee.
Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, Thou that art the God of my health: and my tongue shall sing of Thy righteousness.
Thou shalt open my lips, O Lord: and my mouth shall shew [show] Thy praise.
For Thou desirest no sacrifice, else would I give it Thee: but Thou delightest not in burnt-offerings.
The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit: a broken and contrite heart, O God, shalt Thou not despise.
O be favourable and gracious unto Sion: build Thou the walls of Jerusalem.
Then shalt Thou be pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness, with the burnt-offerings and oblations: then shall they offer young bullocks upon Thine altar.
&lt;/poem&gt;

==See also==
* &quot;Spem in alium&quot;
* Leçons de ténèbres

==Notes and references==
==External links==
* 
* , live performance by The Gesualdo Six and the choristers of Blackburn Cathedral</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1349033" start="105" end="113" title="Psalm 51" label="Psalm 51"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="127" end="137" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q216695" start="169" end="185" title="Gregorio Allegri" label="Gregorio Allegri"/>
<link wikidata="Q131579" start="223" end="238" title="Pope Urban VIII" label="Pope Urban VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943" start="296" end="310" title="Sistine Chapel" label="Sistine Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q602900" start="322" end="330" title="Tenebrae" label="Tenebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131080" start="343" end="352" title="Holy Week" label="Holy Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344860" start="398" end="420" title="Performance practice" label="performance traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q739589" start="425" end="438" title="Ornament (music)" label="ornamentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="673" end="682" title="polyphony" label="polyphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432798" start="822" end="834" title="falsobordone" label="falsobordone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943" start="869" end="883" title="Sistine Chapel" label="Sistine Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q150494" start="1371" end="1380" title="Leopold I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Leopold I"/>
<link wikidata="Q183426" start="1386" end="1402" title="King of Portugal" label="King of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q283651" start="1408" end="1421" title="Giovanni Battista Martini" label="Padre Martini"/>
<link wikidata="Q156280" start="1860" end="1874" title="Leopold Mozart" label="Leopold Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129314" start="1942" end="1955" title="Mozart in Italy" label="visiting Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="1965" end="1988" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q131587" start="2557" end="2573" title="Pope Clement XIV" label="Pope Clement XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q93716" start="2671" end="2695" title="Order of the Golden Spur" label="Order of the Golden Spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q547002" start="2933" end="2947" title="Charles Burney" label="Charles Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388075" start="3067" end="3081" title="Pietro Alfieri" label="Pietro Alfieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992708" start="3239" end="3257" title="Tommaso Bai" label="Tommaso Bai&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="3308" end="3325" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="3338" end="3349" title="Franz Liszt" label="Franz Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203699" start="3586" end="3608" title="W. S. Rockstro" label="William Smyth Rockstro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422837" start="3643" end="3682" title="Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians" label="Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q85658" start="3769" end="3780" title="Robert Haas (musicologist)" label="Robert Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099316" start="3856" end="3867" title="Ivor Atkins" label="Ivor Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075795" start="3940" end="3979" title="Choir of King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="Choir of King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="4054" end="4064" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="4184" end="4201" title="Renaissance music" label="Renaissance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177190" start="4331" end="4346" title="David Willcocks" label="David Willcocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303818" start="4397" end="4403" title="Treble voice" label="treble"/>
<link wikidata="Q542981" start="4404" end="4415" title="Roy Goodman" label="Roy Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="4457" end="4470" title="Gramophone record" label="gramophone LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236085" start="4637" end="4657" title="Sistine Chapel Choir" label="Sistine Chapel Choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q787211" start="4874" end="4882" title="BBC Four" label="BBC Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q971782" start="4970" end="4989" title="Simon Russell Beale" label="Simon Russell Beale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067073" start="5013" end="5024" title="The Sixteen" label="The Sixteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127803" start="5038" end="5056" title="Harry Christophers" label="Harry Christophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432798" start="5090" end="5102" title="falsobordone" label="falsobordone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440096" start="5227" end="5243" title="Tonus peregrinus" label="Tonus peregrinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707688" start="5427" end="5438" title="Plainsong" label="plain-chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948826" start="5584" end="5589" title="SATTB" label="SATTB"/>
<link wikidata="Q111837194" start="7533" end="7571" title="Book of Common Prayer (1662)" label="1662 &amp;quot;Book of Common Prayer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099316" start="7587" end="7598" title="Ivor Atkins" label="Ivor Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328480" start="7663" end="7670" title="Novello &amp;amp; Co" label="Novello"/>
<link wikidata="Q137931" start="8312" end="8318" title="hyssop" label="hyssop"/>
<link wikidata="Q205318" start="9304" end="9308" title="Zion" label="Sion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583387" start="9540" end="9553" title="Spem in alium" label="Spem in alium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2781896" start="9562" end="9580" title="Leçons de ténèbres" label="Leçons de ténèbres"/>
<link wikidata="Q24887435" start="9653" end="9669" title="The Gesualdo Six" label="The Gesualdo Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942889" start="9692" end="9711" title="Blackburn Cathedral" label="Blackburn Cathedral"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384868" wikidata="Q7591864" url="?curid=384868" title="St Thomas' Church, Southwark">
<text>St Thomas Church, Southwark, London, England. The first church building was part of the original St. Thomas&#x27; Hospital which was located to the area around the present St Thomas Street, from the infirmary at St Mary Overie priory in 1212. The hospital was therefore also an Augustinian house. The hospital/conventual precinct became a parish no later than 1496. It was named after Thomas Becket whose cult pilgrimage to Canterbury began at London Bridge. The church was renamed St Thomas the Apostle following the abolition of the Becket cult in 1538 during the Reformation.

The present church was built by the Hospital Governors to designs by Thomas Cartwright in 1703. It had a garret that was called the Herb Garret in 1821. In the same year, the Old Operating Theatre was built in the Herb Garret.

Its use as a church became redundant in 1899 and the parish merged with St Saviour&#x27;s, which became Southwark Cathedral in 1905; St Thomas&#x27; then was used as the Chapter House for the cathedral. The small civil parish of Southwark St Thomas was merged into Southwark St Olave and St Thomas in 1896, and that then merged into Bermondsey parish in 1904 to reflect the previous establishment of the metropolitan borough.

In the late 20th century it was used as office space by the Chapter Group, an insurance company. The building was undermined by the Jubilee Line Extension workings and was &#x27;at risk&#x27; but repairs were effected from 2010 it became the HQ of the Cathedral Group property development company.

The church also houses the oldest surviving operating theatre in England. The scientific facility was uncovered in 1957 by Raymond Russell, and is situated in the garret (roof section) of the church.

==References==
==External links==
* Information from the Old Operating Theatre</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7591864" start="0" end="16" title="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Church, Southwark" label="St Thomas Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273898" start="18" end="27" title="Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="29" end="35" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="37" end="44" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143779" start="97" end="122" title="St. Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital" label="St. Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q66778503" start="172" end="188" title="St Thomas Street" label="St Thomas Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q922967" start="212" end="226" title="St Mary Overie" label="St Mary Overie"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="385" end="398" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q43669" start="482" end="503" title="Thomas the Apostle" label="St Thomas the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645505" start="566" end="577" title="English Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788264" start="649" end="666" title="Thomas Cartwright (architect)" label="Thomas Cartwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084660" start="712" end="723" title="Herb Garret" label="Herb Garret"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084660" start="755" end="776" title="Old Operating Theatre" label="Old Operating Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q922967" start="912" end="931" title="Southwark Cathedral" label="Southwark Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416310" start="978" end="991" title="Chapter house" label="Chapter House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591864" start="1037" end="1056" title="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Church, Southwark" label="Southwark St Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571169" start="1073" end="1105" title="Southwark St Olave and St Thomas" label="Southwark St Olave and St Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892580" start="1141" end="1151" title="Bermondsey (parish)" label="Bermondsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6301879" start="1367" end="1389" title="Jubilee Line Extension" label="Jubilee Line Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084660" start="1578" end="1595" title="Old Operating Theatre Museum and Herb Garret" label="operating theatre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384873" wikidata="Q1415441" url="?curid=384873" title="London Southend Airport">
<text>London Southend Airport is an international airport situated on the outskirts of Southend-on-Sea in Essex, England, approximately from the centre of London. The airport straddles the boundaries between the city of Southend-on-Sea and the Rochford District.

Southend was the UK&#x27;s third-busiest airport during the 1960s, behind Heathrow and Manchester, before passenger numbers dropped off in the 1970s. Following its purchase by Stobart Group in 2008, a development programme provided a new terminal and control tower, extended the runway, and opened Southend Airport railway station (on the Shenfield–Southend line), which provides a connection to central London via a regular rail service between Liverpool Street Station and Southend Victoria.

==Overview==
===Description===
The airport is located between Southend-on-Sea and Rochford town and city centres, north of Southend, in the county of Essex, east of central London. It has a single 1,856m (6,089ft) long asphalt runway on a south-west/north-east axis.

The current passenger terminal, built in 2012, has the capacity to serve five to six million passengers per year. The former terminal is now operated by the London Southend Jet Centre, a fixed-base operator who provide facilities for the handling of executive aircraft. A four-star Holiday Inn hotel adjacent to the airport entrance, owned by London Southend Airport, opened on 1 October 2012, at that time having the only rooftop restaurant in Essex.

London Southend was voted the best airport in Britain for three consecutive years by consumer group &quot;Which?&quot; in 2013, 2014 and 2015. It won best London airport for six consecutive years between 2013-2019. In the years the airport did not rank number one it has typically scored well. 

The airport was put up for sale by then-current owner Esken in March 2023 following a review of the group&#x27;s core businesses. In March 2024, The Carlyle Group alongside Cyrrus Capital Partners took ownership of the airport providing up to £32m of new investment.

===Operations===

London Southend Airport mainly handles scheduled passenger, charter, cargo and business flights, alongside general aviation flying and pilot training (both fixed-wing aircraft and helicopter). The airport is run by London Southend Airport Co Ltd, which employs around 250 people. During the large 2012 airport expansion, there were over 500 more people working at the airport compared to the same time in 2011.

Southend Airport has a Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) Ordinary Licence that allows flights for the public transport of passengers or for flying instruction as authorised by the licensee (London Southend Airport Company Limited).

The airport&#x27;s location means it has an excellent weather record, and is used by airlines as a diversion alternative when adverse weather or incidents cause other London airports to be closed.

Airline ground handling is provided in-house by London Southend Aviation Services, while the London Southend Jet Centre handles aircraft using their services.

Companies located within the airport boundary employ around 450 workers, with businesses including aircraft maintenance, flying clubs and the airport-owned hotel. Previously British World Airlines had its head office at Viscount House at London Southend Airport.

easyJet began operating services by opening a base at Southend in April 2012 and Irish carrier Aer Lingus Regional began regular flights to Dublin in May, resulting in a rapid increase in airport passenger numbers during 2012, with 721,661 using the airport in that year, 969,912 in 2013 and 1,102,358 in 2014. The following year saw a decline to 900,648 and again to 874,549 in 2016, while 2017 saw passenger numbers increase more than 25% to 1,095,914. In 2011, the airport operator planned to reach passenger numbers of two million per year by 2020. In 2018, the airport saw an increase of nearly 400,000 passengers over the previous year&#x27;s total, with just over 1.4 million passengers. The airport successfully reached over two million passengers in 2019, its best year to date. Since 2020 and the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic, the airport declined however is in resurgence as of 2023.

==History==
===Early years===

In 1909, two men from Leigh tested their monoplanes in the same site of the airport.

The airfield was established by the Royal Flying Corps during World War I. It was the largest flying ground in Essex, with the greatest number of units. In May 1915 the Royal Navy Air Service (RNAS) took over until 4 June 1916, when it became RFC Rochford. It was designated as night fighter station and many sorties were flown against Zeppelin airship raiders, including LZ38 on 31 May 1915. Around 1919, the station closed and reverted to farmland, which it remained as until 1933 when Southend Borough Council bought the land.

The airport was officially opened as a municipal airport on 18 September 1935 by the Under-Secretary of State for Air, Sir Philip Sassoon, who arrived in his de Havilland Leopard Moth.

In 1939, the Air Ministry requisitioned the airfield and it was known as &quot;RAF Rochford&quot; during World War II as a satellite airfield. During World War II, it became a base for fighter squadrons comprising Supermarine Spitfires and Hawker Hurricanes as well as Bristol Blenheims. By 28 October 1940, RAF Rochford had been renamed RAF Southend, no longer being a satellite of Hornchurch, although they still had Fighter Control at the base. A day later 264 Squadron arrived for night fighter duties equipped with the Boulton Paul Defiant. Many of the 50 pillboxes that were designed to protect the airport from paratroop landings still survive, as does the underground defence control room, which is near to Southend Flying Club. A further 20 or so pillboxes also remain in the surrounding countryside.
Canewdon, north-east of the airport, was the location of one of the World War II Chain Home radar stations. The high transmitter tower at Canewdon was relocated to the Marconi works at Great Baddow in the 1950s.

===Post-war===
In the 1950s, three new runways were added, enabling commercial flights for passengers and cargo. Runway 6/24 (now runway 5/23) was extended to 1,645m in 1960, while the third runway was removed.

During the 1960s, Southend became third busiest airport in the UK. In 1967, it served 692,686 passengers; the same year, it had its first fatal crash.

===1970s decline===
At the end of February 1972, Channel Airways, which had its hub and headquarters at Southend, ceased operations.

In the 1970s, the proximity of housing on nearby roads, as well as St Laurence Church on Eastwoodbury Lane less than 100m from the runway prevented expansion. The airport&#x27;s decline accelerated as jet aircraft were unable to use the runway due to its short length. As flights were withdrawn, engineering and maintenance became a more important part of airport operations.

===1993: Regional Airports Ltd===

In 1993, after the airport had been losing money for many years, Southend Borough Council sold the lease to the airport to Regional Airports Ltd. (RAL), operator of Biggin Hill Airport. London Southend Airport Co. Ltd. was formed to operate the airport which was re-branded as &quot;London Southend Airport&quot; with the term &quot;Municipal&quot; dropping from the title. The previous losses were turned into small profits for majority of tenure by RAL. 

The largest aircraft ever to land at the airport was in November 1998 when a Lockheed L-1011 Tristar of Irish airline Aer Turas arrived for scrapping at the airport.

In 2001, a debate centred on the possible relocation of the Grade I listed St Laurence and All Saints Church further away from the side of the main runway. The proposal was dropped after the planning application was rejected by Southend Council in 2003, and a compromise scheme was implemented resulting in the installation of new barriers across Eastwoodbury Lane and requiring slightly shorter licensed runway lengths once safety areas had been added. These changes allowed passenger flights to be restarted, although the runway length still largely curtailed the potential range and payloads for passenger flights, and scheduled airline utilisation was low, until the March 2012 runway extension opened.

Flightline was an airline formed in 1989 headquartered at Southend, where they also had a maintenance/engineering base for their own and third party aircraft. They mainly operated British Aerospace 146 aircraft on ad-hoc charters, and an Avro RJ100 regional jet with which they operated a regular service between Southend and Cologne from 7 June 2006 to 1 December 2008 on behalf of Ford Motor Company as a corporate shuttle. Flightline went into administration on 3 December 2008.

In January 2008, Regional Airports Ltd. put the airport up for sale.

Flybe operated a once weekly summer-only service to Jersey using Dash 8 aircraft, ending in 2011.

===2008: Stobart Group===
The lease on the airport was bought on 2 December 2008 by the Stobart Group for £21 million, becoming part of the Stobart Air division of the Stobart Group, which also operates Carlisle Airport.
Following council consultation with the local population, a planning application to extend the usable runway length by to and upgrade navigational and lighting aids, was submitted to Southend Borough Council 13 October 2009. Planning permission was granted 20 January 2010.
Initially subject to an Article 14 Direction, after due consideration by the Government this was withdrawn 19 March 2010, meaning it would not be subject to a Public Inquiry. A Section 106 agreement was entered into between the airport and local councils.

On 1 June 2010, Stobart Group took a £100 million loan from M &amp; G Investments, partly in order to fund the airport construction. In July 2010, an application for a judicial review of the planning application was filed, which was dismissed on 2 February 2011. On 23 September 2010, the airport received the &quot;Airport Achievement Award 2010/11&quot; from the European Regions Airline Association.

A replacement air traffic control tower became operational 21 March 2011, followed by the return of year-round daily passenger services 27 March 2011 when Aer Arann commenced services to Galway and Waterford in Ireland.

EasyJet announced a ten-year agreement with Stobart Group in June 2011, and in April 2012 commenced around 70 flights per week from Southend, using three Airbus A319 aircraft based at the airport, flying to eight European destinations. Easyjet&#x27;s operation at the airport increased to 16 destinations and in the summer of 2018 they based a fourth aircraft at Southend, an Airbus A320.

A new on-site rail station opened on 18 July 2011 (the official opening by Minister for Transport Theresa Villiers MP was on 21 September 2011), and a new road opened on 1 September 2011, replacing Eastwoodbury Lane that lay in the path required for the runway extension.

===2012–2019: London Olympics and expansion of passenger flights===
Before the 2012 Summer Olympic Games, a new terminal was built by Buckingham Group Contracting Ltd during 2011 and opened 28 February 2012 (the official opening was by Justine Greening, Secretary of State for Transport, on 5 March 2012). The original terminal has been redeveloped for use by private jets, with Stobart Air having invested half a million pounds turning it into an executive business lounge.

The extended runway opened on 8 March 2012. Because planes can land in either direction, it is designated as runway 5 for planes landing from the south-west and as runway 23 for those arriving from the north-east. Both approaches have Category I Instrument Landing Systems installed. In 2019, a new Performance Based Navigation system was proposed, as an alternative to using the Instrument Landing Systems.

In spring 2014, Stobart Air announced that it had agreed a five-year franchise agreement with Flybe which would see two Flybe-branded aircraft based at Southend operating six routes from summer 2014. On 18 January 2015, two routes were terminated with the operation reduced to one aircraft. On 7 April 2014, the extension to the passenger terminal was formally opened by Patrick McLoughlin, the Secretary of State for Transport.

ATC Lasham, the major engineering company at the airport, entered administration in October 2015. The main hangar that it used dated back to Aviation Traders Engineering Limited (ATEL) – founded by the late Sir Freddie Laker – and was later used by Heavylift Engineering.

In December 2016, Flybe announced it would be adding new routes from summer 2017 to 12 European destinations, primarily aimed at the weekend break customers. The airline based two Embraer 195 aircraft at the airport.
In October 2017, Flybe added high frequency domestic routes to the airport, with up to 18 flights per week to Manchester, up to 16 flights per week to Dublin and up to 10 flights per week to Glasgow. An additional ATR 72 was based at the airport to operate the Manchester flights, bringing the total number of Flybe aircraft based at Southend to four.

In February 2018, Air Malta announced it would begin flights to Cagliari, Catania and Malta, which began in May 2018 although the Cagliari and Catania flights ceased in January 2019.
In June 2018, Ryanair announced it would open a base at Southend, basing three aircraft there operating 55 flights per week to 13 destinations, which began in April 2019.
In October 2018, Flybe announced it would commence five flights per week to Newquay Airport from April 2019, increasing to daily from May 2019.

In May 2019, Loganair started to fly to Aberdeen, Glasgow and Stornoway; in July 2019 to Carlisle, and Derry flights moved from Stansted to Southend on 27 October 2019.
On 31 October 2019 Ryanair announced four new routes to launch in Summer 2020 - Bergerac, Girona and Marseille were first announced before Rodez was announced as the route was moved from Stansted to Southend.
On 14 November 2019 Loganair announced that the Stornoway to Glasgow to Southend service would be withdrawn from 3 January 2020.

===2020–2021: COVID-19 pandemic and consolidation===
On 22 January 2020, Norwegian airline Widerøe announced it would move its Kristiansand route from Stansted to Southend at the start of the Summer 2020 season, however due to the COVID-19 pandemic this was initially postponed until 26 October 2020 before being cancelled completely when the airline chose not to return to the airport and moved to Heathrow in March 2021.

On 20 February 2020, it was announced Loganair would suspend its Aberdeen service and on 23 March, similarly the Carlisle service.

At the commencement of the COVID-19 UK lockdown, Wizz Air&#x27;s revised schedule consolidated the Sibiu route at Luton Airport from when it re-started, cutting the route from Southend. In June 2020, Wizz Air cut Vilnius as a destination from Southend as well, leaving it with one route to Bucharest which had also since been suspended.

On 17 August 2020, easyJet announced it would close its base at Southend entirely due to the Coronavirus pandemic, the last scheduled flight occurring on 31 August 2020. On 6 August 2021, Ryanair also announced the closure of its base at Southend, effective 30 October 2021 leaving the airport with barely any scheduled services for the time being.

===2021–present: Post-COVID-19 resumption===
On 17 December 2021, easyJet signed a multi-year deal with the airport and announced that they would initially return in a limited capacity with routes to Málaga and Palma de Mallorca. In 2022 it was announced that easyJet would add flights to Amsterdam and Faro for the Summer 2023 season. Further routes to Paris, Geneva, Grenoble and Alicante were announced in 2023.

In May 2022, Air Horizont announced it would base two of its Boeing 737 aircraft at the airport for VIP charter flights. In September 2022, ASL Airlines Ireland, operating for Amazon, announced it would terminate its cargo flights from Southend to Rome which was the airport&#x27;s sole scheduled freight operation.

On 21 June 2023, the airport owner, Esken announced that the airport had been put up for sale following a strategic review of the group&#x27;s businesses. In July 2023, BH Air announced a route to Burgas for the Summer 2024 season. In August 2023, 2Excel Aviation, operating for Oil Spill Response, announced it would use the airport as a base for its two Boeing 727 aircraft to respond to international oil incidents.

On 6 March 2024, it was announced that The Carlyle Group, alongside Cyrrus Capital Partners, would take control of the airport in a deal which would &quot;return no value&quot; to Esken&#x27;s shareholders. The deal settled Esken&#x27;s debt to Carlyle whilst providing a £5m bridge loan and a commitment of £32m of new funding to secure the airport&#x27;s future.

On 16 May 2024, easyJet announced that the airline will return to base at Southend Airport with six new destinations immediately announced, with those destinations being served by three Airbus A320neo aircraft. On 23 September 2024, BH Air announced it would renew its Burgas route for the Summer 2025 season. 

==Facilities==

===Terminal===

The current terminal was built in 2012 as a part of the Stobart Group&#x27;s development upon taking over the airport. It has twelve check-ins, two floors, ten departure gates and two baggage claims. There are several amenities such as shops and places to eat and drink.

===London Southend Jet Centre===
The London Southend Jet Centre is a fixed-base operator established in 2017 and situated at the airport with their own terminal, parking stands and hangar. The Jet Centre specialises in VIP facilities and handling for business and private aviation, alongside providing services to aircraft that have based themselves with the Jet Centre. The Jet Centre has also acted as the registered office address of Avooma Airlines since October 2024. 

===Runway===

There were originally three runways in the 1950s with one removed in the 1960s. A second one was also removed in the 1990s, leaving one runway remaining and used today, 23/05. 

In 2012, there was an additional 300m runway extension to bring its present length to 1,856m (6,089ft) alongside equipping both ends of the runway with category I instrument landing system. In 2019, the runway was resurfaced to grooved asphalt for better durability and performance so that heavier aircraft, such as the Boeing 737-800 and Airbus A321, can commercially operate at the airport.

Some of the largest aircraft that have operated at the airport, for maintenance or scrapping, include the Airbus A300, Lockheed L-1011 TriStar and Ilyushin Il-76.

==Airlines and destinations==
The following airlines operate regular scheduled and charter flights at London Southend Airport: 


==Statistics==


==Ground transport==
===Rail===
The airport has its own railway station near the terminal building, Southend Airport railway station on the Shenfield to Southend Line, which opened in 2011. It is served by Greater Anglia connecting the airport to Liverpool Street station in London usually every 20 minutes, with additional services during peak times, and to Southend Victoria railway station in the other direction. The journey to London takes about 55 minutes.

An additional later train operates to London every night, except Saturday night, with an early morning train to the airport from London every day, except Sunday morning.

===Bus===
The airport is served by buses operated by Arriva Southend from the airport entrance to Southend (7, 8 and 9), Rochford (7 and 8), Ashingdon (7), Hawkwell (8), Hockley (7 and 8), Eastwood (9) and Rayleigh (7, 8 and 9). First Essex operates Essex Airlink X30 from the terminal to Chelmsford and London Stansted Airport. On 8 June 2019, Ensignbus started operating the Jetlink X1, a night bus service running once in each direction from Southend Airport to Grosvenor Gardens, London via Lakeside Shopping Centre bus station, Canning Town and Embankment stations, however this bus service was later withdrawn due to it being banned by the airport authorities. It recommenced on 5 October 2019 but was withdrawn again in March 2020 due to the COVID-19 Pandemic.

==Accidents and incidents==
*On 11 February 1944, a Boeing B-17 42-31694 of the USAAF (511th BS) crash-landed and burned out at Southend after receiving battle damage during a raid on Frankfurt.
*On 11 May 1944, B17G 42-107147 of the USAAF (360BS) made an emergency wheels-up landing with heavy flak damage after a mission to Saarbrücken.
*On 12 July 1957, a Lockheed Constellation of TWA made an emergency landing with one engine on fire while routing from Frankfurt to Heathrow.
* On 28 July 1959, an East Anglian Flying Services Vickers 614 Viking 1 (registered G-AHPH) was written off in a landing accident at the airport. On approach, the aircraft&#x27;s right-hand main gear indicator showed that the gear was unsafe. An emergency landing was made on the grass parallel to the runway. The right gear collapsed and the aircraft swung to the right, damaging it beyond repair. None of the 39 occupants were injured.
*On 9 October 1960, a Handley Page Hermes of Falcon Airways (registration: G-ALDC) overran the runway on landing, ending up across the Shenfield to Southend railway line. The aircraft was written off, but all 76 people on board survived.
*On 3 May 1967, a Vickers Viscount of Channel Airways (registration: G-AVJZ) was written off when a propeller was feathered on take-off. Two people on the ground died.
*On 4 May 1968, a Vickers Viscount of Channel Airways (registration: G-APPU) overran the runway, having landed at too high a speed. The aircraft was written off.
*On 3 June 1971, a Douglas DC-3 of Moormanair (registration: PH-MOA) returned for an emergency landing with one engine partially failed shortly after departure to the Netherlands. The aircraft was carrying supporters of Ajax Football Club. It overran the runway on landing, colliding with an earth bank at the end of the runway and slightly injuring 2 of the 32 passengers on board.
*On 4 October 1974, the flight engineer of a DAT Douglas DC-6 (registration: OO-VGB) retracted the nose gear during take-off, even though the aircraft was not yet airborne, due to a communication error with the pilots. The aircraft slid along the runway and was damaged beyond repair. Of the 99 passengers on board the flight to Antwerp, one was severely injured and another four received minor injuries from evacuating the aircraft. The six crew members remained uninjured.
*On 9 March 1986, a Vickers Viscount (registration: G-BLNB) made a wheels up landing, the landing gear warning horn not having functioned correctly. There were no injuries to the 3 occupants; after repair the aircraft was returned to service.
*On 12 September 1987, a Beechcraft 200 (registration: G-WSJE) carrying newspapers crashed at night into Mac&#x27;s Garage on the Eastwood Road in Rayleigh. The pilot, 33-year-old Hugh Forrester Brown from nearby Canewdon, was thought to have attempted to crash land on the road after take-off, but he was unable to and hit the empty garage; he was killed in the crash.
*On 11 January 1988, a Vickers Viscount of British Air Ferries (registration: G-APIM) was damaged beyond economic repair when it was in a ground collision with a Fairflight Short 330 (registration: G-BHWT). The BAF Viscount was subsequently repaired and donated to Brooklands Museum for preservation.
*On 6 March 1997, a Piper PA-34 Seneca (registration: G-NJML) flying a charter taking aircraft spare parts to Ostend crashed to the north-east of the airport while attempting to return following the failure of the gyroscope in the aircraft&#x27;s attitude indicator. One of the two occupants died; the other was seriously injured.
*On 19 July 2006, a Cessna 150 (registration: G-BABB) being flown by a student pilot on his second solo flight crashed into a public park from the airport. The student pilot was fatally injured.

==See also==
*Expansion of London Southend Airport
*List of airports in the United Kingdom and the British Crown Dependencies
*Airports of London
*Military history of Britain
*Military history of the United Kingdom during World War II

==References==
==Bibliography==
* (&quot;Airliner World&quot; online)

==External links==

*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1415441" start="0" end="23" title="London Southend Airport" label="London Southend Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="30" end="51" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q203995" start="81" end="96" title="Southend-on-Sea" label="Southend-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="100" end="105" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="139" end="155" title="Charing Cross#Official use as central point" label="centre of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q203995" start="214" end="229" title="Southend-on-Sea" label="Southend-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160315" start="238" end="255" title="Rochford District" label="Rochford District"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="332" end="340" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8694" start="345" end="355" title="Manchester Airport" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973630" start="434" end="447" title="Stobart Group" label="Stobart Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q849706" start="496" end="504" title="Airport terminal" label="terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="509" end="522" title="control tower" label="control tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q184590" start="537" end="543" title="runway" label="runway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569535" start="556" end="588" title="Southend Airport railway station" label="Southend Airport railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494235" start="597" end="620" title="Shenfield–Southend line" label="Shenfield–Southend line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354215" start="654" end="668" title="central London" label="central London"/>
<link wikidata="Q801124" start="704" end="728" title="Liverpool Street Station" label="Liverpool Street Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254036" start="733" end="750" title="Southend Victoria railway station" label="Southend Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q203995" start="815" end="830" title="Southend-on-Sea" label="Southend-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926981" start="835" end="843" title="Rochford" label="Rochford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="903" end="908" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="972" end="979" title="Asphalt concrete" label="asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q670113" start="1208" end="1227" title="fixed-base operator" label="fixed-base operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717882" start="1303" end="1314" title="Holiday Inn" label="Holiday Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="1466" end="1471" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993544" start="1580" end="1586" title="Which?" label="Which?"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973630" start="1824" end="1829" title="Esken" label="Esken"/>
<link wikidata="Q926806" start="1915" end="1932" title="The Carlyle Group" label="The Carlyle Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q21074304" start="2116" end="2123" title="charter flight" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q21074304" start="2135" end="2151" title="air charter" label="business flights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="2163" end="2179" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875704" start="2212" end="2231" title="fixed-wing aircraft" label="fixed-wing aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="2236" end="2246" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q795009" start="2491" end="2515" title="Civil Aviation Authority (United Kingdom)" label="Civil Aviation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q392406" start="2797" end="2818" title="diversion airport" label="diversion alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q920362" start="3230" end="3252" title="British World Airlines" label="British World Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q191551" start="3320" end="3327" title="easyJet" label="easyJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q648074" start="3415" end="3434" title="Aer Lingus Regional" label="Aer Lingus Regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="4141" end="4158" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q541590" start="4272" end="4277" title="Leigh-on-Sea" label="Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q627537" start="4291" end="4301" title="monoplanes" label="monoplanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="4372" end="4390" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4398" end="4409" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="4505" end="4527" title="Royal Navy Air Service" label="Royal Navy Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q191413" start="4672" end="4680" title="Zeppelin" label="Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883043" start="4952" end="4984" title="Under-Secretary of State for Air" label="Under-Secretary of State for Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528499" start="4990" end="5004" title="Philip Sassoon" label="Philip Sassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q825165" start="5025" end="5050" title="de Havilland Leopard Moth" label="de Havilland Leopard Moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="5066" end="5078" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="5132" end="5135" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5158" end="5170" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="5267" end="5287" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q194251" start="5293" end="5309" title="Hawker Hurricane" label="Hawker Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q330417" start="5322" end="5338" title="Bristol Blenheim" label="Bristol Blenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q895128" start="5577" end="5597" title="Boulton Paul Defiant" label="Boulton Paul Defiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q92069" start="5614" end="5623" title="Pillbox (military)" label="pillboxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q749387" start="5671" end="5680" title="paratrooper" label="paratroop"/>
<link wikidata="Q92069" start="5809" end="5818" title="Pillbox (military)" label="pillboxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254041" start="5863" end="5871" title="Canewdon" label="Canewdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059083" start="5944" end="5954" title="Chain Home" label="Chain Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="5955" end="5960" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989830" start="6031" end="6038" title="Marconi Company" label="Marconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896496" start="6048" end="6060" title="Great Baddow" label="Great Baddow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062247" start="6489" end="6504" title="Channel Airways" label="Channel Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593940" start="6641" end="6659" title="St Laurence and All Saints Church, Eastwood" label="St Laurence Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="6775" end="6787" title="jet aircraft" label="jet aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431935" start="7151" end="7170" title="Biggin Hill Airport" label="Biggin Hill Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q852" start="7521" end="7544" title="Lockheed L-1011 Tristar" label="Lockheed L-1011 Tristar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825566" start="7562" end="7571" title="Aer Turas" label="Aer Turas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646203" start="7671" end="7685" title="Categories of listed building" label="Grade I listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593940" start="7686" end="7719" title="St. Laurence and All Saints Church, Eastwood" label="St Laurence and All Saints Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490669" start="8319" end="8329" title="Flightline (UK)" label="Flightline"/>
<link wikidata="Q589498" start="8499" end="8520" title="British Aerospace 146" label="British Aerospace 146"/>
<link wikidata="Q589498" start="8557" end="8567" title="BAe 146" label="Avro RJ100"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="8645" end="8652" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="8702" end="8720" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q759652" start="8766" end="8780" title="administration (law)" label="administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q283790" start="8872" end="8877" title="Flybe (1979-2020)" label="Flybe"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="8924" end="8930" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q736765" start="8937" end="8943" title="Bombardier Dash 8" label="Dash 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973630" start="9059" end="9072" title="Stobart Group" label="Stobart Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="9077" end="9078" title="Pound Sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096618" start="9111" end="9122" title="Stobart Air" label="Stobart Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536424" start="9174" end="9190" title="Carlisle Lake District Airport" label="Carlisle Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569516" start="9375" end="9399" title="Southend Borough Council" label="Southend Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800864" start="9490" end="9510" title="Article 14 Direction" label="Article 14 Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830039" start="9643" end="9664" title="Section 106 agreement" label="Section 106 agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="9891" end="9906" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376921" start="10088" end="10124" title="European Regions Airline Association" label="European Regions Airline Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="10141" end="10160" title="air traffic control" label="air traffic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096618" start="10282" end="10291" title="Aer Arann" label="Aer Arann"/>
<link wikidata="Q191551" start="10348" end="10355" title="EasyJet" label="EasyJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317803" start="10502" end="10513" title="Airbus A319" label="Airbus A319"/>
<link wikidata="Q191551" start="10584" end="10598" title="EasyJet" label="Easyjet&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475" start="10724" end="10735" title="Airbus A320" label="Airbus A320"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569535" start="10752" end="10764" title="Southend Airport railway station" label="rail station"/>
<link wikidata="Q266793" start="10836" end="10852" title="Theresa Villiers" label="Theresa Villiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="11090" end="11115" title="2012 Summer Olympic Games" label="2012 Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096618" start="11390" end="11401" title="Stobart Air" label="Stobart Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096618" start="11912" end="11923" title="Stobart Air" label="Stobart Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q171947" start="11965" end="11984" title="Franchising" label="franchise agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q283790" start="11990" end="11995" title="Flybe (1979-2020)" label="Flybe"/>
<link wikidata="Q333267" start="12267" end="12285" title="Patrick McLoughlin" label="Patrick McLoughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246797" start="12291" end="12323" title="Secretary of State for Transport" label="Secretary of State for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q192375" start="12433" end="12439" title="hangar" label="hangar"/>
<link wikidata="Q790835" start="12467" end="12503" title="Aviation Traders" label="Aviation Traders Engineering Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349086" start="12537" end="12550" title="Freddie Laker" label="Freddie Laker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495319" start="12779" end="12790" title="Embraer E-Jet family" label="Embraer 195"/>
<link wikidata="Q283790" start="12833" end="12838" title="Flybe (1979-2020)" label="Flybe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="12926" end="12936" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="12967" end="12973" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="13007" end="13014" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q221604" start="13187" end="13196" title="Air Malta" label="Air Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="13233" end="13241" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903" start="13243" end="13250" title="Catania" label="Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="13255" end="13260" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q170614" start="13366" end="13373" title="Ryanair" label="Ryanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q283790" start="13540" end="13545" title="Flybe (1979-2020)" label="Flybe"/>
<link wikidata="Q477555" start="13599" end="13614" title="Newquay Airport" label="Newquay Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q934983" start="13681" end="13689" title="Loganair" label="Loganair"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="13708" end="13716" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="13718" end="13725" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q165845" start="13730" end="13739" title="Stornoway" label="Stornoway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536424" start="13757" end="13765" title="Carlisle Lake District Airport" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431211" start="13771" end="13776" title="City of Derry Airport" label="Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8709" start="13796" end="13804" title="London Stansted Airport" label="Stansted"/>
<link wikidata="Q28344" start="14267" end="14274" title="Widerøe" label="Widerøe"/>
<link wikidata="Q84167106" start="14407" end="14415" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="14575" end="14583" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q335147" start="14781" end="14789" title="Wizz Air" label="Wizz Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q83324" start="14831" end="14836" title="Sibiu" label="Sibiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8712" start="14846" end="14859" title="Luton Airport" label="Luton Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="14945" end="14952" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="15022" end="15031" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q191551" start="15089" end="15096" title="easyJet" label="easyJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170614" start="15258" end="15265" title="Ryanair" label="Ryanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q191551" start="15486" end="15493" title="easyJet" label="easyJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8851" start="15620" end="15626" title="Málaga" label="Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8826" start="15631" end="15648" title="Palma de Mallorca" label="Palma de Mallorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="15709" end="15718" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q159457" start="15723" end="15727" title="Faro, Portugal" label="Faro"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="15774" end="15779" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="15781" end="15787" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289" start="15789" end="15797" title="Grenoble" label="Grenoble"/>
<link wikidata="Q11959" start="15802" end="15810" title="Alicante" label="Alicante"/>
<link wikidata="Q19834198" start="15849" end="15861" title="Air Horizont" label="Air Horizont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="15897" end="15907" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737"/>
<link wikidata="Q407043" start="15976" end="15996" title="ASL Airlines Ireland" label="ASL Airlines Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="16012" end="16018" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="16084" end="16088" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973630" start="16189" end="16194" title="Esken" label="Esken"/>
<link wikidata="Q266781" start="16322" end="16328" title="BH Air" label="BH Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509" start="16350" end="16356" title="Burgas" label="Burgas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409" start="16509" end="16519" title="Boeing 727" label="Boeing 727"/>
<link wikidata="Q926806" start="16612" end="16629" title="The Carlyle Group" label="The Carlyle Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973630" start="16753" end="16765" title="Esken" label="Esken&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973630" start="16797" end="16809" title="Esken" label="Esken&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q926806" start="16818" end="16825" title="The Carlyle Group" label="Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q191551" start="16955" end="16962" title="easyJet" label="easyJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488" start="17125" end="17139" title="Airbus A320neo" label="Airbus A320neo"/>
<link wikidata="Q266781" start="17172" end="17178" title="BH Air" label="BH Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509" start="17208" end="17214" title="Burgas" label="Burgas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973630" start="17339" end="17352" title="Stobart Group" label="Stobart Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q670113" start="17624" end="17643" title="fixed-base operator" label="fixed-base operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q132398317" start="17992" end="18007" title="Avooma Airlines" label="Avooma Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q464020" start="18385" end="18410" title="instrument landing system" label="instrument landing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084919" start="18542" end="18556" title="Boeing 737-800" label="Boeing 737-800"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278675" start="18561" end="18572" title="Airbus A321" label="Airbus A321"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437" start="18722" end="18733" title="Airbus A300" label="Airbus A300"/>
<link wikidata="Q852" start="18735" end="18758" title="Lockheed L-1011 TriStar" label="Lockheed L-1011 TriStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q142549" start="18763" end="18777" title="Ilyushin Il-76" label="Ilyushin Il-76"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569535" start="19027" end="19059" title="Southend Airport railway station" label="Southend Airport railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494235" start="19067" end="19093" title="Shenfield to Southend Line" label="Shenfield to Southend Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q318679" start="19133" end="19147" title="Greater Anglia" label="Greater Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q801124" start="19174" end="19198" title="Liverpool Street station" label="Liverpool Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254036" start="19286" end="19319" title="Southend Victoria railway station" label="Southend Victoria railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796019" start="19615" end="19630" title="Arriva Southend" label="Arriva Southend"/>
<link wikidata="Q203995" start="19660" end="19668" title="Southend" label="Southend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926981" start="19683" end="19691" title="Rochford" label="Rochford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331153" start="19703" end="19712" title="Ashingdon" label="Ashingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306605" start="19718" end="19726" title="Hawkwell" label="Hawkwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486218" start="19732" end="19739" title="Hockley" label="Hockley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342582" start="19751" end="19759" title="Eastwood, Essex" label="Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117331" start="19768" end="19776" title="Rayleigh, Essex" label="Rayleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452973" start="19791" end="19802" title="First Essex" label="First Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376846" start="19812" end="19829" title="Essex Airlink" label="Essex Airlink X30"/>
<link wikidata="Q210985" start="19851" end="19861" title="Chelmsford" label="Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q8709" start="19866" end="19889" title="London Stansted Airport" label="London Stansted Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380010" start="19907" end="19916" title="Ensignbus" label="Ensignbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28970244" start="20027" end="20052" title="Grosvenor Gardens, London" label="Grosvenor Gardens, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479149" start="20057" end="20081" title="Lakeside Shopping Centre" label="Lakeside Shopping Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033431" start="20095" end="20107" title="Canning Town bus station" label="Canning Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334978" start="20112" end="20122" title="Embankment tube station" label="Embankment"/>
<link wikidata="Q185000" start="20383" end="20394" title="Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress" label="Boeing B-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="20411" end="20416" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="USAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="20515" end="20524" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074121" start="20587" end="20596" title="emergency landing" label="emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q783860" start="20597" end="20606" title="belly landing" label="wheels-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="20626" end="20630" title="flak" label="flak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724" start="20657" end="20668" title="Saarbrücken" label="Saarbrücken"/>
<link wikidata="Q677122" start="20690" end="20712" title="Lockheed Constellation" label="Lockheed Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q527341" start="20716" end="20719" title="Trans World Airlines" label="TWA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074121" start="20728" end="20745" title="emergency landing" label="emergency landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q46033" start="20789" end="20798" title="Frankfurt Airport" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="20802" end="20810" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q594496" start="20863" end="20883" title="Vickers VC.1 Viking" label="Vickers 614 Viking 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q838849" start="20885" end="20895" title="aircraft registration" label="registered"/>
<link wikidata="Q458475" start="20961" end="20969" title="Final approach (aviation)" label="approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="21007" end="21011" title="Landing gear" label="gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074121" start="21058" end="21075" title="emergency landing" label="emergency landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q753807" start="21272" end="21291" title="Handley Page Hermes" label="Handley Page Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431730" start="21295" end="21309" title="Falcon Airways" label="Falcon Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494235" start="21385" end="21406" title="Shenfield to Southend Line" label="Shenfield to Southend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137051" start="21506" end="21522" title="Vickers Viscount" label="Vickers Viscount"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062247" start="21526" end="21541" title="Channel Airways" label="Channel Airways"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21694" end="21709" title="Channel Airways#Accidents and incidents" label="Channel Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="21837" end="21849" title="Douglas DC-3" label="Douglas DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="21985" end="21996" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q81888" start="22038" end="22056" title="AFC Ajax" label="Ajax Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q432425" start="22225" end="22240" title="flight engineer" label="flight engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186212" start="22246" end="22249" title="Delta Air Transport" label="DAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q503761" start="22250" end="22262" title="Douglas DC-6" label="Douglas DC-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094597" start="22944" end="22958" title="Beechcraft 200" label="Beechcraft 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117331" start="23066" end="23074" title="Rayleigh, Essex" label="Rayleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254041" start="23132" end="23140" title="Canewdon" label="Canewdon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23332" end="23351" title="British United Air Ferries#Accidents and incidents" label="British Air Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140283" start="23462" end="23471" title="Short 330" label="Short 330"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974674" start="23554" end="23571" title="Brooklands Museum" label="Brooklands Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q181818" start="23610" end="23628" title="Piper PA-34 Seneca" label="Piper PA-34 Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q12996" start="23700" end="23706" title="Ostend" label="Ostend"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="23804" end="23813" title="gyroscope" label="gyroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q277694" start="23837" end="23855" title="attitude indicator" label="attitude indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057117" start="23941" end="23951" title="Cessna 150" label="Cessna 150"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817313" start="23992" end="24005" title="Student pilot certificate" label="student pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593940" start="24131" end="24167" title="Expansion of London Southend Airport" label="Expansion of London Southend Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q741071" start="24169" end="24242" title="List of airports in the United Kingdom and the British Crown Dependencies" label="List of airports in the United Kingdom and the British Crown Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q14324857" start="24244" end="24262" title="Airports of London" label="Airports of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857565" start="24264" end="24291" title="Military history of Britain" label="Military history of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012319" start="24293" end="24351" title="Military history of the United Kingdom during World War II" label="Military history of the United Kingdom during World War II"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384874" wikidata="Q483526" url="?curid=384874" title="Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway Branch">
<text>The Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway Branch () is an expressway in South Korea, connecting Dalseong County to Buk District, Daegu (30 km). It is numbered 451 and was formerly named the Guma Expressway (구마고속도로).

Originally, this route was called Daegu–Masan section (86.4 km). Due to a reform of Korean expressway route numbers in August 2001, the Masan–Hyeonpung JCT section was incorporated into the Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway.

In 2008, the Guma Expressway changed its name to Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway Branch.

== Information ==
=== Lanes ===
* Hyeonpung–Okpo: 4 Lanes
* South Daegu–West Daegu: 6 Lanes
* Hwawon Okpo–South Daegu, West Daegu–Geumho: 8 Lanes
* Okpo–Hwawon Okpo: 10 Lanes

=== Lengths ===
* 30.0 km

=== Speed limit ===
* 100 km/h

== List of facilities ==

* IC: Interchange, JC: Junction, SA: Service Area, TG:Tollgate

==See also==
* Sincheon-daero, Daegu
* Roads and expressways in South Korea
* Transportation in South Korea

==External links==
* MOLIT South Korean Government Transport Department</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q483526" start="4" end="36" title="Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway Branch" label="Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q47012" start="46" end="71" title="expressway in South Korea" label="expressway in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q50239" start="84" end="99" title="Dalseong County" label="Dalseong County"/>
<link wikidata="Q50393" start="103" end="115" title="Buk District, Daegu" label="Buk District"/>
<link wikidata="Q20927" start="117" end="122" title="Daegu" label="Daegu"/>
<link wikidata="Q483526" start="178" end="193" title="Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway Branch" label="Guma Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q20927" start="239" end="244" title="Daegu" label="Daegu"/>
<link wikidata="Q495387" start="245" end="250" title="Masan" label="Masan"/>
<link wikidata="Q487746" start="395" end="420" title="Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway" label="Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16100853" start="847" end="868" title="Sincheon-daero, Daegu" label="Sincheon-daero, Daegu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47012" start="871" end="907" title="Roads and expressways in South Korea" label="Roads and expressways in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q496188" start="910" end="939" title="Transportation in South Korea" label="Transportation in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q626814" start="968" end="991" title="Government of South Korea" label="South Korean Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q9398575" start="992" end="1012" title="Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport (Korea)" label="Transport Department"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384875" wikidata="Q282317" url="?curid=384875" title="Ordinance">
<text>Ordinance may refer to:

==Law==
* Ordinance (Belgium), a law adopted by the Brussels Parliament or the Common Community Commission
* Ordinance (India), a temporary law promulgated by the President of India on recommendation of the Union Cabinet
* Emergency Ordinance (Malaysia), a type of emergency decree under the Constitution of Malaysia
* Ordinance (university), a particular class of internal legislation in a United Kingdom university
* In England during the Civil War, a law passed by parliament without royal assent; see the list of ordinances and acts of the Parliament of England, 1642–1660
** Self-denying Ordinance, passed by the Long Parliament of England on 3 April 1645
* Legislation made by the Legislative Council of Hong Kong; see also Law of Hong Kong
* A royal decree, law promulgated on the monarch&#x27;s own authority
* Delegated legislation for the Australian territories of the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory, passed by the Federal Executive Council (these were mostly converted to acts after the territories gained self-government)
* By-law, a rule established by an organization to regulate itself
* Local ordinance, a law made by a municipality or other local authority
* Northwest Ordinance, July 13, 1787, an act of the Congress of the Confederation of the United States that created the Northwest Territory
* Ordinance XX, a law passed down in Pakistan which prevents Ahmadi Muslims from being identified as Muslims
* Ordinances of 1311, a series of regulations imposed upon King Edward II of England
* &quot;Ordonnance&quot; in French government, a regulation adopted by the executive in a domain normally reserved for statute law

==Religion==
* Ordinance (Christianity), Protestant term for religious ritual
*Ordinance (Latter Day Saints), a religious ritual enacted using priesthood authority
*Baptist ordinance, Believer&#x27;s Baptism and Lord&#x27;s Supper
* Ecclesiastical ordinances, the bylaws of a Christian religious organization
*Ordinance room, place for Latter-day Saint ordinances
* Ordination, the process by which one is consecrated

==See also==
* Land Ordinance (disambiguation)
* Land Reform Ordinance (disambiguation)
* List of ordinances and acts of the Parliament of England, 1642–1660
*, a British coaster</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q282317" start="0" end="9" title="Ordinance" label="Ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141208" start="35" end="54" title="Ordinance (Belgium)" label="Ordinance (Belgium)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339629" start="134" end="151" title="Ordinance (India)" label="Ordinance (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212904" start="248" end="278" title="Emergency Ordinance (Malaysia)" label="Emergency Ordinance (Malaysia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100795" start="344" end="366" title="Ordinance (university)" label="Ordinance (university)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593071" start="534" end="601" title="list of ordinances and acts of the Parliament of England, 1642–1660" label="list of ordinances and acts of the Parliament of England, 1642–1660"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478113" start="605" end="627" title="Self-denying Ordinance" label="Self-denying Ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q19208" start="712" end="744" title="Legislative Council of Hong Kong" label="Legislative Council of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109938" start="755" end="771" title="Law of Hong Kong" label="Law of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571972" start="782" end="788" title="decree" label="decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258" start="904" end="932" title="Australian Capital Territory" label="Australian Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="941" end="959" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988632" start="975" end="1000" title="Federal Executive Council (Australia)" label="Federal Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q679847" start="1086" end="1092" title="By-law" label="By-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q843713" start="1153" end="1168" title="Local ordinance" label="Local ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q280537" start="1226" end="1245" title="Northwest Ordinance" label="Northwest Ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100798" start="1366" end="1378" title="Ordinance XX" label="Ordinance XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885130" start="1475" end="1493" title="Ordinances of 1311" label="Ordinances of 1311"/>
<link wikidata="Q18552825" start="1566" end="1576" title="Ordonnance" label="Ordonnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100801" start="1705" end="1729" title="Ordinance (Christianity)" label="Ordinance (Christianity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100794" start="1769" end="1798" title="Ordinance (Latter Day Saints)" label="Ordinance (Latter Day Saints)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4077532" start="1855" end="1872" title="Baptist ordinance" label="Baptist ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332274" start="1923" end="1948" title="Ecclesiastical ordinances" label="Ecclesiastical ordinances"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100803" start="2000" end="2014" title="Ordinance room" label="Ordinance room"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519600" start="2056" end="2066" title="Ordination" label="Ordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483927" start="2124" end="2155" title="Land Ordinance (disambiguation)" label="Land Ordinance (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16871801" start="2158" end="2196" title="Land Reform Ordinance (disambiguation)" label="Land Reform Ordinance (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593071" start="2199" end="2266" title="List of ordinances and acts of the Parliament of England, 1642–1660" label="List of ordinances and acts of the Parliament of England, 1642–1660"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384876" wikidata="Q7591965" url="?curid=384876" title="St. Thomas Hospital">
<text>St. Thomas Hospital or Saint Thomas Hospital may refer to:

*Ascension Saint Thomas, an integrated health delivery system based in Nashville, Tennessee, U.S.
**Saint Thomas - Rutherford Hospital, formerly Middle Tennessee Medical Center
**Saint Thomas - West Hospital, formerly Saint Thomas Hospital
**Saint Thomas Hickman Hospital
**Saint Thomas - Midtown Hospital
*Hospital Santo Tomás, in Panama City, Panama
*Hospital of St Thomas of Canterbury, a house of Augustinian canons in medieval Birmingham, England
*Saint Thomas Hospital (Malta), in Qormi, Malta
*St Thomas&#x27; Hospital, in London, England
*St. Thomas&#x27; Hospital (Stockport), in Stockport, England
*St Thomas Hospital (Kerala), in Kattimoola, Kerala, India
*Summa St. Thomas Hospital, in Akron, Ohio</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7402236" start="61" end="83" title="Ascension Saint Thomas" label="Ascension Saint Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841621" start="160" end="194" title="Saint Thomas - Rutherford Hospital" label="Saint Thomas - Rutherford Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402238" start="239" end="267" title="Saint Thomas - West Hospital" label="Saint Thomas - West Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5751081" start="302" end="331" title="Saint Thomas Hickman Hospital" label="Saint Thomas Hickman Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857645" start="334" end="365" title="Saint Thomas - Midtown Hospital" label="Saint Thomas - Midtown Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400082" start="367" end="387" title="Hospital Santo Tomás" label="Hospital Santo Tomás"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245524" start="413" end="448" title="Hospital of St Thomas of Canterbury" label="Hospital of St Thomas of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q23914702" start="513" end="542" title="Saint Thomas Hospital (Malta)" label="Saint Thomas Hospital (Malta)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143779" start="561" end="585" title="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital" label="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q123367527" start="607" end="644" title="St. Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital (Stockport)" label="St. Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital (Stockport)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595555" start="669" end="696" title="St Thomas Hospital (Kerala)" label="St Thomas Hospital (Kerala)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14956877" start="728" end="753" title="Summa St. Thomas Hospital" label="Summa St. Thomas Hospital"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384880" wikidata="Q5892008" url="?curid=384880" title="Honam Expressway Branch">
<text>The Honam Expressway Branch () is an expressway in South Korea, connecting Nonsan to Daejeon. The expressway&#x27;s route number is 251.

This route was origin way of Honam Expressway until August 2001.

== History ==

* September 28, 2001 : Gyeryong IC open
* July 25, 2013 : Yangchon Hi-pass IC open

== Compositions ==
=== Lanes ===
* 4

=== Length ===
* 53.97 km

===Speed limits===
* 100 km/h

==List of facilities==

*IC: Interchange, JC: Junction, SA: Service Area, TG:Tollgate

==See also==
*Roads and expressways in South Korea
*Transportation in South Korea

==External links==
* MOLIT South Korean Government Transport Department</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5892008" start="4" end="27" title="Honam Expressway Branch" label="Honam Expressway Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q47012" start="37" end="62" title="expressway in South Korea" label="expressway in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q42088" start="75" end="81" title="Nonsan" label="Nonsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20921" start="85" end="92" title="Daejeon" label="Daejeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q482726" start="167" end="183" title="Honam Expressway" label="Honam Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="242" end="253" title="Gyeryong IC" label="Gyeryong IC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="277" end="296" title="Yangchon Hi-pass IC" label="Yangchon Hi-pass IC"/>
<link wikidata="Q47012" start="500" end="536" title="Roads and expressways in South Korea" label="Roads and expressways in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q496188" start="538" end="567" title="Transportation in South Korea" label="Transportation in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q626814" start="596" end="619" title="Government of South Korea" label="South Korean Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q9398575" start="620" end="640" title="Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport (Korea)" label="Transport Department"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384883" wikidata="Q7100795" url="?curid=384883" title="Ordinance (university)">
<text>In United Kingdom universities, ordinances, sometimes termed regulations, are detailed legislation that translates the broad principles of the university&#x27;s charter and statutes.

Most UK universities created before 1992 are established by royal charter. Under their charters, they are empowered to make statutes, but any changes to these require the approval of the Privy Council. However, the charter and statutes empower the university to create and modify ordinances. These constitute more detailed legislation that translates the broad principles enshrined in charter and statutes into practical effect. Typically any change to ordinances will require the agreement of the governing body of the university. Ordinances frequently require or allow the promulgation of regulations which can be approved by lesser bodies.

Because of their different history, universities created since 1992 (the so-called &quot;new universities&quot;) have a different scheme of governance, and a different vocabulary to accompany it.

Some university systems influenced by the UK model, particularly in the Commonwealth, use the word &quot;ordinance&quot; in the same way.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="18" end="30" title="universities" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100795" start="32" end="42" title="Ordinance (university)" label="ordinances"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100795" start="61" end="72" title="Ordinance (university)" label="regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="244" end="257" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="371" end="384" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q987075" start="917" end="933" title="new universities" label="new universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1097" end="1109" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384886" wikidata="Q1060822" url="?curid=384886" title="Operating theater">
<text>An operating theater (also known as an Operating Room (OR), operating suite, operation suite, or Operation Theatre (OT)) is a facility within a hospital where surgical operations are carried out in an aseptic environment.

Historically, the term &quot;operating theater&quot; referred to a non-sterile, tiered theater or amphitheater in which students and other spectators could watch surgeons perform surgery. Contemporary operating rooms are usually devoid of a theater setting, making the term &quot;operating theater&quot; a misnomer in those cases.

==Classification of operation theatre==
Operating rooms are spacious, in a cleanroom, and well-lit, typically with overhead surgical lights, and may have viewing screens and monitors. Operating rooms are generally windowless, though windows are becoming more prevalent in newly built theaters to provide clinical teams with natural light, and feature controlled temperature and humidity. Special air handlers filter the air and maintain a slightly elevated pressure. Electricity support has backup systems in case of a black-out. Rooms are supplied with wall suction, oxygen, and possibly other anesthetic gases. Key equipment consists of the operating table and the anesthesia cart. In addition, there are tables to set up instruments. There is storage space for common surgical supplies. There are containers for disposables. Outside the operating room, or sometimes integrated within, is a dedicated scrubbing area that is used by surgeons, anesthetists, ODPs (operating department practitioners), and nurses prior to surgery. An operating room will have a map to enable the terminal cleaner to realign the operating table and equipment to the desired layout during cleaning. Operating rooms are typically supported by an anaesthetic room, prep room, scrub and a dirty utility room.

Several operating rooms are part of the operating suite that forms a distinct section within a health-care facility. Besides the operating rooms and their wash rooms, it contains rooms for personnel to change, wash, and rest, preparation and recovery rooms, storage and cleaning facilities, offices, dedicated corridors, and possibly other supportive units. In larger facilities, the operating suite is climate- and air-controlled, and separated from other departments so that only authorized personnel have access.

===Operating room equipment===
* The operating table in the center of the room can be raised, lowered, and tilted in any direction.
* The operating room lights are over the table to provide bright light, without shadows, during surgery.
* The anesthesia machine is at the head of the operating table. This machine has tubes that connect to the patient to assist them in breathing during surgery, and built-in monitors that help control the mixture of gases in the breathing circuit.
* The anesthesia cart is next to the anesthesia machine. It contains the medications, equipment, and other supplies that the anesthesiologist may need.
* Sterile instruments to be used during surgery are arranged on a stainless steel table.
* An electronic monitor (which records the heart rate and respiratory rate by adhesive patches that are placed on the patient&#x27;s chest).
* The pulse oximeter machine attaches to the patient&#x27;s finger with an elastic band aid. It measures the amount of oxygen contained in the blood.
* Automated blood pressure measuring machine that automatically inflates the blood pressure cuff on a patient&#x27;s arm.
* An electrocautery machine uses high frequency electrical signals to cauterize or seal off blood vessels and may also be used to cut through tissue with a minimal amount of bleeding.
* If surgery requires, a heart-lung machine or other specialized equipment may be brought into the room.
* Supplementary portable air decontaminating equipment is sometimes placed in the OR.
* Advances in technology now support hybrid operating rooms, which integrate diagnostic imaging systems such as MRI and cardiac catheterization into the operating room to assist surgeons in specialized neurological and cardiac procedures.

==Surgeon and assistants&#x27; equipment==
People in the operating room wear PPE (personal protective equipment) to help prevent bacteria from infecting the surgical incision. This PPE includes the following:

*A protective cap covering their hair
*Masks over their lower face, covering their mouths and noses with minimal gaps to prevent inhalation of plume or airborne microbes
*Shades or glasses over their eyes, including specialized colored glasses for use with different lasers. a fiber-optic headlight may be attached for greater visibility
*Sterile gloves; usually latex-free due to latex sensitivity which affects some health care workers and patients
*Long gowns, with the bottom of the gown no closer than six inches to the ground.
*Protective covers on their shoes
*If x-rays are expected to be used, lead aprons/neck covers are used to prevent overexposure to radiation

The surgeon may also wear special glasses to help them see more clearly. The circulating nurse and anesthesiologist will not wear a gown in the OR because they are not a part of the sterile team. They must keep a distance of 12–16 inches from any sterile object, person, or field.

==History==
Early Modern operating theaters in an educational setting had raised tables or chairs at the center for performing operations surrounded by steep tiers of standing stalls for students and other spectators to observe the case in progress. The surgeons wore street clothes with an apron to protect them from blood stains, and they operated bare-handed with unsterilized instruments and supplies.
The University of Padua began teaching medicine in 1222. It played a leading role in the identification and treatment of diseases and ailments, specializing in autopsies and the inner workings of the body.
In 1884 German surgeon Gustav Neuber implemented a comprehensive set of restrictions to ensure sterilization and aseptic operating conditions through the use of gowns, caps, and shoe covers, all of which were cleansed in his newly invented autoclave. In 1885 he designed and built a private hospital in the woods where the walls, floors and hands, arms and faces of staff were washed with mercuric chloride, instruments were made with flat surfaces and the shelving was easy-to-clean glass. Neuber also introduced separate operating theaters for infected and uninfected patients and the use of heated and filtered air in the theater to eliminate germs. In 1890 surgical gloves were introduced to the practice of medicine by William Halsted. Aseptic surgery was pioneered in the United States by Charles McBurney.

===Surviving operating theaters===
The oldest surviving operating theater is thought to be the 1804 operating theater of the Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia. The 1821 Ether Dome of the Massachusetts General Hospital is still in use as a lecture hall. Another surviving operating theater is the Old Operating Theatre in London. Built in 1822, it is now a museum of surgical history. The Anatomical Theater at the University of Padua, in Italy, inside Palazzo Bo was constructed and used as a lecture hall for medical students who observed the dissection of corpses, not surgical operations. It was commissioned by the anatomist Girolamo Fabrizio d&#x27;Acquapendente in 1595.

==See also==
* Anatomical theater
* Hybrid operating room

==References==
== External links ==

* Video of a newly-built orthopaedic operating theater in the United Kingdom</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1060822" start="3" end="20" title="Operating theater" label="operating theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060822" start="39" end="53" title="Operating theater" label="Operating Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060822" start="55" end="57" title="Operating theater" label="OR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060822" start="60" end="75" title="Operating theater" label="operating suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060822" start="77" end="92" title="Operating theater" label="operation suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060822" start="97" end="114" title="Operating theater" label="Operation Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060822" start="116" end="118" title="Operating theater" label="OT"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="144" end="152" title="hospital" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="159" end="178" title="Surgery" label="surgical operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q723758" start="201" end="208" title="asepsis" label="aseptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24354" start="310" end="317" title="theater (building)" label="theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q54831" start="321" end="333" title="amphitheater" label="amphitheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q794827" start="630" end="639" title="cleanroom" label="cleanroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300197" start="679" end="694" title="Surgical lighting" label="surgical lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421432" start="729" end="737" title="Medical monitor" label="monitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026556" start="1198" end="1213" title="operating table" label="operating table"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149399" start="1222" end="1237" title="anesthesia cart" label="anesthesia cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q774306" start="1489" end="1496" title="surgeon" label="surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q615057" start="1499" end="1510" title="anesthetist" label="anesthetist"/>
<link wikidata="Q760111" start="2084" end="2097" title="recovery room" label="recovery room"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316377" start="2602" end="2620" title="anesthesia machine" label="anesthesia machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q552304" start="3705" end="3723" title="heart-lung machine" label="heart-lung machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="3983" end="3986" title="MRI" label="MRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615191" start="3991" end="4014" title="cardiac catheterization" label="cardiac catheterization"/>
<link wikidata="Q273831" start="5568" end="5573" title="apron" label="apron"/>
<link wikidata="Q191618" start="5644" end="5656" title="sterilization (microbiology)" label="unsterilized"/>
<link wikidata="Q193510" start="5687" end="5706" title="University of Padua" label="University of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q102355" start="5912" end="5925" title="Gustav Adolf Neuber" label="Gustav Neuber"/>
<link wikidata="Q723758" start="6002" end="6009" title="Asepsis" label="aseptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188223" start="6129" end="6138" title="autoclave" label="autoclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q143200" start="6278" end="6295" title="Mercury(II) chloride" label="mercuric chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q178541" start="6550" end="6565" title="medical glove" label="surgical gloves"/>
<link wikidata="Q962960" start="6613" end="6628" title="William Halsted" label="William Halsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6667" end="6680" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q342999" start="6684" end="6700" title="Charles McBurney (surgeon)" label="Charles McBurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273145" start="6828" end="6849" title="Pennsylvania Hospital" label="Pennsylvania Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q257073" start="6876" end="6886" title="Ether Dome" label="Ether Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q126412" start="6894" end="6924" title="Massachusetts General Hospital" label="Massachusetts General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084660" start="7003" end="7024" title="Old Operating Theatre" label="Old Operating Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="7028" end="7034" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069678" start="7091" end="7113" title="Anatomical Theatre of Padua" label="The Anatomical Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q193510" start="7121" end="7140" title="University of Padua" label="University of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="7145" end="7150" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159474" start="7361" end="7374" title="Acquapendente" label="Acquapendente"/>
<link wikidata="Q488444" start="7400" end="7418" title="Anatomical theatre" label="Anatomical theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q501818" start="7421" end="7442" title="Hybrid operating room" label="Hybrid operating room"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384890" wikidata="Q76355" url="?curid=384890" title="Christoffer Gabel">
<text>Christoffer Gabel (6 January 1617 – 13 October 1673) was a Danish statesman. He was the father of Vice Governor-general of Norway, Frederik Gabel.

==Biography==
He was born on 6 January 1617 at Glückstadt. His father, Wulbern or Waldemar Gabel, originally a cartographer and subsequently recorder of Glückstadt, was killed at the siege of the fortress there, by the German Imperial Army, in 1628. Nothing is known of Christoffer&#x27;s youth, but it is certain he received a university education. Christoffer&#x27;s name is first recorded in 1639, as overseer and accountant at the court of the Archbishop of Bremen, Duke Frederick. When the duke ascended the Danish throne as King Frederick III, Gabel followed him to Copenhagen as his private secretary and man of business, holding great influence over the irresolute king.

During the brief interval of peace between King Charles X&#x27;s first and second attack upon Denmark, Gabel was employed in several secret missions to Sweden; and he took part in the conspiracies that resulted in the autocratic revolution of 1660. While not the originator of the revolution, he was certainly the chief intermediary between Frederick III and the Conjoined Estates in the mysterious conspiracy which established absolutism in Denmark-Norway. His activities won the king&#x27;s lifelong gratitude. He was enriched, ennobled, and in 1664 made governor of Copenhagen. From 1660 to 1670 he was regarded as the most influential figure at court, and very largely employed in financial and diplomatic affairs. During the early and mid 1660s there was 
an influential circle around Hannibal Sehested, Frederik Ahlefeldt, Peter Bülche, Hans Svane, Jacob Petersen and Theodor Lente, who became increasingly opposed to Gabel. During this period he carried out a pro-French foreign policy, while his domestic policy was affected by laziness and corruption.

When Frederick III died, in February 1670, Gabel&#x27;s power was at an end. The new ruler, Christian V did not favour him, and accusations against Gabel poured in from every quarter. When, on 18 April 1670, he was dismissed, there was no public sympathy for a man who had grown wealthy in a time of widespread poverty. He was stripped of all titles and privileges, except the financial control of the Faroe Islands. He spent his remaining time in Copenhagen, and died on 13 October 1673 and was buried in St. Peter&#x27;s Church.

==Sources==
*Christian Bruun, &quot;Gunde Rosenkrantz: Et Bidrag Til Danmarks Historie Under Frederik Den Tredie&quot;, 2008, Google Books edition
*Carl Frederik Bricka, &quot;Dansk biografisk Lexikon : Volume V : Faaborg - Gersdorff&quot;, Copenhagen, 1891 Online edition
*Anders Thiset, &quot;Danmarks Adels Aarbog : Volume X, Dansk Adelsforening, 1893
*Dansk Biografisk Leksikon Online Edition

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q76355" start="0" end="17" title="Christoffer Gabel" label="Christoffer Gabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="59" end="65" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769489" start="98" end="129" title="Governor-general of Norway" label="Vice Governor-general of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453147" start="131" end="145" title="Frederik Gabel" label="Frederik Gabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q377277" start="195" end="205" title="Glückstadt" label="Glückstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="331" end="336" title="siege" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q520220" start="367" end="387" title="Army of the Holy Roman Empire" label="German Imperial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q487982" start="596" end="616" title="Archbishop of Bremen" label="Archbishop of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="661" end="674" title="Monarchy of Denmark" label="Danish throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q157812" start="683" end="696" title="Frederick III of Denmark" label="Frederick III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="720" end="730" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q52936" start="871" end="885" title="Charles X of Sweden" label="King Charles X"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="980" end="986" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551631" start="1046" end="1075" title="1660 state of emergency in Denmark" label="autocratic revolution of 1660"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797721" start="1191" end="1208" title="Conjoined Estates" label="Conjoined Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="1270" end="1284" title="Denmark-Norway" label="Denmark-Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466903" start="1618" end="1635" title="Hannibal Sehested (governor)" label="Hannibal Sehested"/>
<link wikidata="Q75742" start="1637" end="1655" title="Frederik Ahlefeldt" label="Frederik Ahlefeldt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1657" end="1669" title="Peter Bülche" label="Peter Bülche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797721" start="1671" end="1681" title="Hans Svane" label="Hans Svane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679442" start="1683" end="1697" title="Jacob Petersen" label="Jacob Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1702" end="1715" title="Theodor Lente" label="Theodor Lente"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1799" end="1805" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q157793" start="1982" end="1993" title="Christian V of Denmark" label="Christian V"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="2292" end="2305" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433264" start="2396" end="2419" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Church, Copenhagen" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357388" start="2570" end="2590" title="Carl Frederik Bricka" label="Carl Frederik Bricka"/>
<link wikidata="Q300926" start="2717" end="2738" title="Danmarks Adels Aarbog" label="Danmarks Adels Aarbog"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2751" end="2770" title="Dansk Adelsforening" label="Dansk Adelsforening"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384891" wikidata="Q6662661" url="?curid=384891" title="Lloyd Moseby">
<text>Lloyd Anthony Moseby (born November 5, 1959) is an American former Major League Baseball player. A center fielder, and good all-around athlete, Moseby&#x27;s nickname, &quot;Shaker&quot;, was said to stem from his ability to get away from or &quot;shake&quot; players who attempted to defend him on the basketball court.

==Career==
Born in Portland, Arkansas, Moseby graduated from Oakland High School in Oakland, California. Moseby&#x27;s primary sport in high school was basketball and he did not take baseball seriously until his sophomore year. Moseby had committed to play college basketball for St. Mary&#x27;s, one of 75 schools to offer him a basketball scholarship, if he had not decided to sign with the Blue Jays.

Drafted 2nd overall by the Toronto Blue Jays in the 1978 amateur draft, Moseby made his major league debut on May 24, 1980. Despite some growing pains early in his career, Moseby developed into a well-polished batter, fielder, and base-runner, driving in nearly 100 runs in three seasons (1984, 1986, and 1987) and regularly stealing 30-plus bases. Moseby finished in the top 25 for the American League Most Valuable Player Award twice—1983 and 1984.

In the mid-1980s, he was part of the powerful &quot;Killer B&#x27;s&quot; outfield trio for the Jays, playing center field between George Bell and Jesse Barfield. On April 19, 1983, he hit a walk-off two-run home run against Dan Spillner to give the Blue Jays a 9-7 victory over the Cleveland Indians. On August 16, 1987, Moseby took part in an unusual baserunning play. While on first base, he made an attempt to steal second base that saw the catcher throw the ball into centerfield. Moseby, now at second seeing the ball in the hands of the centerfielder, essentially made a run back to &quot;steal&quot; first base. Strangely enough, the center fielder, in trying to throw the ball back to the first baseman in an attempt to perhaps pick off Moseby, threw the ball wide and hard that resulted in Moseby racing to second base on the error. After the 1989 season, Moseby signed with the Detroit Tigers. Moseby saw limited action with the Tigers for two seasons and then traveled to Japan, where he played with the Yomiuri Giants in 1992 and 1993.

Over his career, Moseby had 869 runs, 169 home runs, 737 runs batted in, and 280 stolen bases with a career batting average of .257. He led the American League in triples in 1984 and was an All-Star in 1986. As of 2018, Moseby ranks in the top 10 for Toronto Blue Jays career leaders in WAR, games played, at-bats, runs, hits, doubles, triples, home runs, RBI, walks, stolen bases (franchise leader), and extra-base hits.

Moseby served as the Blue Jays&#x27; first base coach in 1998 and 1999.

In 2018, Moseby was inducted into the Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame. , Moseby was living on Queens Quay in Toronto.

==See also==
* List of Major League Baseball annual triples leaders

==References==
==External links==

, or Retrosheet</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6662661" start="0" end="20" title="Lloyd Moseby" label="Lloyd Anthony Moseby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="67" end="88" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059480" start="99" end="113" title="center fielder" label="center fielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662661" start="174" end="180" title="Lloyd Moseby" label="Shaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341939" start="303" end="319" title="basketball court" label="basketball court"/>
<link wikidata="Q80163" start="341" end="359" title="Portland, Arkansas" label="Portland, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074010" start="383" end="402" title="Oakland High School (Oakland, California)" label="Oakland High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="406" end="425" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="474" end="484" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q48890" start="579" end="597" title="college basketball" label="college basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401834" start="602" end="617" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Gaels men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="754" end="771" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="1114" end="1129" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="1130" end="1156" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award" label="Most Valuable Player Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572862" start="1310" end="1321" title="George Bell (outfielder)" label="George Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186138" start="1326" end="1340" title="Jesse Barfield" label="Jesse Barfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q859678" start="1370" end="1395" title="walk-off home run" label="walk-off two-run home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214424" start="1404" end="1416" title="Dan Spillner" label="Dan Spillner"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="1462" end="1479" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="2068" end="2082" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2163" end="2168" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197407" start="2195" end="2209" title="Yomiuri Giants" label="Yomiuri Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="2271" end="2279" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="2286" end="2300" title="runs batted in" label="runs batted in"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195130" start="2310" end="2321" title="stolen base" label="stolen base"/>
<link wikidata="Q581390" start="2392" end="2399" title="Triple (baseball)" label="triples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="2419" end="2427" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025915" start="2516" end="2519" title="Wins Above Replacement" label="WAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q865935" start="2689" end="2705" title="first base coach" label="first base coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517652" start="2763" end="2793" title="Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270810" start="2818" end="2829" title="Queens Quay (Toronto)" label="Queens Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589058" start="2858" end="2910" title="List of Major League Baseball annual triples leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual triples leaders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384892" wikidata="Q487746" url="?curid=384892" title="Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway">
<text>The Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway (; literally meaning Central Inland Expwy.) is an expressway in South Korea. Numbered 45, it was first constructed in three parts: connecting Yangpyeong to Chungju and Sangju to Gimcheon and Hyeonpung to Changwon. The part of the expressway between Chungju and Sangju was completed at the end of 2004, with the last remaining section being that between Gimcheon and Hyeonpung. The Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway Branch Line (a.k.a. Guma Expressway) is route number 451 and connects Hyeonpung to N. Daegu.

A speed zone exists from Exit 1 to Exit 13 (Masan-Gimcheon). The maximum speed is 100 km/h, and the minimum speed is 50 km/h. Another speed zone exists from north of exit 13 to exit 28 (Gimcheon-N. Yeoju). The maximum speed limit is 110 km/h, and the minimum speed limit is 50 km/h.

==History==
*December, 1977 - Daegu~Masan Section open the traffic (Guma Expressway)
*September 28, 2001 - Sangju~Gimcheon Section open the traffic.
*December 20, 2002 - Yeoju~Chungju Section open the traffic.
*December 15, 2004 - Sangju~Chungju Section open the traffic.
*November 30, 2007 - Gimcheon~Hyeonpung JC Section open the traffic.
*September 15, 2010 - Yeoju~N.Yeoju Section open the traffic.
*December 28, 2012 - N.Yeoju~Yangpyeong Section open the traffic.

== Information ==

=== Lanes ===
* 4 Lanes

=== Lengths ===
* 301.77 km

=== Speed limit ===
* Naeseo JC ~ Gimcheon JC / N.Yeoju IC~Yangpyeong IC : 100 km/h
* Gimcheon JC ~ N.Yeoju IC : 110 km/h

== Branch Line ==
* See Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway Branch

== List of facilities ==

* IC: Interchange, JC: Junction, SA: Service Area, TG:Tollgate

==See also==
*Roads and expressways in South Korea
*Transportation in South Korea

== External links ==
* KEC (Korea Expressway Corporation)
* MOLIT South Korean Government Transport Department</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q487746" start="4" end="29" title="Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway" label="Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q47012" start="80" end="105" title="expressway in South Korea" label="expressway in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q50255" start="172" end="182" title="Yangpyeong" label="Yangpyeong"/>
<link wikidata="Q31094" start="186" end="193" title="Chungju" label="Chungju"/>
<link wikidata="Q42163" start="198" end="204" title="Sangju" label="Sangju"/>
<link wikidata="Q42078" start="208" end="216" title="Gimcheon" label="Gimcheon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="221" end="230" title="Hyeonpung Junction" label="Hyeonpung"/>
<link wikidata="Q243327" start="234" end="242" title="Changwon" label="Changwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42078" start="383" end="391" title="Gimcheon" label="Gimcheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q487746" start="411" end="448" title="Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway" label="Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway Branch Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q483526" start="457" end="472" title="Guma Expressway" label="Guma Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="507" end="516" title="Hyeonpung" label="Hyeonpung"/>
<link wikidata="Q20927" start="523" end="528" title="Daegu" label="Daegu"/>
<link wikidata="Q20927" start="845" end="850" title="Daegu" label="Daegu"/>
<link wikidata="Q495387" start="851" end="856" title="Masan" label="Masan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42163" start="922" end="928" title="Sangju" label="Sangju"/>
<link wikidata="Q42078" start="929" end="937" title="Gimcheon" label="Gimcheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q50257" start="985" end="990" title="Yeoju" label="Yeoju"/>
<link wikidata="Q31094" start="991" end="998" title="Chungju" label="Chungju"/>
<link wikidata="Q42163" start="1046" end="1052" title="Sangju" label="Sangju"/>
<link wikidata="Q31094" start="1053" end="1060" title="Chungju" label="Chungju"/>
<link wikidata="Q42078" start="1108" end="1116" title="Gimcheon" label="Gimcheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q50257" start="1178" end="1183" title="Yeoju" label="Yeoju"/>
<link wikidata="Q50255" start="1247" end="1257" title="Yangpyeong" label="Yangpyeong"/>
<link wikidata="Q483526" start="1505" end="1537" title="Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway Branch" label="Jungbu Naeryuk Expressway Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q47012" start="1643" end="1679" title="Roads and expressways in South Korea" label="Roads and expressways in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q496188" start="1681" end="1710" title="Transportation in South Korea" label="Transportation in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q489325" start="1740" end="1768" title="Korea Expressway Corporation" label="Korea Expressway Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q626814" start="1778" end="1801" title="Government of South Korea" label="South Korean Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q9398575" start="1802" end="1822" title="Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport (Korea)" label="Transport Department"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384893" wikidata="Q1030284" url="?curid=384893" title="Love–hate relationship">
<text>A love–hate relationship is an interpersonal relationship involving simultaneous or alternating emotions of love and hate—something particularly common when emotions are intense. The term is used frequently in psychology, popular writing and journalism. It can be applied to relationships with inanimate objects, or even concepts, as well as those of a romantic nature or between siblings and parents/children.

==Psychological roots==
A love–hate relationship has been linked to the occurrence of emotional ambivalence in early childhood; to conflicting responses by different ego states within the same person; or to the inevitable co-existence of egoistic conflicts with the object of love.

Individuals with Narcissistic personality disorder or Borderline personality disorder have been seen as particularly prone to aggressive reactions towards love objects, not least when issues of self-identity are involved: in extreme instances, hate at the very existence of the other may be the only emotion felt, until love breaks through behind it.

Research from Yale University suggests love–hate relationships may be the result of poor self-esteem.

==Family and development==
Love–hate relationships also develop within a familial context, especially between an adult and one or both of their parents. Love–hate relationships and sometimes complete estrangement between adults and one or both of their parents often indicates poor bonding with either parent in infancy, depressive symptoms of parents, borderline or narcissistic pathology in the adult child, and/or parental alienation in childhood. Parents who alienate their children from the other parent frequently suffer from borderline personality disorder (BPD) or narcissistic personality disorder (NPD). Children who experience parental alienation techniques by a borderline parent report a higher prevalence of low self-esteem, low self-sufficiency, insecure attachment styles, and higher levels of depression in adulthood. One of the development tasks for humans is to balance the primary love and hate drives as to tolerate ambivalence toward a loved object. When this task is unsuccessfully accomplished, severe psychopathology can ensue. Individuals with BPD and NPD often fail to accomplish the task of ambivalence. They are unable to be simultaneously angry at someone they love, without destroying the love (Corradi, 2013). Children are unable to tolerate the ambivalence, and are indoctrinated to choose. Despite feeling love for their alienated parent, they let go entirely of the loved object. This creates an occasion for the development of ego defenses in the child referred to as “splitting.”

As a way of understanding splitting, a common feature of BPD and NPD, is described as “a pattern of unstable and intense interpersonal relationships characterized by alternating between extremes of idealization and devaluation” (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 663).

A love–hate relationship may develop when people have completely lost the intimacy within a loving relationship, yet still retain some passion for, or perhaps some commitment to, each other, before degenerating into a hate–love relationship leading to divorce.

==Culture==

*The Japanese word “tsundere” is derived from two Japanese terms: (adverb, &#x27;morosely, aloofly, offputtingly&#x27;) and (adverb, &#x27;in a lovey-dovey or infatuated manner&#x27;). A tsundere character is one who frequently switches between insulting their love interest and acting lovestruck or kind toward them. Tsundere characters usually belittle their love interest at first but eventually become kinder to them over time.
**A more abstract term for love–hate exists, .
*Catullus introduced the love–hate theme into Western culture with his famous lines: &quot;I hate and yet love. You may wonder how I manage it. I don&#x27;t know, but feel it happen, and am in torment&quot;.
*The concept of a love–hate relationship is frequently used in teen romance novels where two characters are shown to &quot;hate&quot; each other, but show some sort of affection or attraction towards each other at certain points of the story.
*The screwball comedy film genre features couples feeling intense attraction and intense conflict.

==See also==
== References ==
==Further reading==
* John Gottman, &quot;Why Marriages Succeed and Fail&quot; (1994)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1030284" start="2" end="24" title="Love–hate relationship" label="love–hate relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q223642" start="31" end="57" title="interpersonal relationship" label="interpersonal relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="96" end="103" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q316" start="108" end="112" title="love" label="love"/>
<link wikidata="Q160232" start="117" end="121" title="hate" label="hate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="157" end="164" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="210" end="220" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030" start="242" end="252" title="journalism" label="journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="275" end="311" title="Anthropomorphism" label="relationships with inanimate objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q151885" start="321" end="328" title="concept" label="concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189047" start="353" end="361" title="Romantic love" label="romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518105" start="380" end="388" title="Sibling relationship" label="siblings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928045" start="508" end="519" title="ambivalence" label="ambivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q623513" start="578" end="588" title="Transactional analysis" label="ego states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362786" start="650" end="658" title="Psychological egoism" label="egoistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060310" start="712" end="745" title="Narcissistic personality disorder" label="Narcissistic personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q208166" start="749" end="780" title="Borderline personality disorder" label="Borderline personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433373" start="973" end="978" title="Other (philosophy)" label="other"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="1061" end="1076" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981881" start="1136" end="1147" title="self-esteem" label="self-esteem"/>
<link wikidata="Q208166" start="1682" end="1713" title="borderline personality disorder" label="borderline personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060310" start="1723" end="1756" title="narcissistic personality disorder" label="narcissistic personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325774" start="2694" end="2703" title="Splitting (psychology)" label="splitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q736922" start="3021" end="3029" title="intimacy" label="intimacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q335046" start="3082" end="3089" title="passion (emotion)" label="passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425577" start="3111" end="3121" title="promise" label="commitment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047501" start="3242" end="3250" title="tsundere" label="tsundere"/>
<link wikidata="Q163079" start="3702" end="3710" title="Catullus" label="Catullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667148" start="3792" end="3901" title="Catullus 85" label="I hate and yet love. You may wonder how I manage it. I don&amp;#x27;t know, but feel it happen, and am in torment"/>
<link wikidata="Q858330" start="3977" end="3991" title="romance novels" label="romance novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q248583" start="4157" end="4173" title="screwball comedy" label="screwball comedy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384894" wikidata="Q482946" url="?curid=384894" title="Ulsan Expressway">
<text>The Ulsan Expressway (), is a freeway in South Korea, connecting Ulju-gun, Ulsan to Nam-gu, Ulsan.

== Compositions ==
=== Lanes ===
* Eonyang JC - Janggeom IC: 4
* Janggeom IC - Ulsan IC(Sinbok Rotary): 6

=== Length ===
14.30 km

===Speed limits===
* 100 km/h

==List of facilities==

*IC: Interchange, JC: Junction, SA: Service Area, TG:Tollgate

==See also==
* Busan-Ulsan Expressway Co., Ltd.
* Roads and expressways in South Korea
* Transportation in South Korea
* Donghae Expressway

==External links==
* Busan-Ulsan Expressway Co., Ltd.
* MOLIT South Korean Government Transport Department</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482946" start="4" end="20" title="Ulsan Expressway" label="Ulsan Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="30" end="37" title="freeway" label="freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="41" end="52" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q50313" start="65" end="73" title="Ulju-gun" label="Ulju-gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q41278" start="75" end="80" title="Ulsan" label="Ulsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50364" start="84" end="90" title="Nam-gu, Ulsan" label="Nam-gu"/>
<link wikidata="Q482897" start="365" end="397" title="Busan-Ulsan Expressway Co., Ltd." label="Busan-Ulsan Expressway Co., Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q47012" start="400" end="436" title="Roads and expressways in South Korea" label="Roads and expressways in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q496188" start="439" end="468" title="Transportation in South Korea" label="Transportation in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q482897" start="471" end="489" title="Donghae Expressway" label="Donghae Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q626814" start="553" end="576" title="Government of South Korea" label="South Korean Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q9398575" start="577" end="597" title="Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport (Korea)" label="Transport Department"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384895" wikidata="Q5258499" url="?curid=384895" title="Dennis Hayes (businessman)">
<text>Dennis C. Hayes (born 1950) is the inventor of PC modem and founder of Hayes Microcomputer Products, a manufacturer of modems mostly known for introducing the Hayes AT command set, which has subsequently been used in most modems produced to this day.

==Background==
Hayes had a student job at AT&amp;T Long Lines, in an engineering group, while attending Georgia Institute of Technology.
He left Georgia Tech in the mid-1970s to work at an early data communications company, National Data Corporation in Atlanta, a company that handled electronic money transfers and credit card authorizations. Hayes&#x27;s job was to set up modem connections for NDC&#x27;s customers. In 1977, Hayes started his company &quot;by assembling modems by hand on a borrowed kitchen table.&quot; He met Dale Heatherington at National Data Corporation and together they developed and marketed the first high-quality IBM PC modem, and built the company named &quot;Hayes Communications&quot; around it. While Heatherington left the company early (in 1985) to retire, Hayes ran the company until it filed for bankruptcy in 1998 when the technology was incorporated into the products of competitors.

In 1994, Hayes&#x27;s share of the modem market was 20% and still &quot;the market leader in modems&quot;, but a decline in relation to its previous market share of over 50%.

==Personal life==
In 1982, Hayes married Melita Easters. They divorced in 1987 with an estimated $40 million divorce settlement, one of the largest ever in Georgia. The same year of his divorce, Hayes married Mina Chan with whom, according to Georgia Trend magazine, he had an affair in 1986 while still married to Easters. Chan was a director of Hayes&#x27;s company. From two marriages he has four children.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5258499" start="0" end="15" title="Dennis Hayes (businessman)" label="Dennis C. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="47" end="55" title="Modem" label="PC modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591901" start="71" end="99" title="Hayes Microcomputer Products" label="Hayes Microcomputer Products"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="119" end="124" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q298684" start="159" end="179" title="Hayes AT command set" label="Hayes AT command set"/>
<link wikidata="Q85739040" start="294" end="313" title="AT&amp;amp;T Long Lines" label="AT&amp;amp;T Long Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="356" end="387" title="Georgia Institute of Technology" label="Georgia Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q570473" start="476" end="501" title="McKesson Corporation" label="National Data Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="505" end="512" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q47468011" start="783" end="801" title="Dale Heatherington" label="Dale Heatherington"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="895" end="901" title="IBM Personal Computer" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424752" start="1151" end="1159" title="product (business)" label="products"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384896" wikidata="Q453916" url="?curid=384896" title="Sextus Afranius Burrus">
<text>Sextus Afranius Burrus (born AD 1 in Vasio, Gallia Narbonensis; died AD 62) was a prefect of the Praetorian Guard and was, together with Seneca the Younger, an advisor to the Roman emperor Nero, making him a very powerful man in the early years of Nero&#x27;s reign.

Agrippina the Younger chose him as Prefect in 51 to secure her son Nero&#x27;s place as emperor after the death of Claudius. For the first eight years of Nero&#x27;s rule, Burrus and Nero&#x27;s former tutor Seneca helped maintain a stable government. Burrus acquiesced to Nero&#x27;s murder of Agrippina the Younger but lost his influence over Nero anyway. He died in 62, some say from poison, though officially he died of throat cancer.

The cognomen &quot;Burrus&quot; is the Latin version of the name Pyrrhus, king of Epirus.

==Sources==
* Tacitus &quot;Annales&quot; 12.42; 14.51
* Suetonius &quot;Nero&quot; 35.5
* = ILS 1321
* Dio 62.13

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q453916" start="0" end="22" title="Sextus Afranius Burrus" label="Sextus Afranius Burrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26897" start="44" end="62" title="Gallia Narbonensis" label="Gallia Narbonensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="97" end="113" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="137" end="155" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="181" end="193" title="Nero" label="emperor Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q154732" start="268" end="289" title="Agrippina the Younger" label="Agrippina the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="383" end="391" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q777342" start="712" end="720" title="cognomen" label="cognomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q172353" start="773" end="780" title="Pyrrhus of Epirus" label="Pyrrhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q565751" start="790" end="796" title="Epirus" label="Epirus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384899" wikidata="Q186872" url="?curid=384899" title="Francisco de Sá de Miranda">
<text>Francisco de Sá de Miranda (28 August 1481 – 17 May 1558; ) was a Portuguese poet of the Renaissance.

==Life==
Sá de Miranda was born in Coimbra, the son of a canon Gonçalo Mendes de Sá belonging to the ancient and noble family of Sá and Inês de Melo. His brother, Mem de Sá, was the third governor of the Portuguese colony of Brazil.

Sá de Miranda passed his early years by the banks of the river Mondego, considered a source of inspiration to many other poets. He made his first studies of Greek, Latin and philosophy in the college of the Santa Cruz Monastery, and in 1505 went to University of Lisbon (the University of Coimbra had moved to Lisbon in 1380) to study law, beginning at the same time to attend the Portuguese court and write poems in the mediaeval style still dominant in Portugal.

Verse-making and gallantry occupied much of his time at court, and he became one of a group comprising the greatest nobles and most celebrated poets of the age, including Bernardim Ribeiro and Cristóvão Falcão, who surrounded the courtier Leonor de Mascareñas. He seems to have resided for the most part in the capital up to 1521, dividing his time between the palace and the university, where he had taken the degree of Doctor of Law by 1516. He accompanied the court as it moved from place to place during the reign of King Manuel, and although he witnessed military triumphs, he started pointing out the signs of decadence and future disaster. He had come out of the university so good a lawyer that he was able to act as professor of his faculty, and he was offered a judicial post, but refused it. He had only embarked on a legal career to please his father, and on the latter&#x27;s death he abandoned law for moral and stoic philosophy and poetry. He had observed with regret the modest intellectual position of his country, and resolved to travel.

Sá de Miranda travelled to Italy in 1521, where he was able to make contact with many writers and artists of the Renaissance, including Vittoria Colonna (who was his distant relative), Pietro Bembo, Sannazzaro and Ariosto. He assisted at the rebirth of Italian drama and saw the performance of classical prose comedies, a form of art which he was to transplant to Portugal. On his way home, in 1526, he visited Spain, meeting classical writers Juan Boscan and Garcilaso de la Vega.

Back in Portugal in 1526 or 1527, he was again received at court, where he became a friend to King John III and other nobles. But although his reputation as a courtier and poet grew, the opposition of his literary foes increased. He also became pessimistic at the materialism of the age and neglect of agriculture. Four years after his return he decided to move to the Minho province, in the North of the country, where he purchased land. Around 1530 he married Briolanja de Azevedo, a lady of noble birth.

In 1552 he moved to the Quinta da Tapada, near Amares. He continued to write and receive work from other poets, showing that his influence was well established. Three misfortunes followed in quick succession: his eldest son died in 1553, Prince John in 1554, and his wife in 1555. His friend John III died in 1557, and Sá de Miranda followed him in 1558, aged 76.

==Work==
Like many Portuguese writers of his time, Sá de Miranda often wrote in Castilian apart from Portuguese. His early work is all in the form of the typical 15th-century Portuguese poetry (the &quot;vilancete&quot;, the &quot;cantiga&quot;, the &quot;esparsa&quot; and the &quot;trova&quot;). Influenced by his travels in Italy and Spain, Sá de Miranda introduced a new aesthetics in Portugal. He introduced the sonnet, the elegy, the eclogue, the ottava rima and other classical poetic forms, adapting the Portuguese language to the Italian hendecasyllable verse. These forms, especially sonnet and ottava rima were later used by many Portuguese poets including Luís Vaz de Camões.

Apart from poems, Sá de Miranda wrote two theatrical comedies following classical forms: &quot;Estrangeiros&quot;, the first Portugues prose comedy (staged to great success in Coimbra in 1528 and published in 1559) and &quot;Vilhalpandos&quot; (written around 1530 and published in 1560). His tragedy &quot;Cleópatra&quot; has only survived in fragments.

He also left several letters in verse, addressed to people like King John III and his brother Mem de Sá.

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* &quot;Lusitania illustrata. Notices on the history, antiquities, literature &amp;c&quot;, by John Adamson, Newcastle on Tyne 1842.
* &quot;Dreams of Waking: An Anthology of Iberian Lyric Poetry 1400-1700&quot;. Edited and Translated by Vincent Barletta, Mark L. Bajus, Cici Malik, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 2013.

== External links ==

* Poems by Francisco de Sá de Miranda at Portuguese Wikisource.
* Francisco de Sá de Miranda&#x27;s &quot;Versos portuguêses&quot; at Archive.org.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186872" start="0" end="26" title="Francisco de Sá de Miranda" label="Francisco de Sá de Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="66" end="76" title="Portuguese People" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="77" end="81" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="89" end="100" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q45412" start="138" end="145" title="Coimbra" label="Coimbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104153" start="160" end="165" title="canon (priest)" label="canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16884135" start="232" end="234" title="Sá" label="Sá"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734857" start="266" end="275" title="Mem de Sá" label="Mem de Sá"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088324" start="318" end="334" title="Colonial Brazil" label="colony of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q15656" start="400" end="407" title="Mondego River" label="Mondego"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="494" end="499" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="501" end="506" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="511" end="521" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189004" start="529" end="536" title="college" label="college"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499524" start="544" end="564" title="Santa Cruz Monastery" label="Santa Cruz Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q368643" start="586" end="606" title="University of Coimbra" label="University of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q368643" start="612" end="633" title="University of Coimbra" label="University of Coimbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="792" end="800" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q822857" start="974" end="991" title="Bernardim Ribeiro" label="Bernardim Ribeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q364552" start="996" end="1012" title="Cristóvão Falcão" label="Cristóvão Falcão"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511216" start="1033" end="1041" title="courtier" label="courtier"/>
<link wikidata="Q57234249" start="1042" end="1062" title="Leonor de Mascareñas" label="Leonor de Mascareñas"/>
<link wikidata="Q959320" start="1224" end="1237" title="Doctor of Law" label="Doctor of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="1324" end="1335" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="King Manuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q945895" start="1419" end="1428" title="decadence" label="decadence"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1887" end="1892" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="1973" end="1984" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q255368" start="1996" end="2012" title="Vittoria Colonna" label="Vittoria Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q334188" start="2045" end="2057" title="Pietro Bembo" label="Pietro Bembo"/>
<link wikidata="Q510621" start="2059" end="2069" title="Jacopo Sannazaro" label="Sannazzaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q48900" start="2074" end="2081" title="Ariosto" label="Ariosto"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2271" end="2276" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q375056" start="2304" end="2315" title="Juan Boscan" label="Juan Boscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q311405" start="2320" end="2340" title="Garcilaso de la Vega (poet)" label="Garcilaso de la Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q216789" start="2437" end="2450" title="John III of Portugal" label="King John III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538548" start="2712" end="2717" title="Entre Douro e Minho" label="Minho"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="2837" end="2842" title="Nobility" label="noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q455012" start="2898" end="2904" title="Amares, Portugal" label="Amares"/>
<link wikidata="Q442501" start="3089" end="3100" title="João Manuel, Hereditary Prince of Portugal" label="Prince John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="3296" end="3305" title="Spanish language" label="Castilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q80056" start="3633" end="3639" title="sonnet" label="sonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q174864" start="3645" end="3650" title="elegy" label="elegy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072974" start="3656" end="3663" title="eclogue" label="eclogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402779" start="3669" end="3680" title="ottava rima" label="ottava rima"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="3728" end="3747" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q937691" start="3763" end="3778" title="hendecasyllable" label="hendecasyllable"/>
<link wikidata="Q590" start="3884" end="3902" title="Luís de Camões" label="Luís Vaz de Camões"/>
<link wikidata="Q40831" start="3947" end="3966" title="comedy" label="theatrical comedies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384910" wikidata="Q643927" url="?curid=384910" title="HFB 320 Hansa Jet">
<text>The HFB 320 Hansa Jet is a twin-engine, ten-seat business jet that was designed and produced by German aircraft manufacturer Hamburger Flugzeugbau between 1964 and 1973. The most recognisable and unconventional feature of the aircraft is its forward-swept wing.

The Hansa Jet began development during the 1960s, the selection of the forward-swept wing can be largely attributed to head engineer Hans Wocke, who had previously worked on the experimental Junkers Ju 287. It possessed a spacious cabin, which was achieved due to its wing design, but was a relatively heavy aircraft, posing some issues during both take-off and landing. On 21 April 1964, the prototype conducted its maiden flight. On 12 May 1965, the first prototype was lost during a test flight, killing Hamburger Flugzeugbau&#x27;s chief test pilot; several design changes were made to change the Hansa Jet&#x27;s stall characteristics.

Type certification of the Hansa Jet was received during early 1967 and the first deliveries commenced during the following year. The largest customer of the type was the German Air Force, who tasked it with both training and VIP transport duties. During 1973, it was decided to end production of the Hansa Jet. Reasons for the programme&#x27;s termination include increased competition from newer executive jets, a decline in the value of the US dollar, and the limited sales of the type. The German Air Force continued to operate their Hansa Jets into the early 1990s. A limited number continued to be used amongst civilian operators into the 21st century.

==Development==
===Origins===
During the early 1960s, American businessman and inventor Bill Lear successfully launched the Learjet 23, one of the first light business jets. Several other manufacturers paid heed to this newly-found niche in the global aircraft market, one of these being the German aircraft manufacturer Hamburger Flugzeugbau. At this time, the company was reportedly keen to reassert its authority as a design agency and looking for a suitable commercially viable project in light of limited funding available from the West German government. Having identified the development of its own business jet as a suitable venture, Hamburger Flugzeugbau tasked its design team with producing an innovative small jet aircraft of its own.

The head of Hamburger Flugzeugbau&#x27;s engineering team, German aeronautical engineer Hans Wocke, had previously designed the Junkers Ju 287, an experimental jet bomber of the Second World War which was the first aircraft to feature forward-swept wings. This experience strongly influenced the decision to adopt a forward-swept wing for the new design, which became known as the &quot;HFB 320&quot; or the &quot;Hansa Jet&quot;. A more spacious cabin could be achieved than that of the Learjet, while remaining just as fast by minimising drag. The aircraft&#x27;s aerodynamics were shaped by in excess of 2,000 hours of model-based testing performed in various wind tunnels at sites such as the Aerodynamische Versuchsanstalt in Göttingen, the Nationaal Lucht- en Ruimtevaartlaboratorium in Amsterdam, and Modane in France.

The selection of the American General Electric CJ610 turbojet engine to power the design was a straightforward choice; at the time, there were no other compact turbojets that had reached quantity manufacture yet. It provided some benefits, such as a relatively high thrust output, but was both noisy and fuel-hungry. Despite this power, the Hansa Jet required a runway length of roughly 5,900 feet, preventing it from using most smaller airports thus limiting its practicality. Possessing a maximum takeoff weight (MTOW) of 20,280-pounds, it was a relatively heavy aircraft compared with several competing business jets, such as the pre-existing Learjet 23 that had motivated the Hansa Jet&#x27;s development.

While the German manufacturer would construct the majority of the airframe including the fuselage, engine pods and control system within its own factory, Hamburger Flugzeugbau formed partnerships with multiple other aircraft manufacturers, including Spain&#x27;s CASA, Dutch Fokker and American Lockheed Corporation, which produced several other elements of the airframe abroad at their own facilities. On 18 March 1964, assembly of the first prototype Hansa Jet was completed; its use in a round of ground-based testing commenced immediately thereafter.

===Into flight===
On 21 April 1964, the prototype conducted its maiden flight; during the following month, it was exhibited at the Hanover Air Show. A second prototype was flown on 19 October 1964. After a year of certification flight testing, on 12 May 1965, the first prototype crashed resulting in the death of Hamburger Flugzeugbau&#x27;s chief test pilot; the cause was determined to have been the occurrence of an unrecoverable deep stall which had been induced by the design of the T-tail. As a consequence of the accident, various modifications were introduced to improve the aircraft&#x27;s stall characteristics, including the installation of a stick pusher.

Assembly of the first ten production aircraft commenced during May 1965, the first of these reportedly flew on 2 February 1966. The granting of type certification by German authorities was achieved on 23 February 1967, certification from the American Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) followed on 7 April 1967. Deliveries commenced during the following year. According to aviation journalist Richard Collins, Hamburger Flugzeugbau&#x27;s sales and service teams appeared to make only half-hearted efforts, which led to little customer interest in comparison to other business jets. In the long run, this inability to generate sales soon brought about the end of the programme.

Factors such as increased competition from newer executive jets and a comparatively poor safety record had contributed to dwindling orders during the late 1960s; during 1973, production of the type was ceased. According to EADS, the multinational successor company to Hamburger Flugzeugbau, the decision to terminate further development efforts involving the Hansa Jet had been attributed to the intense international competition from rival manufacturers, as well as a decline in value of the U.S. dollar during this period.

In 1969, the $840,000 HFB 320 was to be developed into the $1.7 million, Mach 0.76 HFB 330: flight-testing was to start in 1971 for FAR 25 certification by late 1972.
It would have been stretched by and powered by Garrett ATF3 turbofans with thrust reversers for short-field operation.
A fuel capacity would have given it a maximum endurance of over seven hours and a transcontinental range of with five people.

==Design==
The HFB 320 Hansa Jet is a mid-wing monoplane of a somewhat conventional layout, being powered by twin rear-mounted jet engines beneath a T-tail. Constructed entirely of metal, it has a 10-seat passenger cabin and retractable undercarriage. As certified, the Hansa Jet can carry up to 12 passengers. Its General Electric CJ610 turbojet engines enabled the aircraft to achieve a maximum speed of along with a maximum endurance in excess of . The decision to mount these engines far aft contributed to the relatively quiet cabin.

An unusual feature of the Hansa Jet is its forward-swept wing, which is mid-mounted in the fuselage. This arrangement provided multiple benefits, not least maximising the aircraft&#x27;s speed capabilities. It also allowed the main wing spar to pass through the fuselage behind the passenger cabin, thus leaving it unencumbered by carry-through spars or similar structural elements; this choice facilitated the adoption of a longer cabin with more seats while maintaining adequate headroom in the small-diameter fuselage. , the HFB 320 remains the only civilian jet ever to have a forward-swept wing.

For added safety, the Hansa Jet was furnished with triple-redundant systems. It was also provisioned with a fully automated fuel system, having a capacity distributed across multiple fuel tanks located in the fuselage, wing, and wing tips. Early aircraft were known to wear out their brakes at a high rate during landings; while a drogue parachute was made available as an option. The brake issue was later effectively addressed via the availability of more substantial brake units and the introduction of thrust reversers.

==Operational history==
The first customer for the Hansa Jet was the Italian construction materials manufacturer Italcementi, which received the first delivery on 26 September 1967. Other corporate purchasers of the HFB 320 included the Argentinian state-owned Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales oil company.

During 1963, the German Air Force placed an order for 13 HFB 320s. As part of the evaluation of the type, two preproduction aircraft were delivered to the ErpSt 61 test wing at Oberpfaffenhoffen in 1966. As a consequence of this evaluation, a total of six aircraft were ordered for VIP transport duties by the German Air Force; deliveries of these aircraft commenced during 1969.

Additionally, a further eight Hansa jets were purchased by the German Air Force for providing electronic countermeasure (ECM) training to air crews; these aircraft were delivered between August 1976 and April 1982. During 1985, the German Air Force decided to replace its Hansas with newer Canadair Challengers in the VIP role; the service&#x27;s ECM aircraft remained operational until their withdrawal in 1994.

The Aviation Safety Network lists a total of nine accidents (six fatal) for the type, a 20 percent hull-loss rate; but only the crash of the prototype was directly attributable to the aircraft&#x27;s design. Pilot error was blamed in a majority of the accidents. According to aviation publication &quot;AIN Online&quot;, perhaps the last flying Hansa in the U.S. crashed on 30 November 2004. Because of the low number of airframes remaining, it became economically impractical to re-engine or install hush kits on the Hansa Jet&#x27;s relatively-noisy CJ610 engines.

==Operators==
===Civilian operators===
* Millardair
* Libyan Arab Airlines
* Golden West Airlines
* Grand Aire Express
* Jet Hansa Corporation
* Modern Air Transport

===Military operators===
* West German Air Force

==Specifications (HFB 320)==


==See also==
==References==
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q643927" start="4" end="21" title="HFB 320 Hansa Jet" label="HFB 320 Hansa Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062135" start="49" end="61" title="business jet" label="business jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="96" end="102" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q565047" start="125" end="146" title="Hamburger Flugzeugbau" label="Hamburger Flugzeugbau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733139" start="242" end="260" title="forward-swept wing" label="forward-swept wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5650847" start="396" end="406" title="Hans Wocke" label="Hans Wocke"/>
<link wikidata="Q685912" start="454" end="468" title="Junkers Ju 287" label="Junkers Ju 287"/>
<link wikidata="Q207977" start="656" end="665" title="prototype" label="prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362364" start="680" end="693" title="maiden flight" label="maiden flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q752034" start="881" end="886" title="Stall (flight)" label="stall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418690" start="905" end="923" title="Type certification" label="Type certification"/>
<link wikidata="Q56013" start="1075" end="1091" title="German Air Force" label="German Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q956495" start="1130" end="1133" title="VIP" label="VIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1618" end="1626" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q325128" start="1652" end="1661" title="Bill Lear" label="Bill Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810725" start="1688" end="1698" title="Learjet 23" label="Learjet 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062135" start="1723" end="1735" title="business jet" label="business jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1856" end="1862" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q565047" start="1885" end="1906" title="Hamburger Flugzeugbau" label="Hamburger Flugzeugbau"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="2101" end="2112" title="West Germany" label="West German"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="2378" end="2390" title="Aerospace engineering" label="aeronautical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5650847" start="2400" end="2410" title="Hans Wocke" label="Hans Wocke"/>
<link wikidata="Q685912" start="2440" end="2454" title="Junkers Ju 287" label="Junkers Ju 287"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2490" end="2506" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929294" start="2547" end="2566" title="swept wing" label="forward-swept wings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2852" end="2856" title="Drag (physics)#Aerodynamics" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="2975" end="2986" title="wind tunnel" label="wind tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q381435" start="3009" end="3039" title="Aerodynamische Versuchsanstalt" label="Aerodynamische Versuchsanstalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033" start="3043" end="3052" title="Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3058" end="3101" title="Nationaal Lucht- en Ruimtevaartlaboratorium" label="Nationaal Lucht- en Ruimtevaartlaboratorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="3105" end="3114" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q537113" start="3120" end="3126" title="Modane" label="Modane"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3130" end="3136" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3160" end="3168" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759471" start="3169" end="3191" title="General Electric CJ610" label="General Electric CJ610"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="3192" end="3200" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q938476" start="3630" end="3652" title="maximum takeoff weight" label="maximum takeoff weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="4100" end="4105" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128353" start="4113" end="4117" title="Construcciones Aeronáuticas SA" label="CASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="4119" end="4124" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q155896" start="4125" end="4131" title="Fokker" label="Fokker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233" start="4145" end="4165" title="Lockheed Corporation" label="Lockheed Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207977" start="4293" end="4302" title="prototype" label="prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362364" start="4470" end="4483" title="maiden flight" label="maiden flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q785990" start="4537" end="4553" title="ILA Berlin Air Show" label="Hanover Air Show"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4840" end="4850" title="Stall (flight)#Deep stall" label="deep stall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414362" start="4895" end="4901" title="T-tail" label="T-tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q752034" start="5006" end="5011" title="Stall (flight)" label="stall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616240" start="5061" end="5073" title="stick pusher" label="stick pusher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418690" start="5220" end="5238" title="type certification" label="type certification"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="5327" end="5358" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="5981" end="5985" title="Airbus" label="EADS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494442" start="6498" end="6510" title="Garrett ATF3" label="Garrett ATF3"/>
<link wikidata="Q732673" start="6526" end="6541" title="thrust reverser" label="thrust reverser"/>
<link wikidata="Q627537" start="6744" end="6753" title="monoplane" label="monoplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414362" start="6846" end="6852" title="T-tail" label="T-tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874353" start="6934" end="6947" title="tricycle landing gear" label="undercarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759471" start="7012" end="7034" title="General Electric CJ610" label="General Electric CJ610"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="7035" end="7043" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733139" start="7280" end="7298" title="forward-swept wing" label="forward-swept wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="7328" end="7336" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303116" start="7469" end="7478" title="wing spar" label="wing spar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303116" start="7582" end="7586" title="spar (aeronautics)" label="spar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534839" start="8123" end="8128" title="brake" label="brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q591399" start="8170" end="8186" title="drogue parachute" label="drogue parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q732673" start="8345" end="8360" title="thrust reverser" label="thrust reverser"/>
<link wikidata="Q610658" start="8477" end="8488" title="Italcementi" label="Italcementi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006989" start="8625" end="8658" title="Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales" label="Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales"/>
<link wikidata="Q56013" start="8690" end="8706" title="German Air Force" label="German Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q849203" start="9148" end="9173" title="electronic countermeasure" label="electronic countermeasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q699843" start="9344" end="9363" title="Canadair Challenger" label="Canadair Challenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459239" start="9472" end="9495" title="Aviation Safety Network" label="Aviation Safety Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476975" start="9969" end="9977" title="hush kit" label="hush kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858531" start="10077" end="10087" title="Millardair" label="Millardair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056939" start="10090" end="10110" title="Libyan Arab Airlines" label="Libyan Arab Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579957" start="10113" end="10133" title="Golden West Airlines" label="Golden West Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594224" start="10136" end="10154" title="Grand Aire Express" label="Grand Aire Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888541" start="10181" end="10201" title="Modern Air Transport" label="Modern Air Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q56013" start="10230" end="10251" title="German Air Force" label="West German Air Force"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384911" wikidata="Q893839" url="?curid=384911" title="Bork">
<text>Bork may refer to:

*Bork (surname)
**Robert Bork, jurist
*Bork (comics), a fictional superhero in the DC Comics universe
*Bork (company), a European home appliance manufacturer
*Börk, Hanak, Turkish village
*DoggoLingo, also known as bork, an Internet language of words used to refer to dogs
*Bork, a part of Selm, Germany
*Bórk, a village in the Pomeranian Voivodeship, Poland

==See also==
*The Swedish Chef, a Muppet who appeared in &quot;The Muppet Show&quot;, was known for his exuberant interjection of &quot;Bork, bork, bork!&quot;
*Bork Lazer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q893839" start="0" end="4" title="Bork" label="Bork"/>
<link wikidata="Q30669686" start="21" end="35" title="Bork (surname)" label="Bork (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365780" start="38" end="49" title="Robert Bork" label="Robert Bork"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945578" start="59" end="72" title="Bork (comics)" label="Bork (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035327" start="123" end="137" title="Bork (company)" label="Bork (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825606" start="179" end="190" title="Börk, Hanak" label="Börk, Hanak"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775084" start="209" end="219" title="DoggoLingo" label="DoggoLingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10935" start="310" end="314" title="Selm" label="Selm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16487675" start="325" end="329" title="Bórk" label="Bórk"/>
<link wikidata="Q700" start="398" end="410" title="Swedish Chef" label="Swedish Chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q220556" start="541" end="551" title="Bork Lazer" label="Bork Lazer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384921" wikidata="Q7112228" url="?curid=384921" title="Outline of Christian theology">
<text>The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to Christian theology:

[[Christian theology]] is the study of Christian belief and practice. Such study concentrates primarily upon the texts of the Old Testament and the New Testament as well as on Christian tradition. Christian theologians use biblical exegesis, rational analysis, and argument. Theology might be undertaken to help the theologian better understand Christian tenets, to make comparisons between Christianity and other traditions, to defend Christianity against objections and criticism, to facilitate reforms in the Christian church, and to assist in the propagation of Christianity.

== Divisions of Christian theology==
There are many methods of categorizing different approaches to Christian theology. For a historical analysis, see the main article on the History of Christian theology.

=== Sub-disciplines ===

Christian theologians may be specialists in one or more theological sub-disciplines. These sub-disciplines are often included in certain job titles such as &#x27;Professor of x&#x27;, &#x27;Senior Lecturer in y&#x27;:

* Apologetics/polemics – studying Christian theology as it compares to non-Christian worldviews in order to defend the faith and challenge beliefs that lie in contrast with Christianity.
* Biblical hermeneutics – interpretation of the Bible, often with particular emphasis on the nature and constraints of contemporary interpretation. Hermeneutics takes into consideration the culture at the time of writing, who wrote the text, who was the text written for, etc.
* Biblical studies – interpretation of the Bible, often with particular emphasis on historical-critical investigation.
* Biblical theology – interpretation of the Bible, often with particular emphasis on links between biblical texts and the topics of systematic or dogmatic theology.
* Constructive theology – generally another name for systematic theology; also specifically a postmodernist approach to systematic theology, applying (among other things) feminist theory, queer theory, deconstructionism, and hermeneutics to theological topics.
* Dogmatic theology – studying theology (or dogma) as it developed in different church denominations.
* Ecumenical theology – comparing the doctrines of the diverse churches (e.g., Eastern Orthodox, Roman Catholic, the various Protestant denominations) with the goal of promoting unity among them
* Exegesis – interpretation of the Bible.
* Historical theology – studying Christian theology via the thoughts of other Christians throughout the centuries.
* Homiletics – in theology the application of general principles of rhetoric to public preaching.
* Moral theology, specifically Christian ethics – explores the moral and ethical dimensions of the religious life
* Natural theology – the discussion of those aspects of theology that can be investigated without the help of revelation scriptures or tradition (sometimes contrasted with &quot;positive theology&quot;).
* Patristics or patrology—studies the teaching of Church Fathers, or the development of Christian ideas and practice in the period of the Church Fathers.
* Philosophical theology – the use of philosophical methods in developing or analyzing theological concepts.
* Pragmatic or practical theology – studying theology as it relates to everyday living and service to God, including serving as a religious minister.
* Spiritual theology—studying theology as a means to orthopraxy; scripture and tradition are both used as guides for spiritual growth and discipline.
* Systematic theology (doctrinal theology, dogmatic theology or philosophical theology)—focused on the attempt to arrange and interpret the ideas current in the religion. This is also associated with constructive theology.
* Theological aesthetics – interdisciplinary study of theology and aesthetics/the arts.
* Theological hermeneutics – the study of the manner of construction of theological formulations. Related to theological methodology.

=== Major topics ===

These topics crop up repeatedly in Christian theology; composing the main recurrent &#x27;loci&#x27; around which Christian theological discussion revolves.

* Bible (Holy Scripture) – the nature and means of its inspiration, etc.; including hermeneutics (the development and study of theories of the interpretation and understanding of texts and the topic of Biblical law in Christianity)
* Eschatology – the study of the &quot;last things&quot;, or end times. Covers subjects such as death and the afterlife, the end of history, the end of the world, the last judgment, the nature of hope and progress, etc.
* Christology – the study of Jesus Christ, of his nature(s), and of the relationship between his divinity and humanity;
* Divine providence – the study of sovereignty, superintendence, or agency of God over events in people&#x27;s lives and throughout history.
* Ecclesiology (sometimes a subsection of missiology)—the study of the Christian Church, including the institutional structure, sacraments and practices (especially the worship of God) thereof
* Mariology – area of theology concerned with Mary, the Mother of Jesus Christ.
* Missiology (sometimes a subsection of ecclesiology) – God&#x27;s will in the world, missions, evangelism, etc.
* Pneumatology – the study of the Holy Spirit, sometimes also &#x27;geist&#x27; as in Hegelianism and other philosophico-theological systems
* Protology - the study of &quot;first things&quot;, such as God&#x27;s creation of the universe.
* Soteriology – the study of the nature and means of salvation in Christianity. May include hamartiology (the study of sin), God&#x27;s Law and the Gospel (the study of the relationship between the Divine Law and divine grace, justification, and sanctification.)
* Theological anthropology – the study of humanity, especially as it relates to the divine.
* Theology proper – the study of God&#x27;s attributes, nature, and relation to the world; may include:
** Theodicy – attempts at reconciling the existence of evil and suffering in the world with the nature and justice of God.
** Apophatic theology – negative theology which seeks to describe God by negation (e.g., immutable, impassible ). It is the discussion of what God is &quot;not&quot;, or the investigation of how language about God breaks down. Apophatic theology often is contrasted with &quot;Cataphatic theology&quot;.

==== A traditional pattern ====

In many Christian seminaries, the four Great Departments of Theology are:

# Exegetical theology
# Historical theology
# Systematic theology
# Practical theology

The four departments can usefully be subdivided in the following way:
1. Exegetical theology:
* Biblical studies (analysis of the contents of Scripture)
* Biblical introduction
* Canonics (inquiry into how the different books of the Bible came to be collected together)
* Biblical theology (inquiry into how divine revelation progressed over the course of the Bible).

2. Historical theology (study of how Christian theology develops over time):

* The Patristic Period (1st through 8th centuries)
** The Ante-Nicene Fathers (1st to 3rd centuries)
** The Nicene Fathers (4th century)
** The Post-Nicene Fathers (5th to 8th centuries)
* The Middle Ages (8th to 16th centuries)
* The Reformation and Counter-Reformation (16th to 18th centuries)
* The Modern Period (18th to 21st centuries)

3. Systematic theology:

* Prolegomena (first principles)
* Theology Proper
** The existence of God
** The attributes of God
** The Trinity
** Creation
** Divine Providence
* Doctrine of Man (theological anthropology)
* Christology
* Soteriology
** Justification
** Sanctification
* Pneumatology (doctrine of the Holy Spirit)
* Ecclesiology (doctrine of the Church)
* Eschatology and the afterlife.

4. Practical theology:

* Moral theology (Christian ethics and casuistry)
* Ecclesiology
* Pastoral theology
** Liturgics
** Homiletics
** Christian education
** Christian counseling
* Missiology

=== Roman Catholic theology ===

One important branch of Christian theology is Roman Catholic theology which has these major teachings:

* Biblical canon (involvement of Pope Damasus I [b.305]);
* Absolution (sacerdotal remittance of sin);
* The apostolic succession (i.e., of bishops and the Pope from the original Apostles);
* Christology;
* Ecclesiology since Vatican II;
* Infant Baptism;
* Ecumenism (the move to reunite churches);
* Ecumenical Councils (as means to bring about change or reform);
* Icon veneration;
* The Immaculate Conception of Mary;
* Real Presence;
* Liturgy since Vatican II;
* Models of the Church (Avery Dulles);
* Moral Theology/Ethics;
* Natural Law;
* Indulgences (i.e., remissions by the Church of some penalties for sin);
* Mary (Mary as Theotokos [i.e., in Greek, &quot;God-bearer&quot; or &quot;Mother of God&quot;]; as perpetually virgin; the Assumption of Mary);
* The Pope (i.e., belief that the Pope is the successor of St. Peter, the &quot;rock&quot; on which the Church is built, and therefore the infallible head of Christendom);
* Purgatory (a &quot;holding place&quot; after death where souls are purified before entering heaven);
* Sacerdotalism (priesthood as intermediary and sacred office; also see priesthood (Catholic Church), Mass (liturgy), and priesthood in Vatican II);
* The Sacraments; Transubstantiation; Fermentum;
* Sainthood, canonization and beatification;
* Papal Infallibility (the Pope being infallible when he speaks &quot;ex cathedra&quot;, that is, when he speaks in his magisterial capacity to the whole Church on a matter of faith or morals);
* Tradition (i.e., its authority relative to Scripture and role of Tradition in Church Councils).

=== Controversial movements ===

Christians have had theological disagreements since the time of Jesus. Theological disputes have given rise to many schisms and different Christian denominations, sects and movements.

==== Pre-Reformation ====

* Alogi – rejected the doctrine of the Logos
* Arianism – doctrines regarding Christ&#x27;s divinity;
* Augustinianism - strong assertion of original sin, important doctrine in the Roman Catholic Church.
* Donatism
* Dyophysitism - doctrines regarding Christ&#x27;s divinity, followed by the all churches except the Oriental Orthodox Church 
* Ebionitism
* Gnosticism – Generally rejected the goodness of the physical to emphasize the spiritual, also emphasized &quot;hidden teachings.&quot;
* Judaizers
* Manichaeism
* Marcionism
* Monarchianism – doctrines regarding Christ&#x27;s divinity
* Monophysitism – doctrines regarding Christ&#x27;s divinity, in opposition to dyophysitism 
* Miaphysitism - doctrine of the Oriental Orthodox Church, historically misinterpreted by Chalcedonians as monophysitism 
* Monothelitism - developed as a compromise between miaphysitism/monophysitism and dyophysitism
* Montanism
* Nazarene (sect)
* Nestorianism - doctrine of the Church of the East. However, the Church of the East itself considers this label as a pejorative term and instead opts for the term &#x27;dyophysitism of Theodore of Mopsuestia&#x27;. 
* Nicolationism
* Nontrinitarianism
* Novatianism
* Palamism - doctrine of the Eastern Orthodox Church 
* Pelagianism – denial of original sin and helplessness of sinner to save himself, strong affirmation of libertarian free will
* Semi-Pelagianism – developed as a compromise between Pelagianism and Augustinianism, the Eastern Orthodox Church is accused of believing in it by the Roman Catholic Church. 
* Quartodecimanism – Easter controversy
* Sabellianism – doctrines regarding the Trinity, also known as &quot;modalism.&quot;
* Simonianism
* Thomism - doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church 

==== Post-Reformation ====

Because the Reformation promoted the idea that Christians could expound their own views of theology based on the notion of &quot;sola scriptura,&quot; the Bible alone, many theological distinctions have occurred between the various Protestant denominations. The differences between many of the denominations are relatively minor; however, and this has helped ecumenical efforts in recent times.

* Adventism – Typified by the Seventh-day Adventist Church.
* Anabaptism
* Anglicanism
* Anglo-Catholicism – High church theology of Anglicanism.
* Arminianism – affirms man&#x27;s freedom to accept or reject God&#x27;s gift of salvation; identified with Dutch Reformed theologian Jacobus Arminius, developed by Hugo Grotius, defended by the Remonstrants, and popularized by John Wesley. Key doctrine of Methodist churches, adopted by many Baptists and some Congregationalists.
* Brethrenism: Anabaptist-Pietist, with Open and Exclusive streams.
* Calvinism – System of soteriology advanced by French Reformer John Calvin, which espouses Augustinian views on election and reprobation; stresses absolute predestination, the sovereignty of God and the inability of man to effect his own salvation by believing the Gospel prior to regeneration; principle doctrines are often summarized by the acronym TULIP (see Canons of Dort).
* Charismaticism – Movement in many Protestant and some Catholic churches that emphasizes the gifts of the Spirit and the continual working of the Holy Spirit within the body of Christ; often associated with glossolalia (i.e., speaking in tongues) and divine healing.
* Congregationalism – Form of governance used in Congregationalist, Baptist, and Pentecostal churches in which each congregation is self-governing and independent of all others.
* Counter-Reformation (or Catholic Reformation): The Roman Catholic response to the Protestant Reformation (see also Council of Trent).
* Creation Spirituality – Panentheist theology.
* Deism – The general doctrine that no faith is necessary for justified belief in God&#x27;s existence or the doctrine that God does not intervene in earthly affairs (contrasts with Fideism).
* Dispensationalism – Belief in a conservative, Biblically literalist hermeneutic and philosophy of history that, by stressing the dichotomy between Israel and the Church, rejects supersessionism (commonly referred to as &quot;replacement theology&quot;).
* Evangelicalism – Typically conservative, predominantly Protestant outlook that prioritizes evangelism above all or most other activities of the Church (see also neo-evangelicalism).
*Fideism – The doctrine that faith is irrational, that God&#x27;s existence transcends logic, and that all knowledge of God is on the basis of faith (contrasts with Deism).
* Latitudinarianism: Broad church theology of Anglicanism.
* Liberalism – Belief in interpreting the Bible to allow for the maximum amount of individual freedom.
* Low church – Puritanical / Evangelical theology of Anglicanism.
* Methodism – Form of church governance and doctrine used in the Methodist Church.
* Modernism – Belief that truth changes, so doctrine must evolve in light of new information or trends.
* Latter Day Saint movement (Mormonism): Belief that the Book of Mormon and others to be additional divine scriptures; belief in living prophets; generally reject the Nicene Creed and other early creeds.
* New Thought – Movement based on 19th century New England belief in positive thinking. Several denominations arose from it including Unity Church, and Religious Science.
* Nonconformism – Advocacy of religious liberty; includes Quakers, Methodists, Baptists, Congregationalists and Salvationists.
* Nontrinitarianism – Rejection of the doctrine of Trinity.
* Open Theism – A rejection of the exhaustive foreknowledge of God, by attributing it to Greek philosophy.
* Pentecostalism
* Pietism – A stream of Lutheranism placing renewed emphasis on the Bible and a universal priesthood of all believers.
* Presbyterianism – Form of governance used in Presbyterian and Reformed churches.
* Puritanism: Movement to cleanse Episcopalianism of any &quot;ritualistic&quot; aspects.
* Supersessionism – Belief that the Christian Church, the body of Christ, is the only elect people of God in the new covenant age (see also covenant theology).
* Restoration Movement – 19th century attempt to return to a New Testament model of the Church.
* Restorationism (Christian primitivism) – The doctrine that most of the modern Church is apostate; includes the Millerites, Seventh-day Adventists, Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, and Latter Day Saints.
* Salvation Army – An offshoot of the Methodist Church known for its charitable activities
* Tractarianism – Oxford Movement. It led to Anglo-Catholicism.
* Ultramontanism – A movement within 19th-century Roman Catholicism to emphasize papal authority, particularly in the wake of the French Revolution and the secularization of the state
* Unification Church
* Unitarianism – Rejects a holy &quot;Trinity&quot; and also the divinity of Christ, with some exceptions (see modalism).
* Universalism – In various forms, the belief that all people will ultimately be reconciled with God; most famously defended by Origen.

==== Contemporary theological movements ====

In addition to the movements listed above, the following are some of the movements found amongst Christian theologians

* Black theology
* Catholic Christianity
* Anarchism
* Christian fundamentalism
* Covenant Theology
* Dalit theology (a form of liberation theology developed in India)
* Dispensationalism
* Eastern Orthodox Christianity
* Emerging church
* Evangelicalism
* Feminist theology
* Fundamentalism
* Holocaust theology (In response to the horrors of the Holocaust especially in relation to Theodicy)
* Liberal theology
* Liberation theology
* Lutheranism
* Methodism
* Molinism
* Narrative theology – studying a narrative presentation of the faith rather than dogmatic development.
* Neo-orthodoxy (also known as &quot;dialectical theology&quot; and &quot;crisis theology&quot;, stemming from the works of Søren Kierkegaard and Karl Barth)
* Neo-scholasticism
* New Church
* New Covenant Theology
* Paleo-Orthodoxy
* Pentecostalism
* Personalism
* Postliberal theology
* Postmodern theology
* Process theology
* Progressive theology
* Prosperity theology
* Queer Theology
* Quakerism
* Restoration Movement
* Revisionist theology
* Scotism
* Transcendental Theology

== Christian theology organizations ==

=== Evangelical Theological Society (ETS) ===
ETS is an academic society of Biblical scholars, teachers, pastors, students, and others involved in evangelical scholarship.

=== International Academy of Practical Theology (IAPT) ===
The purpose of the International Academy of Practical Theology is the study of and critical reflection on practical theological thought and action. This critical reflection should be pursued with attention to the various historical and cultural contexts in which practical theology is done. Out of respect for the diversity of these contexts, the academy seeks to promote international, interracial, and ecumenical dialogue and understanding.

== Notes ==
== See also ==
* Biblical canon
* Eastern Orthodox – Roman Catholic theological differences
* Eastern Orthodox – Roman Catholic ecclesiastical differences
* Christian ecumenism
* Christian worship
* Ecumenism
* Heresy
* List of Christian theologians
* List of Methodist theologians
* Protestant Reformation
* Roman Catholicism
* Vatican II
* Christian Theology
* Wesleyan Quadrilateral
* Word of Faith

== References ==

* Andcone, J.H., eds. &quot;Black Theology; A Documentary History, 1966–1979.&quot; Orbis Books, 1979
* Appiah-Kubi, K and Torres, S., eds. &quot;African Theology en Route,&quot; Orbis Books, 1979
* Bonino, J.M. &quot;Doing theology in a Revolutionary situation,&quot; Philadelphia:Fortress Press, 1975.
* &quot;Christian Theology Reader&quot; by Alister McGrath. 
* &quot;Christian Theology: An Introduction&quot; by Alister McGrath. 
* Elwood, D.J., ed. &quot;Asian Christian Theology; Emerging Themes.&quot; Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1979
* Fuller, Reginald H. &quot;The Foundations of New Testament Christology&quot; (1965). 
* Gonzalez, Justo L. &quot;The Story of Christianity&quot; (1984, 1985, 1999). )
* Hill, Jonathan 2003) &quot;The History of Christian Thought&quot;. and 0830827765
* Hoare, Ryan, 2009,&#x27;What is Theology&#x27; A lecture Given at suburbschurch Bristol.
* Koyama, Kosuke, Waterbuffalo Theology. Orbis books, 1974
* Leith, John H. &quot;Introduction to the Reformed Tradition&quot; (1978). )
* Miranda, J. &quot;Being and the Messiah.&quot; Orbis Books, 1974.
* Moore, B., ed. &quot;The Challenge of Black Theology in South Africa.&quot; Atlanta: John Knox Press, 1974.
* Muzorewa, H. &quot;African Theology: Its Origin and Development.&quot; Orbis Books, 1984.
* Sobrino, J. &quot;Christology on the Crossroads.&quot; Orbis Books, 1978
* &quot;Systematic Theology&quot;, an ecumenical trilogy by Thomas Oden
** Volume 1: &quot;The Living God&quot; (1992). 
** Volume 2: &quot;The Word of Life&quot; (1992). 
** Volume 3: &quot;Life in the Spirit&quot; (1994). 

== External links ==

* Confident Christians Free Christian apologetic materials and presentations
* Christian Theology Reading Room: Extensive online resources for theology (Tyndale Seminary)
* Christian Socialist Party USA: Real time modern day Christian theology.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1531349" start="14" end="21" title="Outline (list)" label="outline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112228" start="94" end="116" title="Outline of Christian theology" label="[[Christian theology]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="133" end="142" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="220" end="233" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="242" end="255" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110396" start="270" end="289" title="Christian tradition" label="Christian tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="291" end="312" title="Christian theologians" label="Christian theologians"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="326" end="334" title="exegesis" label="exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q938185" start="336" end="344" title="rationality" label="rational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075827" start="465" end="476" title="comparative religion" label="comparisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377898" start="523" end="529" title="Christian apologetics" label="defend"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="645" end="672" title="evangelism" label="propagation of Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775678" start="850" end="879" title="History of Christian theology" label="History of Christian theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q191776" start="1128" end="1139" title="Apologetics" label="Apologetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27406" start="1140" end="1148" title="polemics" label="polemics"/>
<link wikidata="Q49447" start="1211" end="1220" title="world view" label="worldview"/>
<link wikidata="Q508069" start="1315" end="1336" title="Biblical hermeneutics" label="Biblical hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="1361" end="1366" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q794605" start="1592" end="1608" title="Biblical studies" label="Biblical studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203109" start="1711" end="1728" title="Biblical theology" label="Biblical theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164503" start="1876" end="1897" title="Constructive theology" label="Constructive theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q875490" start="1927" end="1946" title="systematic theology" label="systematic theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="1968" end="1981" title="Postmodernism" label="postmodernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810748" start="2045" end="2060" title="feminist theory" label="feminist theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q658022" start="2062" end="2074" title="queer theory" label="queer theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q180348" start="2076" end="2090" title="deconstruction" label="deconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="2099" end="2111" title="hermeneutics" label="hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q938714" start="2137" end="2154" title="Dogmatic theology" label="Dogmatic theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="2179" end="2184" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="2215" end="2235" title="Christian denomination" label="church denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="2239" end="2258" title="Ecumenism" label="Ecumenical theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="2434" end="2442" title="Exegesis" label="Exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370284" start="2476" end="2495" title="Historical theology" label="Historical theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038158" start="2591" end="2601" title="Homiletics" label="Homiletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q14254438" start="2689" end="2703" title="Ethics in religion" label="Moral theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665156" start="2718" end="2734" title="Christian ethics" label="Christian ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="2750" end="2755" title="Morality" label="moral"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="2760" end="2767" title="Ethics" label="ethical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129353" start="2803" end="2819" title="Natural theology" label="Natural theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q189380" start="3007" end="3017" title="Patristics" label="Patristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="3055" end="3069" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356367" start="3161" end="3183" title="Philosophical theology" label="Philosophical theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383443" start="3283" end="3301" title="practical theology" label="practical theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="3398" end="3416" title="minister (Christianity)" label="religious minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427367" start="3471" end="3481" title="orthopraxis" label="orthopraxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="3483" end="3492" title="Religious text" label="scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q82821" start="3497" end="3506" title="tradition" label="tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q875490" start="3570" end="3589" title="Systematic theology" label="Systematic theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782227" start="3793" end="3815" title="Theological aesthetics" label="Theological aesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="3845" end="3853" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="3858" end="3868" title="aesthetics" label="aesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="3869" end="3877" title="the arts" label="the arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782229" start="3881" end="3905" title="Theological hermeneutics" label="Theological hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="4196" end="4201" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q870945" start="4249" end="4260" title="Biblical inspiration" label="inspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="4278" end="4290" title="hermeneutics" label="hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903283" start="4396" end="4424" title="Biblical law in Christianity" label="Biblical law in Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261111" start="4428" end="4439" title="Christian eschatology" label="Eschatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="4487" end="4496" title="Eschatology" label="end times"/>
<link wikidata="Q623282" start="4536" end="4545" title="afterlife" label="afterlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="4558" end="4565" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821239" start="4593" end="4606" title="last Judgment" label="last judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q187900" start="4648" end="4659" title="Christology" label="Christology"/>
<link wikidata="Q51663" start="4675" end="4680" title="Jesus in Christianity" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q642420" start="4681" end="4687" title="Christ (title)" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q866338" start="4768" end="4785" title="Divine providence" label="Divine providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q223693" start="4909" end="4921" title="Ecclesiology" label="Ecclesiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q34651" start="4978" end="4994" title="Christian Church" label="Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q178706" start="5010" end="5033" title="institution" label="institutional structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="5035" end="5044" title="sacrament" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514663" start="5076" end="5083" title="worship" label="worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q650276" start="5102" end="5111" title="Mariology" label="Mariology"/>
<link wikidata="Q910375" start="5182" end="5192" title="Missiology" label="Missiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003236" start="5236" end="5251" title="Will of God" label="God&amp;#x27;s will"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424668" start="5295" end="5307" title="Pneumatology (Christianity)" label="Pneumatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="5327" end="5338" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5436" end="5445" title="Protology" label="Protology"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="5506" end="5514" title="Creationism" label="creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q326255" start="5534" end="5545" title="Soteriology" label="Soteriology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="5585" end="5610" title="salvation in Christianity" label="salvation in Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790386" start="5624" end="5636" title="hamartiology" label="hamartiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q60227" start="5651" end="5654" title="sin" label="sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258498" start="5657" end="5686" title="Law and Gospel" label="God&amp;#x27;s Law and the Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5726" end="5740" title="Old Testament#Christian theology" label="the Divine Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852175" start="5745" end="5757" title="divine grace" label="divine grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275703" start="5797" end="5821" title="Theological anthropology" label="Theological anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q742609" start="5837" end="5845" title="Human nature" label="humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782252" start="5889" end="5904" title="Theology proper" label="Theology proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q825" start="5920" end="5923" title="God in Christianity" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q276183" start="5994" end="6002" title="Theodicy" label="Theodicy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062821" start="6017" end="6064" title="Problem of evil" label="reconciling the existence of evil and suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q938946" start="6117" end="6135" title="Negative theology" label="Apophatic theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942906" start="6203" end="6212" title="immutability (theology)" label="immutable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006093" start="6214" end="6224" title="impassibility" label="impassible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390326" start="6391" end="6410" title="Cataphatic theology" label="Cataphatic theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="6529" end="6548" title="Exegesis" label="Exegetical theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370284" start="6551" end="6570" title="Historical theology" label="Historical theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q875490" start="6573" end="6592" title="Systematic theology" label="Systematic theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383443" start="6595" end="6613" title="Practical theology" label="Practical theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q794605" start="6711" end="6727" title="Biblical studies" label="Biblical studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q51623" start="6794" end="6802" title="Biblical canon" label="Canonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203109" start="6887" end="6904" title="Biblical theology" label="Biblical theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q189380" start="7068" end="7084" title="Patristics" label="Patristic Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="7120" end="7139" title="Ante-Nicene Fathers" label="Ante-Nicene Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="7170" end="7176" title="Nicene" label="Nicene"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152258" start="7206" end="7225" title="Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers" label="Post-Nicene Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="7255" end="7266" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="7297" end="7308" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="7313" end="7332" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782252" start="7464" end="7479" title="Theology Proper" label="Theology Proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="7536" end="7543" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q215304" start="7547" end="7555" title="Creation myth" label="Creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q866338" start="7559" end="7576" title="Divine Providence" label="Divine Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275703" start="7579" end="7594" title="Doctrine of Man" label="Doctrine of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q187900" start="7624" end="7635" title="Christology" label="Christology"/>
<link wikidata="Q326255" start="7638" end="7649" title="Soteriology" label="Soteriology"/>
<link wikidata="Q653345" start="7653" end="7666" title="Justification (theology)" label="Justification"/>
<link wikidata="Q956444" start="7670" end="7684" title="Sanctification in Christianity" label="Sanctification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424668" start="7687" end="7699" title="Pneumatology (Christianity)" label="Pneumatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="7717" end="7728" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q223693" start="7732" end="7744" title="Ecclesiology" label="Ecclesiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="7772" end="7783" title="Eschatology" label="Eschatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q623282" start="7792" end="7801" title="afterlife" label="afterlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q14254438" start="7830" end="7844" title="Moral theology" label="Moral theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q223693" start="7880" end="7892" title="Ecclesiology" label="Ecclesiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056335" start="7895" end="7912" title="Pastoral theology" label="Pastoral theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244108" start="7916" end="7925" title="Liturgics" label="Liturgics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735729" start="7943" end="7962" title="Catechesis" label="Christian education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110315" start="7966" end="7986" title="Christian counseling" label="Christian counseling"/>
<link wikidata="Q910375" start="7989" end="7999" title="Missiology" label="Missiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367940" start="8080" end="8103" title="Roman Catholic theology" label="Roman Catholic theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q51623" start="8140" end="8154" title="Biblical canon" label="Biblical canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q130997" start="8176" end="8185" title="Damasus I" label="Damasus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q164361" start="8198" end="8208" title="Absolution (religious)" label="Absolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="8247" end="8267" title="apostolic succession" label="apostolic succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q187900" start="8330" end="8341" title="Christology" label="Christology"/>
<link wikidata="Q223693" start="8345" end="8357" title="Ecclesiology" label="Ecclesiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741926" start="8378" end="8392" title="Infant Baptism" label="Infant Baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="8396" end="8405" title="Ecumenism" label="Ecumenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51645" start="8440" end="8459" title="Ecumenical Councils" label="Ecumenical Councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="8506" end="8510" title="Icon" label="Icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579384" start="8511" end="8521" title="veneration" label="veneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q185606" start="8529" end="8550" title="Immaculate Conception" label="Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134873" start="8562" end="8575" title="Real Presence" label="Real Presence"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="8579" end="8586" title="Liturgy" label="Liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q546756" start="8629" end="8641" title="Avery Dulles" label="Avery Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q85786273" start="8646" end="8660" title="Moral Theology" label="Moral Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="8661" end="8667" title="Ethics" label="Ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="8671" end="8682" title="Natural Law" label="Natural Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q44777" start="8686" end="8697" title="Indulgences" label="Indulgences"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="8760" end="8764" title="Mary, the mother of Jesus" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q208542" start="8774" end="8783" title="Theotokos" label="Theotokos"/>
<link wikidata="Q170538" start="8870" end="8876" title="virgin" label="virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q162691" start="8882" end="8900" title="Assumption of Mary" label="Assumption of Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="8909" end="8913" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="8962" end="8971" title="St. Peter" label="St. Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q566" start="9077" end="9086" title="Purgatory" label="Purgatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="9180" end="9193" title="Sacerdotalism" label="Sacerdotalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17351675" start="9250" end="9278" title="priesthood (Catholic Church)" label="priesthood (Catholic Church)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="9280" end="9294" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass (liturgy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="9314" end="9324" title="Vatican II" label="Vatican II"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="9333" end="9342" title="Sacrament" label="Sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q214500" start="9345" end="9363" title="Transubstantiation" label="Transubstantiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q959390" start="9365" end="9374" title="Fermentum" label="Fermentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="9378" end="9387" title="Sainthood" label="Sainthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="9389" end="9401" title="canonization" label="canonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="9406" end="9419" title="beatification" label="beatification"/>
<link wikidata="Q275016" start="9423" end="9442" title="Papal Infallibility" label="Papal Infallibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847489" start="9459" end="9469" title="infallible" label="infallible"/>
<link wikidata="Q199993" start="9617" end="9626" title="Catholic Traditionalism" label="Tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q111161" start="9695" end="9710" title="Church Councils" label="Church Councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="9811" end="9816" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q126287984" start="9863" end="9869" title="Schism (religion)" label="schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="9885" end="9907" title="Christian denomination" label="Christian denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093393" start="9961" end="9966" title="Alogi" label="Alogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q180832" start="9998" end="10003" title="Logos" label="Logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="10006" end="10014" title="Arianism" label="Arianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651445" start="10063" end="10077" title="Augustinianism" label="Augustinianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q203204" start="10165" end="10173" title="Donatism" label="Donatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991529" start="10176" end="10188" title="Dyophysitism" label="Dyophysitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="10275" end="10299" title="Oriental Orthodox Churches" label="Oriental Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q208171" start="10303" end="10313" title="Ebionites" label="Ebionitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="10316" end="10326" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710868" start="10453" end="10462" title="Judaizers" label="Judaizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="10465" end="10476" title="Manichaeism" label="Manichaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q754941" start="10479" end="10489" title="Marcionism" label="Marcionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180430" start="10492" end="10505" title="Monarchianism" label="Monarchianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379405" start="10542" end="10550" title="divinity" label="divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q183091" start="10553" end="10566" title="Monophysitism" label="Monophysitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764554" start="10646" end="10658" title="Miaphysitism" label="Miaphysitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711500" start="10734" end="10747" title="Chalcedonian Christianity" label="Chalcedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q238459" start="10768" end="10781" title="Monothelitism" label="Monothelitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q138681" start="10864" end="10873" title="Montanism" label="Montanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q929001" start="10876" end="10891" title="Nazarene (sect)" label="Nazarene (sect)"/>
<link wikidata="Q168414" start="10894" end="10906" title="Nestorianism" label="Nestorianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="10925" end="10943" title="Church of the East" label="Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q355664" start="11078" end="11100" title="Theodore of Mopsuestia" label="Theodore of Mopsuestia"/>
<link wikidata="Q605184" start="11111" end="11124" title="Nicolationism" label="Nicolationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q584205" start="11127" end="11144" title="Nontrinitarianism" label="Nontrinitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276913" start="11147" end="11158" title="Novatianism" label="Novatianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126662" start="11161" end="11169" title="Palamism" label="Palamism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="11188" end="11211" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q122398" start="11215" end="11226" title="Pelagianism" label="Pelagianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319515" start="11342" end="11358" title="Semi-Pelagianism" label="Semi-Pelagianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562510" start="11518" end="11534" title="Quartodecimanism" label="Quartodecimanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225074" start="11537" end="11555" title="Easter controversy" label="Easter controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293300" start="11558" end="11570" title="Sabellianism" label="Sabellianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q856561" start="11626" end="11634" title="modalism" label="modalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920074" start="11644" end="11655" title="Simonianism" label="Simonianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q328945" start="11658" end="11665" title="Thomism" label="Thomism"/>
<link wikidata="Q310430" start="11865" end="11879" title="sola scriptura" label="sola scriptura"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="12095" end="12105" title="ecumenical" label="ecumenical"/>
<link wikidata="Q215168" start="12134" end="12143" title="Adventism" label="Adventism"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="12162" end="12190" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="12194" end="12204" title="Anabaptism" label="Anabaptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763556" start="12207" end="12218" title="Anglican doctrine" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q541235" start="12221" end="12238" title="Anglo-Catholicism" label="Anglo-Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070069" start="12241" end="12252" title="High church" label="High church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="12265" end="12273" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q13446873" start="12280" end="12291" title="Arminianism" label="Arminianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q515880" start="12387" end="12401" title="Dutch Reformed" label="Dutch Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q313070" start="12413" end="12429" title="Jacobus Arminius" label="Jacobus Arminius"/>
<link wikidata="Q154959" start="12444" end="12456" title="Hugo Grotius" label="Hugo Grotius"/>
<link wikidata="Q284561" start="12474" end="12486" title="Remonstrants" label="Remonstrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="12507" end="12518" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="12536" end="12545" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="12572" end="12580" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="12590" end="12607" title="Congregational church" label="Congregationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q839054" start="12650" end="12654" title="Open Brethren" label="Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429373" start="12659" end="12668" title="Exclusive Brethren" label="Exclusive"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="12680" end="12689" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="12726" end="12732" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q763779" start="12733" end="12741" title="Protestant Reformers" label="Reformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="12742" end="12753" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="12770" end="12781" title="St. Augustine" label="Augustinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q193203" start="12835" end="12849" title="predestination" label="predestination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935731" start="12960" end="12972" title="Regeneration (theology)" label="regeneration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13030" end="13035" title="Calvinism#Five Points of Calvinism" label="TULIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200984" start="13041" end="13055" title="Canons of Dort" label="Canons of Dort"/>
<link wikidata="Q324640" start="13060" end="13074" title="Charismatic movement" label="Charismaticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464584" start="13152" end="13171" title="gifts of the Spirit" label="gifts of the Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q61070" start="13266" end="13277" title="glossolalia" label="glossolalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420463" start="13310" end="13324" title="divine healing" label="divine healing"/>
<link wikidata="Q960252" start="13328" end="13345" title="Congregationalist polity" label="Congregationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="13506" end="13525" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="13588" end="13610" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="13621" end="13637" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q354890" start="13642" end="13663" title="Creation Spirituality" label="Creation Spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q221390" start="13666" end="13677" title="Panentheist" label="Panentheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="13690" end="13695" title="Deism" label="Deism"/>
<link wikidata="Q196667" start="13870" end="13877" title="Fideism" label="Fideism"/>
<link wikidata="Q849459" start="13882" end="13899" title="Dispensationalism" label="Dispensationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="13950" end="13961" title="hermeneutic" label="hermeneutic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190721" start="13966" end="13987" title="philosophy of history" label="philosophy of history"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="14138" end="14152" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="14229" end="14239" title="evangelism" label="evangelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="14299" end="14317" title="neo-evangelicalism" label="neo-evangelicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q196667" start="14321" end="14328" title="Fideism" label="Fideism"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="14485" end="14490" title="Deism" label="Deism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806994" start="14495" end="14509" title="Latitudinarian" label="Latitudinarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="14554" end="14564" title="Liberalism" label="Liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323511" start="14657" end="14667" title="Low church" label="Low church"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="14670" end="14677" title="Puritan" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="14684" end="14695" title="evangelicalism" label="Evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="14723" end="14732" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="14786" end="14802" title="Methodist Church" label="Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="14806" end="14815" title="Modernism" label="Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="14910" end="14935" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q747802" start="14937" end="14946" title="Mormonism" label="Mormonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q459842" start="14965" end="14979" title="Book of Mormon" label="Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="15075" end="15087" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q940573" start="15114" end="15125" title="New Thought" label="New Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="15159" end="15170" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062042" start="15246" end="15258" title="Unity Church" label="Unity Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q764731" start="15264" end="15281" title="Religious Science" label="Religious Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="15285" end="15298" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="Nonconformism"/>
<link wikidata="Q584205" start="15412" end="15429" title="Nontrinitarianism" label="Nontrinitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="15461" end="15468" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096453" start="15472" end="15483" title="Open Theism" label="Open Theism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="15579" end="15593" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193664" start="15596" end="15603" title="Pietism" label="Pietism"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="15618" end="15626" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="15715" end="15730" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="15798" end="15805" title="Puritan" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q792023" start="15888" end="15903" title="Supersessionism" label="Supersessionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373014" start="16026" end="16043" title="covenant theology" label="covenant theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q585110" start="16048" end="16068" title="Restoration Movement" label="Restoration Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="16107" end="16120" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q855941" start="16144" end="16182" title="Restorationism (Christian primitivism)" label="Restorationism (Christian primitivism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q719620" start="16255" end="16265" title="Millerites" label="Millerites"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="16267" end="16289" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventists"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="16291" end="16315" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="16342" end="16356" title="Salvation Army" label="Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137662" start="16433" end="16446" title="Tractarianism" label="Tractarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137662" start="16449" end="16464" title="Oxford Movement" label="Oxford Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q274053" start="16497" end="16511" title="Ultramontanism" label="Ultramontanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q217059" start="16681" end="16699" title="Unification Church" label="Unification Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="16702" end="16714" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q856561" start="16811" end="16819" title="modalism" label="modalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19001724" start="16824" end="16836" title="Universalism" label="Universalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170472" start="16950" end="16956" title="Origen" label="Origen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943023" start="17127" end="17141" title="Black theology" label="Black theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367940" start="17144" end="17165" title="Catholic theology" label="Catholic Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q329659" start="17168" end="17177" title="Christian anarchism" label="Anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q578881" start="17180" end="17204" title="Christian fundamentalism" label="Christian fundamentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373014" start="17207" end="17224" title="Covenant Theology" label="Covenant Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211041" start="17227" end="17241" title="Dalit theology" label="Dalit theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q849459" start="17295" end="17312" title="Dispensationalism" label="Dispensationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294384" start="17315" end="17344" title="Eastern Orthodox theology" label="Eastern Orthodox Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q943602" start="17347" end="17362" title="Emerging church" label="Emerging church"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="17365" end="17379" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330520" start="17382" end="17399" title="Feminist theology" label="Feminist theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q578881" start="17402" end="17416" title="Fundamentalist Christianity" label="Fundamentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q318179" start="17419" end="17437" title="Holocaust theology" label="Holocaust theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="17469" end="17482" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q276183" start="17509" end="17517" title="Theodicy" label="Theodicy"/>
<link wikidata="Q859557" start="17521" end="17537" title="Liberal Christianity" label="Liberal theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q206898" start="17540" end="17559" title="Liberation theology" label="Liberation theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="17562" end="17573" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="17576" end="17585" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177169" start="17588" end="17596" title="Molinism" label="Molinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942985" start="17599" end="17617" title="Narrative theology" label="Narrative theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q875241" start="17703" end="17716" title="Neo-orthodoxy" label="Neo-orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512" start="17825" end="17842" title="Søren Kierkegaard" label="Søren Kierkegaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q107473" start="17847" end="17857" title="Karl Barth" label="Karl Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573900" start="17861" end="17878" title="Neo-scholasticism" label="Neo-scholasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654539" start="17881" end="17891" title="The New Church (Swedenborgian)" label="New Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006732" start="17894" end="17915" title="New Covenant Theology" label="New Covenant Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976213" start="17918" end="17933" title="Paleo-Orthodoxy" label="Paleo-Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="17936" end="17950" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q856020" start="17953" end="17964" title="Personalism" label="Personalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942985" start="17967" end="17987" title="Postliberal theology" label="Postliberal theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q590819" start="17990" end="18009" title="Postmodern theology" label="Postmodern theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277683" start="18012" end="18028" title="Process theology" label="Process theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248639" start="18031" end="18051" title="Progressive Christianity" label="Progressive theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q655189" start="18054" end="18073" title="Prosperity theology" label="Prosperity theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563086" start="18076" end="18090" title="Queer Theology" label="Queer Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="18093" end="18102" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Quakerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q585110" start="18105" end="18125" title="Restoration Movement" label="Restoration Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861708" start="18151" end="18158" title="Scotism" label="Scotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833875" start="18161" end="18184" title="Transcendental Theology" label="Transcendental Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q51623" start="18931" end="18945" title="Biblical canon" label="Biblical canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330366" start="18948" end="19005" title="Eastern Orthodox – Roman Catholic theological differences" label="Eastern Orthodox – Roman Catholic theological differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330364" start="19008" end="19068" title="Eastern Orthodox – Roman Catholic ecclesiastical differences" label="Eastern Orthodox – Roman Catholic ecclesiastical differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="19071" end="19090" title="Christian ecumenism" label="Christian ecumenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539016" start="19093" end="19110" title="Christian worship" label="Christian worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="19113" end="19122" title="Ecumenism" label="Ecumenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="19125" end="19131" title="Heresy" label="Heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782409" start="19134" end="19163" title="List of Christian theologians" label="List of Christian theologians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589979" start="19166" end="19195" title="List of Methodist theologians" label="List of Methodist theologians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="19198" end="19220" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="19223" end="19240" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="19243" end="19253" title="Vatican II" label="Vatican II"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="19256" end="19274" title="Christian Theology" label="Christian Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984067" start="19277" end="19299" title="Wesleyan Quadrilateral" label="Wesleyan Quadrilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q941184" start="19302" end="19315" title="Word of Faith" label="Word of Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q451103" start="19682" end="19697" title="Alister McGrath" label="Alister McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q451103" start="19753" end="19768" title="Alister McGrath" label="Alister McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308720" start="19912" end="19956" title="The Foundations of New Testament Christology" label="The Foundations of New Testament Christology"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="20748" end="20758" title="Christian ecumenism" label="ecumenical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422894" start="20770" end="20781" title="Thomas Oden" label="Thomas Oden"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384925" wikidata="Q872433" url="?curid=384925" title="Institute for War and Peace Reporting">
<text>The Institute for War &amp; Peace Reporting (IWPR) is an independent nonprofit organization that trains and provide publishing opportunities for professional and citizen journalists. IWPR is registered in the UK as a charity (charity reg. no: 1027201, company reg. no: 2744185); the US under IRS Section 501(c)(3) and NL as a charitable foundation.

==History==

IWPR was founded in 1991 under the name Yugofax. Initially it was a newsletter that reported on the troubling developments throughout the Balkans from a balanced perspective. As the conflict developed into an all out war, Yugofax newsletter changed its name to Balkan War Report.

Eventually, in late 1995, after the Dayton Peace Accord was signed ending the war in Bosnia, the newsletter expanded its area of focus to other global trouble spots (initially mainly focusing on ex-Soviet republics) and adjusted its name to War Report.

In 1998, the newsletter changed its name again to the Institute for War &amp; Peace Reporting and registered as a non-governmental organization.

==Deaths of members==
International Media Awards in 2008 for her story, Honour Killing Sparks Fears of New Iraqi Conflict, published by IWPR in May 2007, about the brutal murder of a young Yezidi woman in the town of Bashika.

On May 2, 2015, the previous IWPR Iraq director, Ammar Al Shahbander, was killed in a car bomb attack, along with up to 17 other people.

On October 18, 2015, the IWPR acting Iraq director, Jacqueline Anne Sutton (a.k.a. Jacky Sutton), age 50, was found hanged in a bathroom stall of Istanbul&#x27;s Atatürk International Airport. She had been on her way to Irbil.

On 6 July 2020, Hisham al-Hashimi was seriously wounded outside his home in Zayouna, Baghdad from an attack by gunmen on 3 motorbikes. He died in Ibn Al-Nafees Hospital shortly after arrival.

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q872433" start="4" end="43" title="Institute for War and Peace Reporting" label="Institute for War &amp;amp; Peace Reporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q872433" start="45" end="49" title="Institute for War and Peace Reporting" label="IWPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q18325436" start="296" end="313" title="501(c)(3) organization" label="Section 501(c)(3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q264238" start="431" end="441" title="newsletter" label="newsletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="501" end="508" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="680" end="699" title="Dayton Peace Accord" label="Dayton Peace Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="842" end="848" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="1012" end="1041" title="non-governmental organization" label="non-governmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690465" start="1653" end="1670" title="Hisham al-Hashimi" label="Hisham al-Hashimi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384927" wikidata="Q5499621" url="?curid=384927" title="Free-form language">
<text>In computer programming, a free-form language is a programming language in which the positioning of characters on the page in program text is insignificant. Program text does not need to be placed in specific columns as on old punched card systems, and frequently ends of lines are insignificant. Whitespace characters are used only to delimit tokens, and have no other significance. Free-form languages allow a greater degree of flexibility and have fewer syntactic rules to learn, which could lower the entry barrier for beginners.

Most free-form languages descend from ALGOL, including C, Pascal, and Perl. Lisp languages are free-form, although they do not descend from ALGOL. Rexx and its dialects ooRexx and NetRexx are mostly free-form, though in some cases whitespace characters are concatenation operators. SQL, though not a full programming language, is also free-form.

Most free-form languages are also structured programming languages, which is sometimes thought to go along with the free-form syntax: Earlier imperative programming languages such as Fortran 77 used particular columns for line numbers, which many structured languages do not use or need.

Structured languages exist which are not free-form, such as ABC, Curry, Haskell, Python and others. Many of these use some variant of the off-side rule, in which indentation, rather than keywords or braces, is used to group blocks of code.

==See also==
* Indent style
* Obfuscated code
* Curly-bracket programming language Many free-form languages are within this set.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="3" end="23" title="computer programming" label="computer programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499621" start="27" end="45" title="Free-form language" label="free-form language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="51" end="71" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q32483" start="100" end="110" title="character (computing)" label="characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="227" end="239" title="punched card" label="punched card"/>
<link wikidata="Q591615" start="297" end="317" title="Whitespace character" label="Whitespace character"/>
<link wikidata="Q835922" start="344" end="350" title="token (parser)" label="tokens"/>
<link wikidata="Q188436" start="573" end="578" title="ALGOL" label="ALGOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="590" end="591" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="593" end="599" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="605" end="609" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="611" end="615" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q685820" start="682" end="686" title="Rexx" label="Rexx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437099" start="704" end="710" title="Object REXX" label="ooRexx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6998311" start="715" end="722" title="NetRexx" label="NetRexx"/>
<link wikidata="Q126002" start="792" end="805" title="concatenation" label="concatenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47607" start="817" end="820" title="SQL" label="SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q223335" start="916" end="938" title="structured programming" label="structured programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q275596" start="1024" end="1046" title="imperative programming" label="imperative programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="1065" end="1075" title="Fortran 77" label="Fortran 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057802" start="1231" end="1234" title="ABC (programming language)" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368856" start="1236" end="1241" title="Curry (programming language)" label="Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q34010" start="1243" end="1250" title="Haskell (programming language)" label="Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="1252" end="1258" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150006" start="1309" end="1322" title="off-side rule" label="off-side rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q13444128" start="1427" end="1439" title="Indent style" label="Indent style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150647" start="1442" end="1457" title="Obfuscated code" label="Obfuscated code"/>
<link wikidata="Q389085" start="1460" end="1494" title="Curly bracket programming language" label="Curly-bracket programming language"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384940" wikidata="Q92956" url="?curid=384940" title="Andrew Morton (computer programmer)">
<text>Andrew Keith Paul Morton (born 1959) is an Australian software engineer. He is one of the lead developers of the Linux kernel, and a co-maintainer of the Ext3 file system, the journaling layer for block devices (JBD) and memory management.

In the late 1980s, he was one of the partners of a company in Sydney, Australia that produced a kit computer called the Applix 1616, as well as a hardware engineer for the now-defunct Australian gaming equipment manufacturer Keno Computer Systems. He holds an honours degree in electrical engineering from the University of New South Wales in Australia.

Morton maintains a Linux kernel patchset known as the &quot;mm&quot; tree, which contains work-in-progress patches that might later be accepted into the official Linux tree maintained by Linus Torvalds. &quot;mm&quot; as a primary testing ground became unmanageably large and busy, and in 2008 the &quot;linux-next&quot; tree was created to fill much of this role.

In 2001, Morton and his family moved from Wollongong, New South Wales to Palo Alto, California. In July 2003, he joined the Open Source Development Labs under an agreement with his then-employer Digeo Inc. (makers of the Moxi home entertainment media center), in which OSDL supported Morton&#x27;s Linux kernel development work while he continued in his official role as principal engineer at Digeo. Since August 2006, Morton has been employed by Google and continues his current work in maintaining the kernel.

Morton delivered the keynote speech at the 2004 Ottawa Linux Symposium. He was also a featured speaker at MontaVista Software&#x27;s Vision 2007 Conference. He was an expert witness in the &quot;SCO v. IBM&quot; lawsuit contesting UNIX copyrights.

Morton is also known by his username &quot;akpm&quot;, as found in e-mail addresses and as part of the URL to his now-defunct webpage. On being asked what the initials KP stood for, he replied, &quot;Some say &#x27;Kernel Programmer.&#x27; My parents said &#x27;Keith Paul.&#x27;&quot;

== References ==
==External links==

*Interview: Andrew Morton; Jeremy Andrews; Kerneltrap; February 14, 2002.
*Interview; Nadia Cameron; LinuxWorld; July 16, 2003.
*Keynote speech; Ottawa Linux Symposium, 2004
*Interview ; Ingrid Marson; ZDNet UK; May 5, 2006.
*Interview; Fosdem Conference; Feb 06, 2007.
*Audio of Talk at SDForum
*Video with Andrew Morton at Hannover Industry Trade Fair, Germany, May 2008
*Link to his patches
*Link to his own kernel tree
*Archive of his now-defunct webpage, hosted by Internet Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q92956" start="0" end="24" title="Andrew Morton (computer programmer)" label="Andrew Keith Paul Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="54" end="71" title="Software engineering" label="software engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="113" end="125" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q283390" start="154" end="158" title="Ext3" label="Ext3"/>
<link wikidata="Q579047" start="176" end="186" title="journaling file system" label="journaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q14679" start="197" end="209" title="block device" label="block device"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="303" end="320" title="Sydney, Australia" label="Sydney, Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781617" start="361" end="372" title="Applix 1616" label="Applix 1616"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="501" end="515" title="Honours degree#Honours degrees and academic distinctions" label="honours degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="519" end="541" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q734764" start="551" end="580" title="University of New South Wales" label="University of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q307583" start="650" end="669" title="mm tree" label="&amp;quot;mm&amp;quot; tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q34253" start="783" end="797" title="Linus Torvalds" label="Linus Torvalds"/>
<link wikidata="Q187861" start="1004" end="1031" title="Wollongong, New South Wales" label="Wollongong, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q47265" start="1035" end="1056" title="Palo Alto, California" label="Palo Alto, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353202" start="1086" end="1114" title="OSDL" label="Open Source Development Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927492" start="1183" end="1187" title="Moxi (DVR)" label="Moxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="1409" end="1415" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044492" start="1581" end="1591" title="MontaVista" label="MontaVista"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389251" start="1670" end="1680" title="SCO v. IBM" label="SCO v. IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="1706" end="1710" title="UNIX" label="UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="2518" end="2534" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384941" wikidata="Q2993860" url="?curid=384941" title="Council of States">
<text>Council of States may refer to:

* Rajya Sabha (Council of States), the upper house of the Parliament of India
* Council of States (South Sudan), established in 2011 by interim constitution – one of two chambers that compose the National Legislature of South Sudan
* Council of States (Sudan)
* Council of States (Switzerland)

== See also ==
* Council of State</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2993860" start="0" end="17" title="Council of States" label="Council of States"/>
<link wikidata="Q244730" start="35" end="46" title="Rajya Sabha" label="Rajya Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454821" start="113" end="144" title="Council of States (South Sudan)" label="Council of States (South Sudan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993867" start="267" end="292" title="Council of States (Sudan)" label="Council of States (Sudan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q609037" start="295" end="326" title="Council of States (Switzerland)" label="Council of States (Switzerland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687335" start="345" end="361" title="Council of State" label="Council of State"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384942" wikidata="Q418596" url="?curid=384942" title="Brainiac">
<text>Brainiac is a colloquial adjective used to describe exceptionally intelligent people. It may also refer to:
==Culture==
===Fictional entities===
* Brainiac (character), a fictional supervillain in DC Comics, and an enemy of Superman
* Brainiac (story arc), a 2008 storyline in Action Comics
* Brainiac (&quot;Smallville&quot;), a version of the villain in the TV series &quot;Smallville&quot;
* Vril Dox also known as Brainiac 2, a DC Comics character
* Brainiac 5, a member of the Legion of Super-Heroes
* Brainiac 8, a superheroine of the Outsiders, who turned into a supervillainess

===Television===
* &quot;&quot;, a 2003–2008 British television programme, and its spin-offs:
** &quot;&quot;, aired in 2005
** &quot;Brainiac&#x27;s Test Tube Baby&quot;, aired in 2006–2007
* &quot;Brainiac&quot; (&quot;Dark Angel&quot;), an episode of the television series &quot;Dark Angel&quot;

===Other uses in culture===
* Brainiac (band), an American indie rock band in the 1990s, from Dayton, Ohio
* &quot;The Brainiac&quot;, a 1962 Mexican horror film directed by Chano Urueta
* &quot;Brainiac: Adventures in the Curious, Competitive, Compulsive World of Trivia Buffs&quot;, a book written by Ken Jennings

==Other uses==
* Function BRAINIAC, an energy drink, for improving brain function
* Brainiac techniques for improving computer performance, in technology

== See also ==
* Geniac, an educational toy billed as a computer
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q418596" start="0" end="8" title="Brainiac" label="Brainiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q901711" start="14" end="24" title="colloquial" label="colloquial"/>
<link wikidata="Q592909" start="147" end="167" title="Brainiac (character)" label="Brainiac (character)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955892" start="235" end="255" title="Brainiac (story arc)" label="Brainiac (story arc)"/>
<link wikidata="Q461676" start="293" end="326" title="Brainiac (Smallville)" label="Brainiac (&amp;quot;Smallville&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158866" start="395" end="403" title="Vril Dox" label="Vril Dox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994978" start="454" end="464" title="Brainiac 5" label="Brainiac 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024751" start="507" end="517" title="Brainiac 8" label="Brainiac 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955891" start="721" end="751" title="Brainiac&amp;#x27;s Test Tube Baby" label="Brainiac&amp;#x27;s Test Tube Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q462417" start="780" end="825" title="Brainiac (Dark Angel)" label="&amp;quot;Brainiac&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Dark Angel&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347168" start="917" end="932" title="Brainiac (band)" label="Brainiac (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220316" start="1002" end="1014" title="The Brainiac" label="The Brainiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q186" start="1190" end="1202" title="Ken Jennings" label="Ken Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508765" start="1221" end="1238" title="Function BRAINIAC" label="Function BRAINIAC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1288" end="1307" title="Computer performance#brainiac" label="Brainiac techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533156" start="1376" end="1382" title="Geniac" label="Geniac"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384945" wikidata="Q3278039" url="?curid=384945" title="Jeffersonian democracy">
<text>Jeffersonian democracy, named after its advocate Thomas Jefferson, was one of two dominant political outlooks and movements in the United States from the 1790s to the 1820s. The Jeffersonians were deeply committed to American republicanism, which meant opposition to what they considered to be artificial aristocracy, opposition to corruption, and insistence on virtue, with a priority for the &quot;yeoman farmer&quot;, &quot;planters&quot;, and the &quot;plain folk&quot;. They were antagonistic to the aristocratic elitism of merchants, bankers, and manufacturers, distrusted factory workers, and strongly opposed and were on the watch for supporters of the Westminster system.

The term was commonly used to refer to the Democratic-Republican Party, formally named the &quot;Republican Party&quot;, which Jefferson founded in opposition to the Federalist Party of Alexander Hamilton. At the beginning of the Jeffersonian era, only two states, Vermont and Kentucky, established universal white male suffrage by abolishing property requirements. But by the end of the Jeffersonian period, more than half of the states had followed suit, including virtually all of the states in the Old Northwest. States then moved on to allowing white male popular votes for presidential elections, canvassing voters more modernly. Jefferson&#x27;s party was then in full control of the apparatus of government&quot;&quot;from the state legislature and city hall to the White House.

Jeffersonian democracy persisted as an element of the Democratic Party until the early 20th century, exemplified in the rise of Jacksonian democracy and the three presidential candidacies of William Jennings Bryan.

== Positions ==
Thomas Jefferson has been called &quot;the most democratic of the founders&quot;. The Jeffersonians advocated a narrow interpretation of the Constitution&#x27;s Article I provisions granting powers to the federal government. They strenuously opposed the Federalist Party, led by Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton. President George Washington generally supported Hamilton&#x27;s program for a financially strong national government. The election of Jefferson in 1800, which Jefferson labeled &quot;the revolution of 1800&quot;, brought in the Presidency of Thomas Jefferson and the permanent eclipse of the Federalists, apart from the Supreme Court.

Jeffersonian democracy is an umbrella term; some factions favored some positions more. While principled, with vehemently held core beliefs, the Jeffersonians had factions that disputed the true meaning of their creed. For example, during the Anglo-American War of 1812, it became apparent that independent state militia units were inadequate for conducting a serious war against a major country. The new Secretary of War John C. Calhoun, a Jeffersonian, proposed to build up the Army. With the support of most Republicans in Congress, Calhoun got his way. However, the &quot;Old Republican&quot; faction, claiming to be true to the Jeffersonian Principles of &#x27;98, fought him and reduced the size of the Army after Spain sold Florida to the U.S.

Historians characterize Jeffersonian democracy as including the following core ideals:
* The core political value of America is republicanism&quot;&quot;citizens have a civic duty to aid the state and resist corruption, especially monarchism and aristocracy.
* Jeffersonian values are best expressed through an organized political party. The Jeffersonian party was officially the &quot;Republican Party&quot;; political scientists later called it the Democratic-Republican Party to differentiate it from the later Republican Party of Abraham Lincoln.
* It was the duty of citizens to vote, and the Jeffersonians invented many modern campaign techniques designed to get out the vote. Turnout indeed soared across the country. The work of John J. Beckley, Jefferson&#x27;s agent in Pennsylvania, set new standards in the 1790s. In the 1796 presidential election, Beckley blanketed the state with agents who passed out 30,000 hand-written tickets, naming all 15 electors (printed tickets were not allowed). Historians consider Beckley to be one of the first American professional campaign managers, and his techniques were quickly adopted in other states.
* The Federalist Party, especially its leader Alexander Hamilton, was the archfoe because it accepted aristocracy and British methods.
* The national government is a dangerous necessity to be instituted for the common benefit, protection and security of the people, nation or community&quot;&quot;it should be watched closely and circumscribed in its powers. Most anti-Federalists from 1787 to 1788 joined the Jeffersonians.
* Separation of church and state is the best method to keep the government free of religious disputes and religion free from corruption by the government.
* The federal government must not violate the rights of individuals. The Bill of Rights is a central theme.
* The federal government must not violate the rights of the states. The Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions of 1798 (written secretly by Jefferson and James Madison) proclaim these principles.
* Freedom of speech and the press are the best methods to prevent tyranny over the people by their own government. The Federalists&#x27; violation of this freedom through the Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798 became a major issue.
* The yeoman farmer best exemplifies civic virtue and independence from corrupting city influences&quot;&quot;government policy should be for his benefit. Financiers, bankers, and industrialists make cities the &quot;cesspools of corruption&quot; and should be avoided.
* The United States Constitution was written in order to ensure the freedom of the people. However, as Jefferson wrote to James Madison in 1789, &quot;no society can make a perpetual constitution or even a perpetual law. The earth belongs always to the living generation&quot;.
* All men have the right to be informed and thus to have a say in the government. The protection and expansion of human liberty was one of the chief goals of the Jeffersonians. They also reformed their respective state systems of education. They believed that their citizens had a right to an education no matter their circumstances or status in life.
* The judiciary should be subservient to the elected branches, and the Supreme Court should not have the power to strike down laws passed by Congress. The Jeffersonians lost this battle to Chief Justice John Marshall, a Federalist, who dominated the Court from 1801 to his death in 1835.

=== Foreign policy ===
The Jeffersonians also had a distinct foreign policy:
* Americans had a duty to spread what Jefferson called the &quot;Empire of Liberty&quot; to the world, but should avoid &quot;entangling alliances&quot;.
* Britain was the greatest threat, especially its monarchy, aristocracy, corruption, and business methods&quot;&quot;the Jay Treaty of 1794 was much too favorable to Britain and thus threatened American values.
* Regarding the French Revolution, its devotion to principles of Republicanism, liberty, equality, and fraternity made France the ideal European nation. According to Michael Hardt, &quot;Jefferson&#x27;s support of the French Revolution often serves in his mind as a defense of republicanism against the monarchism of the Anglophiles&quot;. On the other hand, Napoleon was the antithesis of republicanism and could not be supported.
* Navigation rights on the Mississippi River were critical to American national interests. Control by Spain was tolerable&quot;control by France was unacceptable. The Louisiana Purchase was an unexpected opportunity to guarantee those rights the Jeffersonians immediately seized.
* A standing army is dangerous to liberty and should be avoided&quot;much better was to use economic coercion such as the embargo. See Embargo Act of 1807.
* Most Jeffersonians argued an expensive high seas navy was unnecessary since cheap locally based gunboats, floating batteries, mobile shore batteries, and coastal fortifications could defend the ports without the temptation to engage in distant wars. Jefferson himself, however, wanted a few frigates to protect American shipping against Barbary pirates in the Mediterranean.
* The locally controlled non-professional militia was adequate to defend the nation from invasion. After the militia proved inadequate in the War of 1812, President Madison expanded the national army for the duration.

===Westward expansion===

Territorial expansion of the United States was a major goal of the Jeffersonians because it would produce new farm lands for yeomen farmers. The Jeffersonians wanted to integrate the Indians into American society or remove further west those tribes that refused to integrate. However, Sheehan (1974) argues that the Jeffersonians, with the best of goodwill toward the Indians, destroyed their distinctive cultures with their misguided benevolence.

The Jeffersonians took enormous pride in the bargain they reached with France in the Louisiana Purchase of 1803. It opened up vast new fertile farmlands from Louisiana to Montana. Jefferson saw the West as an economic safety valve that would allow people in the crowded East to own farms. However, established New England political interests feared the growth of the West, and a majority in the Federalist Party opposed the purchase. Jeffersonians thought the new territory would help maintain their vision of the ideal republican society, based on agricultural commerce, governed lightly and promoting self-reliance and virtue.

Jeffersonians&#x27; dream did not come to pass as the Louisiana Purchase was a turning point in the history of American imperialism. The farmers that Jefferson identified with conquered the West, often through violence against Native Americans. Jefferson himself sympathized with Native Americans, but that did not stop him from enacting policies that would continue the trend towards the dispossession of their lands.

=== Economics ===
Jeffersonian agrarians held that the economy of the United States should rely more on agriculture for strategic commodities than on industry. Jefferson specifically believed: &quot;Those who labor in the earth are the chosen people of God, if He ever had a chosen people, whose breast He has made His peculiar deposit for substantial and genuine virtue&quot;. However, Jeffersonian ideals are not opposed to all manufacturing, rather Jefferson believed that all people have the right to work to provide for their own subsistence and that an economic system which undermines that right is unacceptable.

Jefferson believed the expansion of industry and trade could lead to the development of a class of wage laborers reliant on others for income and sustenance. It would result in workers who were dependent voters. This belief made Jefferson apprehensive that Americans were at risk of economic exploitation and political coercion. Jefferson&#x27;s solution was, as scholar Clay Jenkinson noted, &quot;a graduated income tax that would serve as a disincentive to vast accumulations of wealth and would make funds available for some sort of benign redistribution downward&quot;, as well as tariffs on imported articles, which were mainly purchased by the wealthy. In 1811, Jefferson wrote a friend:
These revenues will be levied entirely on the rich . ... The Rich alone use imported articles, and on these alone, the whole taxes of the General Government are levied. The poor man ... pays not a farthing of tax to the General Government, but on his salt.

However, Jefferson was of the belief that a tax on income, as well as consumption, would constitute excessive taxation, writing in an 1816 letter:... if the system be established on the basis of Income, and his just proportion on that scale has been already drawn from everyone, to step into the field of Consumption and tax special articles ... is doubly taxing the same article. For that portion of Income with which these articles are purchased, having already paid its tax as Income, to pay another tax on the thing it purchased, is paying twice for the same thing; it is an aggrievance on the citizens who use these articles in the exoneration of those who do not, contrary to the most sacred of the duties of a government, to do equal and impartial justice to all its citizens.Lastly, Jefferson and other Jeffersonians believed in the power of embargoes as a means to inflict punishment on hostile foreign nations. Jefferson preferred these methods of coercion to war.

=== Limited government ===

While the Federalists advocated for a strong central government, Jeffersonians argued for strong state and local governments and a weak federal government. Self-sufficiency, self-government, and individual responsibility were in the Jeffersonian worldview among the most important ideals that formed the basis of the American Revolution. In Jefferson&#x27;s opinion, the federal government should accomplish nothing that individuals at the local level could feasibly accomplish. The federal government would concentrate its efforts solely on national and international projects. Jefferson&#x27;s advocacy of limited government led to sharp disagreements with Federalist figures such as Alexander Hamilton. Jefferson felt that Hamilton favored plutocracy and the creation of a powerful aristocracy in the United States which would accumulate increasingly greater power until the political and social order of the United States became indistinguishable from those of the Old World.

After initial skepticism, Jefferson supported the ratification of the United States Constitution and especially supported its stress on checks and balances. The ratification of the United States Bill of Rights, especially the First Amendment, gave Jefferson even greater confidence in the document. Jeffersonians favored a strict construction interpretation of federal government powers described in Article I of the Constitution. For example, Jefferson once wrote a letter to Charles Willson Peale explaining that although a Smithsonian-style national museum would be a fantastic resource, he could not support the use of federal funds to construct and maintain such a project. The &quot;strict constructionism&quot; of today is a remote descendant of Jefferson&#x27;s views.

== Politics and factions ==
The spirit of Jeffersonian democracy dominated American politics from 1800 to 1824, the First Party System, under Jefferson and succeeding presidents James Madison and James Monroe. The Jeffersonians proved much more successful than the Federalists in building state and local party organizations that united various factions. Voters in every state formed blocs loyal to the Jeffersonian coalition.

Prominent spokesmen for Jeffersonian principles included Madison, Albert Gallatin, John Randolph of Roanoke, Nathaniel Macon, John Taylor of Caroline, and James Monroe, John C. Calhoun, John Quincy Adams, and Henry Clay; however, Calhoun, Adams, and Clay pursued new paths after 1828.

Randolph was the Jeffersonian leader in Congress from 1801 to 1815, but he later broke with Jefferson and formed his own &quot;Tertium Quids&quot; faction because he thought the president no longer adhered to the true Jeffersonian principles of 1798. The Quids wanted to actively punish and discharge Federalists in the government and in the courts. Jefferson himself sided with the moderate faction exemplified by figures such as Madison, who were much more conciliatory towards Federalism.

After the Madison administration experienced serious trouble financing the War of 1812 and discovered the Army and militia could not effectively make war, a new more combative generation of Republican nationalists arrived on the scene. They were supported by President James Monroe, an original Jeffersonian; and included John Quincy Adams, Henry Clay and John C. Calhoun. In 1824, Adams defeated Andrew Jackson, who had support from the Quids; and in a few years, two successor parties had emerged, the Democratic Party, which formulated Jacksonian democracy and which still exists; and Henry Clay&#x27;s Whig Party. Their competition marked the Second Party System.

After 1830, the principles were still talked about but did not form the basis of a political party; thus, editor Horace Greeley in 1838 started a magazine, &quot;The Jeffersonian,&quot; that he said: &quot;would exhibit a practical regard for that cardinal principle of Jeffersonian Democracy, and the People are the sole and safe depository of all power, principles and opinions which are to direct the Government&quot;.

== Jefferson and Jeffersonian principles ==

Jeffersonian democracy was not a one-person operation. It was a significant political party with many local and state leaders and various factions, and they did not always agree with Jefferson or with each other.

Jefferson was accused of inconsistencies by his opponents. The &quot;Old Republicans&quot; said that Jefferson abandoned the Principles of 1798. Jefferson believed the national security concerns were so urgent that it was necessary to purchase Louisiana without waiting for a Constitutional amendment. Jefferson enlarged federal power through the intrusively enforced Embargo Act of 1807. Jefferson idealized the &quot;yeoman farmer&quot; despite being a gentleman plantation owner. Numerous historians have noted the disparities between Jefferson&#x27;s philosophy and practices. Staloff proposed that it was due to his being a proto-Romantic; John Quincy Adams claimed that it was a manifestation of pure hypocrisy, or &quot;pliability of principle&quot;; and Bailyn asserts it simply represented a contradiction with Jefferson, that he was &quot;simultaneously a radical utopian idealist and a hardheaded, adroit, at times cunning politician&quot;. However, Jenkinson argued that Jefferson&#x27;s personal failings ought not to influence present-day thinkers to disregard Jeffersonian ideals.

Kuehnelt-Leddihn, a European nobleman who opposed democracy, argues that &quot;Jeffersonian democracy&quot; is a misnomer because Jefferson was not a democrat but believed in rule by an elite: &quot;Jefferson actually was an Agrarian Romantic who dreamt of a republic governed by an elite of character and intellect&quot;.

Historian Sean Wilentz argues that as a practical politician elected to serve the people, Jefferson had to negotiate solutions, not insist on his own version of abstract positions. The result, Wilentz argues, was &quot;flexible responses to unforeseen events ... in pursuit of ideals ranging from the enlargement of opportunities for the mass of ordinary, industrious Americans to the principled avoidance of war&quot;.

Historians have long portrayed the contest between Jefferson and Hamilton as iconic for the politics, political philosophy, economic policies, and future direction of the United States. In 2010, Wilentz identified a scholarly trend in Hamilton&#x27;s favor: In recent years, Hamilton and his reputation have decidedly gained the initiative among scholars who portray him as the visionary architect of the modern liberal capitalist economy and of a dynamic federal government headed by an energetic executive. Jefferson and his allies, by contrast, have come across as naïve, dreamy idealists. At best according to many historians, the Jeffersonians were reactionary utopians who resisted the onrush of capitalist modernity in hopes of turning America into a yeoman farmers&#x27; arcadia. At worst, they were proslavery racists who wish to rid the West of Indians, expand the empire of slavery, and keep political power in local hands – all the better to expand the institution of slavery and protect slaveholders&#x27; rights to own human property. Joseph Ellis wrote that developments in urbanization and industrialization that occurred during the turn of the 20th century has largely rendered Jefferson&#x27;s agrarian dream irrelevant.

Jefferson summarized his essential principles of government in his first inaugural address on March 4, 1801, when he expounded on &quot;the essential principles of our Government, and consequently, those which ought to shape its Administration&quot;, stating:
Equal and exact justice to all men, of whatever state or persuasion, religious or political; peace, commerce, and honest friendship with all nations, entangling alliances with none; the support of the State governments in all their rights, as the most competent administrations for our domestic concerns and the surest bulwarks against anti-republican tendencies; the preservation of the General Government in its whole constitutional vigor, as the sheet anchor of our peace at home and safety abroad; a jealous care of the right of election by the people...; absolute acquiescence in the decisions of the majority...a well-disciplined militia, our best reliance in peace and for the first moments of war till regulars may relieve them; the supremacy of the civil over the military authority; economy in the public expense, that labor may be lightly burthened; the honest payment of our debts and sacred preservation of the public faith; encouragement of agriculture, and of commerce as its handmaid; the diffusion of information and arraignment of all abuses at the bar of the public reason; freedom of religion; freedom of the press, and freedom of person under the protection of the habeas corpus, and trial by juries impartially selected.

== See also ==
== References ==
Notes 
==Further reading==
* Banning, Lance. &quot;The Jeffersonian Persuasion: Evolution of a Party Ideology&quot; (1978) online
* Banning, Lance. &quot;Jeffersonian Ideology Revisited: Liberal and Classical Ideas in the New American Republic,&quot; &quot;William and Mary Quarterly&quot; (1986) 43#1 pp. 3–19 in JSTOR
* Beard, Charles A. &quot;Some Economic Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy.&quot; &quot;American Historical Review&quot; 19#2 (1914): pp. 282–298; Summary of his famous book; in JSTOR
* Brown; Stuart Gerry. &quot;The First Republicans: Political Philosophy and Public Policy in the Party of Jefferson and Madison&quot; (1954) online 
* Cunningham, Noble E. &quot;The Jeffersonian Republicans in power; party operations, 1801–1809&quot; (1963) online
* Elkins, Stanley M. and Eric L. McKitrick. &quot;The Age of Federalism: The Early American Republic, 1788–1800&quot; (1995), the standard political history of the 1790s online
* Freeman, Joanne B. et al. eds. &quot;Jeffersonians in Power : The Rhetoric of Opposition Meets the Realities of Governing&quot; (University of Virginia Press, 2019)
* Hendrickson, David C. and Robert W. Tucker. &quot;Empire of Liberty: The Statecraft of Thomas Jefferson&quot; (1990); His foreign policy
* Jefferson, Thomas. &quot;The Jeffersonian cyclopedia: a ...&quot;. topical compendium of Jefferson&#x27;s statements and quotes
* Jenkinson, Clay S. &quot;Becoming Jefferson&#x27;s People: Re-Inventing the American Republic in the Twenty-First Century&quot;. Reno: Marmouth Press, 2004
* McCoy? Drew R. &quot;The elusive Republic : political economy in Jeffersonian America&quot; (1982) online
* Onuf, Peter, ed. &quot;Jeffersonian legacies&quot; (1993) online
* Parrington, Vernon. &quot;Main Currents in American Thought&quot; (1927) v 2 online
* Pasley, Jeff. The Tyranny of Printers. The Tyranny of Printers : Jeffrey L. Pasley 
* Peterson, Merrill D. &quot;The Jefferson Image in the American Mind&quot; (1960)
* Robinson, William A. &quot;Jeffersonian democracy in New England&quot; (Yale U.P. 1916) online
* Taylor, Jeff. &quot;Where Did the Party Go?: William Jennings Bryan, Hubert Humphrey, and the Jeffersonian Legacy&quot; (2006).
* White, Leonard. &quot;The Jeffersonians, 1801–1829: A Study in Administrative History&quot; (1951) comprehensive coverage of all cabinet and federal executive agencies and their main activities. online
* Wilentz, Sean. &quot;The Rise of American Democracy: Jefferson to Lincoln&quot; (2005), comprehensive political history, 1800–1865.
* Wilentz, Sean. &quot;Jeffersonian democracy and the origins of political antislavery in the United States: The Missouri crisis revisited.&quot; &quot;Journal of the Historical Society&quot; 4#3 (2004): pp. 375–401.
* Wiltse, Charles Maurice. &quot;The Jeffersonian Tradition in American Democracy&quot; (1935) online
* Wiltse, Charles M. &quot;Jeffersonian Democracy: a Dual Tradition.&quot; &quot;American Political Science Review&quot; (1934) 28#05 pp. 838–851. in JSTOR
* Wood, Gordon S. &quot;The American Revolution: A History&quot;. New York: The Modern Library, 2002.
* ––––. &quot;Empire of Liberty: A History of the Early Republic, 1789–1815&quot;. Oxford University Press, 2009.
* Wright, Benjamin F. &quot;The Philosopher of Jeffersonian Democracy.&quot; &quot;American Political Science Review&quot; 22#4 (1928): pp. 870–892. in JSTOR

=== Historiography ===
* Cogliano, Francis D. ed. &quot;A Companion to Thomas Jefferson&quot; (2012), 648 pp; 34 essays by scholars focusing on how historians have handled Jefferson. online
* Robertson, Andrew W. &quot;Afterword: Reconceptualizing Jeffersonian Democracy,&quot; &quot;Journal of the Early Republic&quot; (2013) 33#2 pp. 317–334 on recent voting studies online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3278039" start="0" end="22" title="Jeffersonian democracy" label="Jeffersonian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="49" end="65" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277720" start="217" end="239" title="Republicanism in the United States" label="American republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="305" end="316" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q366" start="332" end="342" title="corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="362" end="368" title="virtue" label="virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="400" end="413" title="Yeoman" label="yeoman farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630100" start="427" end="435" title="Planter class" label="planters"/>
<link wikidata="Q422933" start="518" end="525" title="elitism" label="elitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="661" end="679" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="725" end="752" title="Democratic-Republican Party" label="Democratic-Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="848" end="864" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="868" end="886" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="947" end="954" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="959" end="967" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q669315" start="1184" end="1197" title="Northwest Territory" label="Old Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="1456" end="1467" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="1524" end="1540" title="History of the Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040924" start="1598" end="1618" title="Jacksonian democracy" label="Jacksonian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="1661" end="1683" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="1702" end="1718" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48416" start="1863" end="1872" title="Article One of the United States Constitution" label="Article I"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="1956" end="1972" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="1981" end="1999" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="Treasury Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="2000" end="2018" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="2030" end="2047" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="2117" end="2136" title="Federal government of the United States" label="national government"/>
<link wikidata="Q698106" start="2142" end="2171" title="1800 United States presidential election" label="election of Jefferson in 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206678" start="2248" end="2278" title="Presidency of Thomas Jefferson" label="Presidency of Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="2340" end="2353" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="2598" end="2624" title="Anglo-American War of 1812" label="Anglo-American War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="2760" end="2776" title="United States Secretary of War" label="Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q207191" start="2777" end="2792" title="John C. Calhoun" label="John C. Calhoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="2835" end="2839" title="United States Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="2881" end="2889" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245177" start="3001" end="3023" title="Principles of &amp;#x27;98" label="Principles of &amp;#x27;98"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277720" start="3235" end="3248" title="Republicanism in the United States" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="3558" end="3585" title="Democratic-Republican Party" label="Democratic-Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="3621" end="3637" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="3641" end="3656" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q706071" start="3844" end="3859" title="John J. Beckley" label="John J. Beckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="4266" end="4282" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="4306" end="4324" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="4401" end="4420" title="Federal government of the United States" label="national government"/>
<link wikidata="Q257855" start="4624" end="4640" title="Anti-Federalism" label="anti-Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="4687" end="4717" title="Separation of church and state" label="Separation of church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="4886" end="4907" title="Civil liberties" label="rights of individuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="4913" end="4927" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q48527" start="4994" end="5014" title="States&amp;#x27; rights" label="rights of the states"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140753" start="5020" end="5053" title="Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions" label="Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="5097" end="5110" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="5141" end="5158" title="Freedom of speech" label="Freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="5163" end="5172" title="freedom of the press" label="the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118757" start="5314" end="5337" title="Alien and Sedition Acts" label="Alien and Sedition Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="5374" end="5380" title="yeoman" label="yeoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974906" start="5405" end="5417" title="civic virtue" label="civic virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="5644" end="5670" title="Constitution of the United States" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q310829" start="6471" end="6484" title="John Marshall" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374201" start="6699" end="6716" title="Empire of Liberty" label="Empire of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155530" start="6760" end="6780" title="United States non-interventionism" label="entangling alliances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568837" start="6909" end="6919" title="Jay Treaty" label="Jay Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="7015" end="7032" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="7599" end="7617" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365383" start="7716" end="7729" title="standing army" label="standing army"/>
<link wikidata="Q325980" start="7804" end="7821" title="Coercion" label="economic coercion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248258" start="7834" end="7841" title="Economic sanctions" label="embargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686420" start="7847" end="7866" title="Embargo Act of 1807" label="Embargo Act of 1807"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="8387" end="8398" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q787170" start="8490" end="8532" title="Territorial evolution of the United States" label="Territorial expansion of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="9024" end="9042" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="9334" end="9350" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q605269" start="9680" end="9700" title="American imperialism" label="American imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188540" start="10044" end="10072" title="economy of the United States" label="economy of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="10093" end="10104" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q268592" start="10139" end="10147" title="Industry (economics)" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="12884" end="12903" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440576" start="13226" end="13236" title="Federalist" label="Federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="13253" end="13271" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q131708" start="13310" end="13320" title="plutocracy" label="plutocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870590" start="13598" end="13644" title="History of the United States Constitution" label="ratification of the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="13684" end="13703" title="Separation of powers" label="checks and balances"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="13729" end="13757" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="United States Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="13774" end="13789" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623615" start="13871" end="13890" title="strict constructionism" label="strict construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q454945" start="14025" end="14046" title="Charles Willson Peale" label="Charles Willson Peale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453498" start="14442" end="14460" title="First Party System" label="First Party System"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="14504" end="14517" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="14522" end="14534" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q500046" start="14820" end="14835" title="Albert Gallatin" label="Albert Gallatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341317" start="14837" end="14861" title="John Randolph of Roanoke" label="John Randolph of Roanoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733790" start="14863" end="14878" title="Nathaniel Macon" label="Nathaniel Macon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205057" start="14880" end="14903" title="John Taylor of Caroline" label="John Taylor of Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="14909" end="14921" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q207191" start="14923" end="14938" title="John C. Calhoun" label="John C. Calhoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="14940" end="14957" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="14963" end="14973" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705277" start="15167" end="15180" title="Tertium quids" label="Tertium Quids"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="15608" end="15619" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="15802" end="15814" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="15855" end="15872" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="15874" end="15884" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q207191" start="15889" end="15904" title="John C. Calhoun" label="John C. Calhoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="15930" end="15944" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="16037" end="16053" title="History of the United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040924" start="16072" end="16092" title="Jacksonian democracy" label="Jacksonian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="16139" end="16149" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q859488" start="16180" end="16199" title="Second Party System" label="Second Party System"/>
<link wikidata="Q436790" start="16315" end="16329" title="Horace Greeley" label="Horace Greeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686420" start="17252" end="17271" title="Embargo Act of 1807" label="Embargo Act of 1807"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="17519" end="17527" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="17529" end="17546" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q113951" start="17981" end="17997" title="Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn" label="Kuehnelt-Leddihn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409298" start="18315" end="18327" title="Sean Wilentz" label="Sean Wilentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409298" start="18921" end="18928" title="Sean Wilentz" label="Wilentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q168786" start="19505" end="19512" title="Arcadia (utopia)" label="arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q669468" start="19775" end="19787" title="Joseph Ellis" label="Joseph Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="19815" end="19827" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="19832" end="19849" title="Industrialisation" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="22756" end="22773" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Jefferson, Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585778" start="24514" end="24528" title="Gordon S. Wood" label="Wood, Gordon S"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384947" wikidata="Q3575288" url="?curid=384947" title="Zero interest-rate policy">
<text>Zero interest-rate policy (ZIRP) is a macroeconomic concept describing conditions with a very low nominal interest rate, such as those in contemporary Japan and in the United States from December 2008 through December 2015 and again from March 2020 until March 2022 amid the COVID-19 pandemic. ZIRP is considered to be an unconventional monetary policy instrument and can be associated with slow economic growth, deflation and deleverage.

==Overview==
Under ZIRP, the central bank maintains a 0% nominal interest rate. The ZIRP is an important milestone in monetary policy because the central bank is typically no longer able to reduce nominal interest rates. ZIRP is very closely related to the problem of a liquidity trap, where nominal interest rates cannot adjust downward at a time when savings exceed investment.

However, some economists—such as market monetarists—believe that unconventional monetary policy such as quantitative easing can be effective at the zero lower bound.

Others argue that when monetary policy is already used to the maximal extent, governments must be willing to use fiscal policy to create jobs. The fiscal multiplier of government spending is expected to be larger when nominal interest rates are zero than they would be when nominal interest rates are above zero. Keynesian economics holds that the multiplier is above one, meaning government spending effectively boosts output. In his paper on this topic, Michael Woodford finds that, in a ZIRP situation, the optimal policy for government is to spend enough in stimulus to cover the entire output gap.

Chris Modica and Warren Sulmasy find that the ZIRP policy follows from the need to refinance a high level of US public debt and from the need to recapitalize the world&#x27;s banking system in the wake of the Financial crisis of 2007–2008.

==Zero lower bound==
The zero lower bound problem refers to a situation in which the short-term nominal interest rate is zero, or just above zero, causing a liquidity trap and limiting the capacity that the central bank has to stimulate economic growth. This problem returned to prominence with Japan&#x27;s experience during the 1990s and more recently with the American subprime crisis. Paul Krugman, Michael Woodford, and Milton Friedman argued that a zero nominal interest rate presents no problem for monetary policy, as a central bank can increase the monetary base only if it continues buying bonds.

==See also==

* History of Federal Open Market Committee actions
* Janet Yellen
* Ben Bernanke
* Excess reserves
* Federal funds rate
* Forward guidance
* Negative interest rate
* Natural rate of interest
* Real interest rate
* Stagflation
* Speculative bubble
* Too big to fail
* Yield Curve Control
==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
*Monetary Policy Alternatives at the Zero Bound: An Empirical Assessment
*Fed Funds Rate: Turning Japanese, I Really Think So
*Nominal Interest Rates: Less Than Zero?
*Macroeconomics Wiki: Zero Lower Bound Problem</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3575288" start="0" end="25" title="Zero interest-rate policy" label="Zero interest-rate policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575288" start="27" end="31" title="Zero interest-rate policy" label="ZIRP"/>
<link wikidata="Q39680" start="38" end="51" title="macroeconomic" label="macroeconomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205832" start="98" end="119" title="nominal interest rate" label="nominal interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q333101" start="151" end="156" title="Bank of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="168" end="181" title="Federal Reserve System" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="275" end="292" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="322" end="352" title="Monetary policy#Unconventional monetary policy at the zero bound" label="unconventional monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="396" end="411" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q161081" start="413" end="422" title="deflation" label="deflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253658" start="427" end="437" title="Deleveraging" label="deleverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="469" end="481" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205832" start="497" end="518" title="nominal interest rate" label="nominal interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="558" end="573" title="monetary policy" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q923190" start="710" end="724" title="liquidity trap" label="liquidity trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770821" start="854" end="872" title="Market monetarism" label="market monetarists"/>
<link wikidata="Q874727" start="925" end="944" title="quantitative easing" label="quantitative easing"/>
<link wikidata="Q187021" start="1101" end="1114" title="fiscal policy" label="fiscal policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18907327" start="1135" end="1152" title="fiscal multiplier" label="fiscal multiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q83937" start="1301" end="1320" title="Keynesian economics" label="Keynesian economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q381692" start="1444" end="1460" title="Michael Woodford (economist)" label="Michael Woodford"/>
<link wikidata="Q631916" start="1579" end="1589" title="output gap" label="output gap"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1701" end="1715" title=" United States public debt" label="US public debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="1801" end="1830" title="Financial crisis of 2007–2008" label="Financial crisis of 2007–2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069596" start="1858" end="1882" title="zero lower bound problem" label="zero lower bound problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q923190" start="1990" end="2004" title="liquidity trap" label="liquidity trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141122" start="2128" end="2168" title="Lost Decade (Japan)" label="Japan&amp;#x27;s experience during the 1990s"/>
<link wikidata="Q844541" start="2205" end="2220" title="subprime crisis" label="subprime crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131112" start="2222" end="2234" title="Paul Krugman" label="Paul Krugman"/>
<link wikidata="Q381692" start="2236" end="2252" title="Michael Woodford (economist)" label="Michael Woodford"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="2258" end="2273" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q593105" start="2391" end="2404" title="monetary base" label="monetary base"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776103" start="2457" end="2505" title="History of Federal Open Market Committee actions" label="History of Federal Open Market Committee actions"/>
<link wikidata="Q263725" start="2508" end="2520" title="Janet Yellen" label="Janet Yellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q201795" start="2523" end="2535" title="Ben Bernanke" label="Ben Bernanke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419533" start="2538" end="2553" title="Excess reserves" label="Excess reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304346" start="2556" end="2574" title="Federal funds rate" label="Federal funds rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556980" start="2577" end="2593" title="Forward guidance" label="Forward guidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q179179" start="2596" end="2618" title="Negative interest rate" label="Negative interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377897" start="2621" end="2645" title="Natural rate of interest" label="Natural rate of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140421" start="2648" end="2666" title="Real interest rate" label="Real interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185245" start="2669" end="2680" title="Stagflation" label="Stagflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207781" start="2683" end="2701" title="Speculative bubble" label="Speculative bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q677066" start="2704" end="2719" title="Too big to fail" label="Too big to fail"/>
<link wikidata="Q116029257" start="2722" end="2741" title="Yield Curve Control" label="Yield Curve Control"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384948" wikidata="Q1761300" url="?curid=384948" title="Methyl violet">
<text>Methyl violet is a family of organic compounds that are mainly used as dyes. Depending on the number of attached methyl groups, the color of the dye can be altered. Its main use is as a purple dye for textiles and to give deep violet colors in paint and ink. It is also used as a hydration indicator for silica gel. Methyl violet 10B is also known as crystal violet (and many other names) and has medical uses.

==Structure==
The term methyl violet encompasses three compounds that differ in the number of methyl groups attached to the amine functional group. Methyl violets are mixtures of tetramethyl (2B), pentamethyl (6B) and hexamethyl (10B) pararosanilins.

They are all soluble in water, ethanol, diethylene glycol and dipropylene glycol.

===Methyl violet 2B===
Methyl violet 2B (IUPAC name: 4,4′-((4-Iminocyclohexa-2,5-dien-1-ylidene)methylene)bis(&quot;N&quot;,&quot;N&quot;-dimethylaniline) monohydrochloride) is a green powder which is soluble in water and ethanol but not in xylene. It appears yellow in solution of low pH (approximately 0.15) and changes to violet with pH increasing toward 3.2.

===Methyl violet 10B===

Methyl violet 10B has six methyl groups. It is known in medicine as Gentian violet (or crystal violet or pyoctanin(e)) and is the active ingredient in a Gram stain, used to classify bacteria. It is used as a pH indicator, with a range between 0 and 1.6. The protonated form (found in acidic conditions) is yellow, turning blue-violet above pH levels of 1.6.

Methyl violet 10B inhibits the growth of many Gram positive bacteria, except streptococci. When used in conjunction with nalidixic acid (which destroys gram-negative bacteria), it can be used to isolate the streptococci bacteria for the diagnosis of an infection.

==Degradation==
Methyl violet is a mutagen and mitotic poison, therefore concerns exist regarding the ecological impact of the release of methyl violet into the environment. Methyl violet has been used in vast quantities for textile and paper dyeing, and 15% of such dyes produced worldwide are released to environment in wastewater. Numerous methods have been developed to treat methyl violet pollution. The three most prominent are chemical bleaching, biodegradation, and photodegradation.

===Chemical bleaching===
Chemical bleaching is achieved by oxidation or reduction. Oxidation can destroy the dye completely, e.g. through the use of sodium hypochlorite (NaClO, common bleach) or hydrogen peroxide. Reduction of methyl violet occurs in microorganisms but can be attained chemically using sodium dithionite.

===Biodegradation===
Biodegradation has been well investigated because of its relevance to sewage plants with specialized microorganisms. Two microorganisms that have been studied in depth are the white rot fungus and the bacterium &quot;Nocardia corallina&quot;.

===Photodegradation===
Light alone does not rapidly degrade methyl violet, but the process is accelerated upon the addition of large band-gap semiconductors, titanium dioxide or zinc oxide.

===Other methods===
Many other methods have been developed to treat the contamination of dyes in a solution, including electrochemical degradation, ion exchange, laser degradation, and absorption onto various solids such as activated charcoal.

==See also==

*Fuchsine
*Methylene blue
*Methyl blue
*Egyptian Blue
*Han Purple
*Fluorescein
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1761300" start="0" end="13" title="Methyl violet" label="Methyl violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="29" end="45" title="organic compound" label="organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="71" end="74" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407" start="113" end="119" title="methyl" label="methyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="201" end="209" title="textiles" label="textiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q308976" start="304" end="314" title="silica gel" label="silica gel"/>
<link wikidata="Q420705" start="316" end="333" title="Crystal violet" label="Methyl violet 10B"/>
<link wikidata="Q420705" start="351" end="365" title="crystal violet" label="crystal violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="536" end="541" title="amine" label="amine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170409" start="542" end="558" title="functional group" label="functional group"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="688" end="693" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="695" end="702" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q421902" start="704" end="721" title="diethylene glycol" label="diethylene glycol"/>
<link wikidata="Q904799" start="726" end="744" title="dipropylene glycol" label="dipropylene glycol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="1033" end="1035" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q420705" start="1204" end="1218" title="Gentian violet" label="Gentian violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q188990" start="1289" end="1299" title="Gram stain" label="Gram stain"/>
<link wikidata="Q300951" start="1344" end="1356" title="pH indicator" label="pH indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="1420" end="1424" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="1541" end="1554" title="Gram positive" label="Gram positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q190161" start="1572" end="1584" title="streptococci" label="streptococci"/>
<link wikidata="Q281082" start="1616" end="1630" title="nalidixic acid" label="nalidixic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902073" start="2234" end="2250" title="photodegradation" label="photodegradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="2312" end="2321" title="oxidation" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="2325" end="2334" title="redox" label="reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q407204" start="2402" end="2421" title="sodium hypochlorite" label="sodium hypochlorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="2448" end="2465" title="hydrogen peroxide" label="hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q414560" start="2556" end="2573" title="sodium dithionite" label="sodium dithionite"/>
<link wikidata="Q281331" start="2773" end="2782" title="white rot" label="white rot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2814" end="2832" title="Nocardia corallina" label="Nocardia corallina"/>
<link wikidata="Q193521" start="2999" end="3015" title="titanium dioxide" label="titanium dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q190077" start="3019" end="3029" title="zinc oxide" label="zinc oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q190878" start="3256" end="3274" title="activated carbon" label="activated charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q419167" start="3292" end="3300" title="Fuchsine" label="Fuchsine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422134" start="3302" end="3316" title="Methylene blue" label="Methylene blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q422156" start="3318" end="3329" title="Methyl blue" label="Methyl blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q253181" start="3331" end="3344" title="Egyptian Blue" label="Egyptian Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646726" start="3346" end="3356" title="Han Purple" label="Han Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q410922" start="3358" end="3369" title="Fluorescein" label="Fluorescein"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384949" wikidata="Q112880" url="?curid=384949" title="Friedrich Torberg">
<text>Friedrich Torberg (16 September 1908, Vienna, Alsergrund – 10 November 1979, Vienna) is the pen-name of Friedrich Kantor, an Austrian writer.

== Biography ==
He worked as a critic and journalist in Vienna and Prague until 1938, when his Jewish heritage compelled him to emigrate to France and, later, after being invited by the New York PEN-Club as one of &quot;Ten outstanding German Anti-Nazi-Writers&quot; (along with Heinrich Mann, Franz Werfel, Alfred Döblin, Leonhard Frank, Alfred Polgar, and others) to the United States, where he worked as a scriptwriter in Hollywood and then for Time magazine in New York City. In 1951 he returned to Vienna, where he remained for the rest of his life.

Torberg is known best for his satirical writings in fiction and nonfiction, as well as his translations into German of the stories of Ephraim Kishon, which remain the standard German language version of Kishon&#x27;s work. A staunch anti-communist, Torberg used his prominence as a theater critic to boycott Bertolt Brecht&#x27;s plays in most of Austria for over a decade. 

Austrian Olympic swimmer and swimsuit model Hedy Bienenfeld was the inspiration for the character &quot;Lisa&quot; in his novel &quot;The Pupil Gerber&quot; (&quot;Der Schüler Gerber&quot;).

==Honours and awards==
* Julius-Empire Award (1933)
* Title of Professor (1958)
* City of Vienna Prize for Journalism (1966) 
* Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany (1968) 
* Austrian Cross of Honour for Science and Art, 1st class (1968) 
* Gold Medal of the Austrian capital Vienna (1974) 
* Richard Champion Medal (1974) 
* Austrian Decoration for Science and Art (1976)
* Grand Austrian State Prize for Literature (1979) 
* Naming of Torberggasse in Penzing (Vienna 14th District) (1981)

== Selected works ==
* &quot;Der Schüler Gerber hat absolviert&quot; (1930) (this semi-autobiographical novel tells the story of a grammar school student under the oppression of a tyrannical teacher); later editions bore the shortened title &quot;Der Schüler Gerber&quot;, under which the novel is now generally known.
* &quot;… und glauben, es wäre die Liebe&quot; (1932)
* &quot;Süsskind von Trimberg&quot;. Roman. Fischer, Frankfurt am Main 1972, (fictitious biography) 
* &quot;Die Tante Jolesch oder Der Untergang des Abendlandes in Anekdoten&quot; (1975) (a collection of amusing yet bittersweet anecdotes about Jewish life and personalities in pre-Nazi Vienna and Prague, and in the emigration), translated by Maria Poglitsch Bauer and Sonat Hart, Ariadne Press, 2008, .
* &quot;Die Erben der Tante Jolesch&quot; (1978) (the sequel to the above)

== Further reading ==
* (&quot;The &quot;Hazards of Versatility&quot;&quot;)

==References==
== External links ==
* http://www.forward.com/articles/13829/ (Coffee talk: Reading Friedrich Torberg&#x27;s Masterpiece)
* Recordings with Friedrich Torberg in the Online Archive of the Österreichische Mediathek (in German). Retrieved 29 July 2019</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q112880" start="0" end="17" title="Friedrich Torberg" label="Friedrich Torberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q257780" start="46" end="56" title="Alsergrund" label="Alsergrund"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="125" end="132" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181287" start="134" end="140" title="German literature" label="writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="199" end="205" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="210" end="216" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="238" end="241" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="283" end="289" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q76480" start="422" end="435" title="Heinrich Mann" label="Heinrich Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q78514" start="437" end="449" title="Franz Werfel" label="Franz Werfel"/>
<link wikidata="Q57389" start="451" end="464" title="Alfred Döblin" label="Alfred Döblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q77069" start="466" end="480" title="Leonhard Frank" label="Leonhard Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q45287" start="482" end="495" title="Alfred Polgar" label="Alfred Polgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="516" end="529" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="568" end="577" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="591" end="604" title="Time magazine" label="Time magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="608" end="621" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="808" end="814" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q167429" start="833" end="847" title="Ephraim Kishon" label="Ephraim Kishon"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="932" end="946" title="Anti-communism" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568850" start="999" end="1028" title="Brecht boycott in Vienna" label="boycott Bertolt Brecht&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q530328" start="1119" end="1134" title="Hedy Bienenfeld" label="Hedy Bienenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q21164" start="1395" end="1463" title="Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q306590" start="1474" end="1518" title="Austrian Cross of Honour for Science and Art" label="Austrian Cross of Honour for Science and Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q306590" start="1625" end="1664" title="Austrian Decoration for Science and Art" label="Austrian Decoration for Science and Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q304386" start="1674" end="1700" title="Grand Austrian State Prize" label="Grand Austrian State Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q690335" start="1752" end="1759" title="Penzing (Vienna)" label="Penzing"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2273" end="2290" title=":de:Die Tante Jolesch" label="Die Tante Jolesch"/>
<link wikidata="Q193206" start="2393" end="2401" title="anecdote" label="anecdote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="2446" end="2450" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q303798" start="2925" end="2950" title="Österreichische Mediathek" label="Österreichische Mediathek"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384955" wikidata="Q1298254" url="?curid=384955" title="Factor price equalization">
<text>Factor price equalization is an economic theory, by Paul A. Samuelson (1948), which states that the prices of identical factors of production, such as the wage rate or the rent of capital, will be equalized across countries as a result of international trade in commodities. The theorem assumes that there are two goods and two factors of production, for example capital and labour. Other key assumptions of the theorem are that each country faces the same commodity prices, because of free trade in commodities, uses the same technology for production, and produces both goods. Crucially these assumptions result in factor prices being equalized across countries without the need for factor mobility, such as migration of labor or capital flows.

A simple summary of this theory is when the prices of the output goods are equalized between countries as they move to free trade, then the prices of the factors (capital and labor) will also be equalized between countries.

Whichever factor receives the lowest price before two countries integrate economically and effectively become one market will therefore tend to become more expensive relative to other factors in the economy, while those with the highest price will tend to become cheaper.

In a perfectly competitive market, the return to a factor of production depends upon the value of its marginal productivity. The marginal productivity of a factor, like labor, in turn depends upon the amount of labor being used as well as the amount of capital. As the amount of labor rises in an industry, labor&#x27;s marginal productivity falls. As the amount of capital rises, labor&#x27;s marginal productivity rises. Finally, the value of productivity depends upon the output price commanded by the good in the market.

An often-cited example of factor price equalization is . When two countries enter a free trade agreement, wages for identical jobs in both countries tend to approach each other.

The result was first proven mathematically as an outcome of the Heckscher–Ohlin model assumptions.

Simply stated the theorem says that when the prices of the output goods are equalized between countries as they move to free trade, then the prices of the input factors (capital and labor) will also be equalized between countries.

This theory was independently discovered by Abba Lerner in 1933 but was published much later in 1952. The &quot;Lerner Diagram&quot; remains a key analytical tool in teaching international trade theory.

==Application==
Joseph Stiglitz applied factor price equalization to a dynamic economy to study the long term supply responses of capital from the classical perspective. He showed that the high interest economy is eager to trade with the low interest rate economy, and consequently it has a lower long term consumption in free trade than pre-trade. He also demonstrated that in the long run tariff or export subsidy may increase the consumption per capita in those countries, providing a simple explanation for the results.

==See also==
* List of international trade topics

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1298254" start="0" end="25" title="Factor price equalization" label="Factor price equalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="32" end="40" title="economics" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q102454" start="52" end="69" title="Paul A. Samuelson" label="Paul A. Samuelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q210947" start="120" end="141" title="factors of production" label="factors of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="1856" end="1866" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261156" start="2015" end="2036" title="Heckscher–Ohlin model" label="Heckscher–Ohlin model"/>
<link wikidata="Q305781" start="2327" end="2338" title="Abba P. Lerner" label="Abba Lerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18430" start="2503" end="2518" title="Joseph Stiglitz" label="Joseph Stiglitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="2809" end="2819" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="2878" end="2884" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018913" start="3027" end="3061" title="List of international trade topics" label="List of international trade topics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384959" wikidata="Q1071068" url="?curid=384959" title="Saturn I SA-1">
<text>Saturn-Apollo 1 (SA-1) was the first flight of the Saturn I space launch vehicle, the first in the Saturn family, and first mission of the American Apollo program. The rocket was launched on October 27, 1961, from Cape Canaveral, Florida.

== Objectives ==
The Saturn I booster was a huge increase in size and power over anything previously launched. It was three times taller, required six times more fuel and produced ten times more thrust than the Juno I rocket that had launched the first American satellite, &quot;Explorer 1&quot;, into orbit in 1958.

At the time, NASA had decided to not use all-up testing, when an entire system is tested at once. The agency planned to test each rocket stage in separate launches, so for SA-1 the only live stage was the S-I first stage.

This first flight was designed to test the structure of the launch vehicle during a suborbital flight using the nose cone from a Jupiter rocket.

== Preparation ==
As this was the first Saturn flight, the systems were still being developed. It was the first time that a stage had been delivered to Cape Canaveral by barge and it demonstrated this could be done for the larger stages of future Saturn rockets.

The first stage and the two dummy upper stages arrived on August 15, 1961, on the barge &quot;Compromise&quot;. It had encountered some problems on the voyage, running aground four times due to poor nautical charts. On the return trip, the barge hit a bridge, causing some minor damage.

The booster was erected at Pad 34 five days later with little trouble. Testing proceeded, albeit a little behind schedule. At this time, testing was not automated and amounted to flicking switches in the control center and observing how the rocket responded.

== Flight ==

At 12:30 p.m. EST on October 27, 1961, the RP-1 propellant started to flow into the rocket.
A slight surplus (3%) of the fuel required was put into the rocket, as it was possible to easily drain fuel. Just before launch, surplus fuel was removed from the tanks.

Liquid oxygen began flowing into its tanks at 3:00 a.m. the next day. It followed the same procedure as the RP-1 with the tanks being filled to 10 percent to check for leaks, then fast filled to 97 percent, then slowly topped off.

Despite a couple of delays due to bad weather, the rocket was launched only one hour behind schedule. The engineers had given the rocket only a 75 percent chance of lifting off and only a 30 percent chance of completing a nominal flight. Even with a nominal flight some damage was thought possible. At the Redstone Arsenal, ground testing had shattered windows 12 km away.

The sound of the launch was a disappointment for some witnesses, being described as like an Atlas rocket launch, when observers stood 1.5 miles (2.4 km) away instead of three miles (5 km) for a Saturn launch. It was later determined that the cause of the difference between the Cape and the Redstone Arsenal was atmospheric conditions damping the sound.

The flight itself was nearly perfect. The rocket reached a height of 136.5 km and impacted 345.7 km down range from the launch site in the Atlantic Ocean. The only real problem was the rocket cut off 1.6 seconds ahead of schedule. This was traced to the fact that there was 400 kg too much liquid oxygen and 410 kg too little RP-1. For the test flight, SA-1 only carried a propellant load that was 83 percent full.

== References ==
== External links ==
*NASA Space Science Data Coordinated Archive
*NASA Apollo Mission SA-1
*&quot;Moonport: A History of Apollo Launch Facilities and Operations&quot; </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1071068" start="0" end="15" title="Saturn I SA-1" label="Saturn-Apollo 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071068" start="17" end="21" title="Saturn I SA-1" label="SA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q521076" start="51" end="59" title="Saturn I" label="Saturn I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285723" start="99" end="112" title="Saturn rocket" label="Saturn family"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="148" end="162" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q334465" start="214" end="228" title="Cape Canaveral Air Force Station" label="Cape Canaveral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192304" start="451" end="457" title="Juno I" label="Juno I"/>
<link wikidata="Q49901" start="519" end="529" title="Explorer 1" label="Explorer 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="571" end="575" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q100553010" start="763" end="766" title="S-I" label="S-I"/>
<link wikidata="Q832435" start="865" end="882" title="suborbital flight" label="suborbital flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q728502" start="1390" end="1404" title="nautical chart" label="nautical chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034347" start="1506" end="1512" title="Cape Canaveral Air Force Station Launch Complex 34" label="Pad 34"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1767" end="1770" title="Time zone#UTC-5 (EST – Eastern Standard Time)" label="EST"/>
<link wikidata="Q520336" start="1796" end="1800" title="RP-1" label="RP-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q618153" start="2016" end="2029" title="Liquid oxygen" label="Liquid oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q998938" start="2554" end="2570" title="Redstone Arsenal" label="Redstone Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22949" start="2714" end="2726" title="Atlas (rocket)" label="Atlas rocket"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384965" wikidata="Q3593256" url="?curid=384965" title="Walpole Island First Nation">
<text>Walpole Island is an island and First Nation reserve in southwestern Ontario, Canada, on the border between Ontario and Michigan in the United States. It is located in the mouth of the Saint Clair River on Lake Saint Clair, about by road from Windsor, Ontario, and from Detroit, Michigan.

Walpole Island is given (but disputed) as the resting place of Tecumseh, a 19th-century leader of the Shawnee of much renown for his resistance against American westward expansion by forming Tecumseh&#x27;s confederacy and starting Tecumseh&#x27;s War.

==Land area == 

Walpole Island is unceded territory and is inhabited by the Ojibwe, Potawatomi, and Odawa peoples of the Walpole Island First Nation, who call it Bkejwanong, meaning &quot;where the waters divide&quot; in Anishinaabemowin. In addition to Walpole Island, the reserve includes Squirrel Island, Saint Anne Island (surrounded by Syme and Johnson Rivers), Seaway Island (except a small US portion), Bassett Island, and Potawatomi Island. The river or creeks that separate these islands provide the area with its other commonly used name, &quot;Swejwanong&quot; or &quot;many forks of a river.&quot;

It is independent of, but within the geographic region of, Lambton County and adjoins the municipality of Chatham-Kent and the township of Saint Clair. Across the Saint Clair River to the west are the United States towns of Algonac, Michigan, and Clay Township. Harsen&#x27;s Island, also unceded Anishinaabe territory, is now on the west side of the international border line. The border was redrawn in the 19th century following disputes between the United Kingdom and the United States; their governments were oblivious to the interests and rights of the Indigenous peoples living on and using these lands. As such, the First Nation is now trying to solve their grievances with the Crown with a specific claim.

==History==

The name origins of Walpole are uncertain (although possibly related to surveyors Lieutenants Arthur Walpole or John Walpole).

===Settlement (1600s–1800s)===

In the late 1600s and early 1700s, what is now known as Walpole Island and the surrounding area was settled by people from the Ojibwe and Odawa nations. In 1844, Jesuits from nearby Sandwich built a mission at the northern point of Walpole Island at the Highbanks. This raised tensions with the Anishinaabeg as the Jesuits were not invited to build on the island and they cut down oak trees that the community did not want to be cut. The relationship between the two groups was further antagonized by the theological debate that Father Pierre Chazelle held with Chief Peterwegeschick and other chief leaders on July 31, 1844. In 1850, the Jesuits left after the mission was razed.

===Deforestation of the island (1869–1883)===

Due to a number of contracts for harvesting oak on the island, drawn up by non-Native resource industries, a large amount of Walpole Island was deforested. The nature of these contracts &quot;created a lasting mistrust between the community, Indian Affairs, and non-Native resource industries&quot;.

===Illegal hunting prohibitions (1884–1899)===

As part of an effort to colonize the island, Indian Affairs produced an illegal prohibition on the hunting of ducks on Saint Anne&#x27;s Island. The prohibition was lifted once Aboriginal Title was reaffirmed in 1899.

===20th-century industrialization of Saint Clair River===

By the early twentieth century, the river surrounding Walpole Island was heavily trafficked with industrial freight.

=== Present day ===

In February 2021 a University of Windsor male student unrelated to Island members was murdered near Pump House Road, and several males were charged.

== Environment ==

The island is also home to many different environmental efforts, including the Walpole Island Land Trust and the Purple Martin Project run by Richard Carr. Walpole Island has the only self-sustaining population of northern bobwhite (&quot;Colinus virginianus&quot;) confirmed to exist in Ontario, and by extension, all of Canada.

==Demographics==

As of January 2011, the registered population of the Walpole Island First Nation is 4,315 members, of whom 2,213 live on the reserve, 22 live on another reserve, and 2,080 live off reserve.


==Transportation==

Walpole Island is connected to mainland Canada by the Tecumsah Road Bridge (Route 32). The Walpole-Algonac Ferry connects with the US city of Algonac, Michigan. This ferry service has been in place for over 100 years.

== Education == 

Students completing their Walpole Island Elementary School education will continue it at nearby Wallaceburg District Secondary School. In the mid-1990s, graduation for First Nations students was about 20%, but by mid-2010s had become closer to 75%. 

The Harriett Jacobs Center within WDSS houses the Walpole Island First Nation Secondary School Program, assisting 150+ students. 
== Sports == 

The island is home the Walpole Island Wild who play in the Provincial Junior Hockey League.

The Walpole Island First Nation bought the then Wallaceburg Thuderbirds in July 2022. In April 2023, the team&#x27;s relocation to the Walpole Island Sports Complex was approved. The team was then rebranded as the Walpole Island Wild.

==Notable people==

* Bauzhi-Geezhig-Waeshikum (? – 1842) – Ojibwa chief and medicine man from the Lake Saint Clair area. 
* Stephen Kiyoshk (1891–1941) – murderer executed for killing a fellow tribesman in 1939. Notable for being the only person in Canadian history to be sentenced to death twice for different crimes. 
* Sacramento Knoxx – Multidisciplinary artist (including hip hop), director, and activist.
* Alexander McKee (1735–1799) – British Indian Department agent who founded the Walpole Island settlement.
* Tecumseh (1813)) – prominent 19th-century chief and warrior. His remains are claimed to have been buried on Saint Anne Island, and reburied at Walpole Island in 1941.

==Gallery==

== See also ==
* List of Jesuit sites
* Walpole–Algonac Ferry

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3593256" start="0" end="14" title="Walpole Island First Nation" label="Walpole Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="21" end="27" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="32" end="44" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q155239" start="45" end="52" title="Indian reserve" label="reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="69" end="76" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="108" end="115" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="120" end="128" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="136" end="149" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054325" start="185" end="202" title="St. Clair River" label="Saint Clair River"/>
<link wikidata="Q736707" start="206" end="222" title="Lake Saint Clair (North America)" label="Lake Saint Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q182625" start="243" end="250" title="Windsor, Ontario" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="270" end="277" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q257808" start="353" end="361" title="Tecumseh" label="Tecumseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q253436" start="392" end="399" title="Shawnee" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="442" end="450" title="America" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q717738" start="481" end="508" title="Tecumseh&amp;#x27;s confederacy" label="Tecumseh&amp;#x27;s confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q325314" start="522" end="541" title="Tecumseh&amp;#x27;s War" label="Tecumseh&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668392" start="579" end="596" title="unceded territory" label="unceded territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="621" end="627" title="Ojibwe" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065583" start="629" end="639" title="Potawatomi" label="Potawatomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q536116" start="645" end="650" title="Odawa" label="Odawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33875" start="766" end="782" title="Ojibwe language" label="Anishinaabemowin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054325" start="853" end="870" title="St. Anne Island" label="Saint Anne Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406913" start="1215" end="1229" title="Lambton County" label="Lambton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q113464" start="1262" end="1274" title="Chatham-Kent" label="Chatham-Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116603" start="1295" end="1306" title="St. Clair, Ontario" label="Saint Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731289" start="1380" end="1397" title="Algonac, Michigan" label="Algonac, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130024" start="1403" end="1416" title="Clay Township, Michigan" label="Clay Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673727" start="1418" end="1438" title="Harsen&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Harsen&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091535" start="1445" end="1452" title="Indigenous land claims in Canada" label="unceded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956640" start="1453" end="1464" title="Anishinaabe" label="Anishinaabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="1608" end="1622" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1631" end="1644" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q920486" start="1700" end="1706" title="Indigenous rights" label="rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q65079919" start="1854" end="1868" title="Specific Claim" label="specific claim"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="2171" end="2177" title="Ojibwe" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q536116" start="2182" end="2187" title="Odawa" label="Odawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="2206" end="2213" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084898" start="2226" end="2234" title="Sandwich, Ontario" label="Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010563" start="3167" end="3181" title="Indian Affairs" label="Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054325" start="3241" end="3265" title="St. Anne Island" label="Saint Anne&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q142651" start="3922" end="3939" title="northern bobwhite" label="northern bobwhite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731289" start="4411" end="4428" title="Algonac, Michigan" label="Algonac, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962943" start="4602" end="4639" title="Wallaceburg District Secondary School" label="Wallaceburg District Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962944" start="4925" end="4944" title="Walpole Island Wild" label="Walpole Island Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q24191899" start="4961" end="4992" title="Provincial Junior Hockey League" label="Provincial Junior Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873620" start="5253" end="5277" title="Bauzhi-Geezhig-Waeshikum" label="Bauzhi-Geezhig-Waeshikum"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="5291" end="5297" title="Ojibwa" label="Ojibwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q266750" start="5308" end="5320" title="medicine man" label="medicine man"/>
<link wikidata="Q114822476" start="5356" end="5371" title="Stephen Kiyoshk" label="Stephen Kiyoshk"/>
<link wikidata="Q28794067" start="5554" end="5570" title="Sacramento Knoxx" label="Sacramento Knoxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719608" start="5645" end="5660" title="Alexander McKee" label="Alexander McKee"/>
<link wikidata="Q717649" start="5675" end="5700" title="British Indian Department" label="British Indian Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q257808" start="5752" end="5760" title="Tecumseh" label="Tecumseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575275" start="5950" end="5970" title="List of Jesuit sites" label="List of Jesuit sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963738" start="5973" end="5994" title="Walpole–Algonac Ferry" label="Walpole–Algonac Ferry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384967" wikidata="Q3087069" url="?curid=384967" title="Avianca Flight 410">
<text>Avianca Flight 410 was a flight that crashed at 13:17 on March 17, 1988, near Cúcuta, Colombia, which occurred shortly after takeoff when it flew into a mountain. All 143 people on board were killed. It was the deadliest aviation accident to occur in Colombia until December 20, 1995.

==Aircraft==

The aircraft involved, manufactured in 1966, was a Boeing 727-21 owned and operated by Avianca. It was registered as HK-1716 serial number 18999. It had flown previously with Pan Am, originally registered as N321PA and named Clipper Koln-Bonn; it was sold on September 20, 1974, to Avianca. It had logged 43,848 hours of airframe time and was powered by three Pratt &amp; Whitney JT8D-7A engines.

== Description ==
The plane took off from Cúcuta at around 13:17 from runway 33 bound for Cartagena. There was no further information from the plane until ground witnesses claimed that they saw a Boeing 727 flying too low. The plane contacted some trees and then, at 13:18, it struck the mountain head on. The 727 broke in half and disintegrated when the fuel exploded; the remains were scattered in a radius. There were no survivors among the 7 crew and 136 passengers.

Rescue operations and commissions rushed to the crash site, which was impossible to reach due to nightfall and the resulting low visibility. Area residents provided light and helped the rescuers reach the top of the mountain, where the rest of the wreckage was. The next day, the remains were transported back to Cúcuta to be identified by their family members.

== Investigation ==
The official cause of the crash was a controlled flight into terrain at 6,343 feet. The investigation pointed to a number of probable causes, including a non-crew pilot in the cockpit, whose presence diverted the attention of the pilot and who interfered with the operation of the aircraft, and a lack of teamwork (crew resource management) between the pilot and co-pilot.

== Aftermath ==
The crash of Flight 410 was the deadliest aviation accident to occur in Colombia until December 20, 1995, when American Airlines Flight 965 crashed into a mountain near Buga, Valle del Cauca, killing 159 people. The cause was determined to be pilot error.

==See also==
* List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft
* Avianca Flight 011 - another plane of Avianca that crashed in Spain five years prior in similar circumstances
* Prinair Flight 277

== References ==
==External links==
*ICAO reports:
**ICAO Circular 2660-AN/154 (12-26)
**ICAO Adrep Summary 2/88 (#5)
*Final report (Archive) - Civil Aviation Department, Colombia, prepared by Harro Ranter, Aviation Safety Network. Source: Aircraft Accident Digest (ICAO Circular 260-AN/154) p. 12-26.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3087069" start="0" end="18" title="Avianca Flight 410" label="Avianca Flight 410"/>
<link wikidata="Q216847" start="78" end="84" title="Cúcuta" label="Cúcuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="86" end="94" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129232" start="141" end="161" title="Controlled flight into terrain" label="flew into a mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q108284447" start="221" end="238" title="aviation accident" label="aviation accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q941612" start="266" end="283" title="American Airlines Flight 965" label="December 20, 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="304" end="312" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409" start="351" end="364" title="Boeing 727" label="Boeing 727-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q308911" start="387" end="394" title="Avianca" label="Avianca"/>
<link wikidata="Q838849" start="403" end="413" title="Aircraft registration" label="registered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198578" start="425" end="438" title="serial number" label="serial number"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="475" end="481" title="Pan American World Airways" label="Pan Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107964" start="660" end="687" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney JT8D" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney JT8D-7A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129232" start="1591" end="1621" title="controlled flight into terrain" label="controlled flight into terrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095549" start="1716" end="1721" title="Aviator" label="pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q499874" start="1868" end="1892" title="crew resource management" label="crew resource management"/>
<link wikidata="Q941612" start="2054" end="2082" title="American Airlines Flight 965" label="American Airlines Flight 965"/>
<link wikidata="Q934753" start="2112" end="2133" title="Buga, Valle del Cauca" label="Buga, Valle del Cauca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057459" start="2186" end="2197" title="pilot error" label="pilot error"/>
<link wikidata="Q354069" start="2215" end="2276" title="List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft" label="List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119385" start="2279" end="2297" title="Avianca Flight 011" label="Avianca Flight 011"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715028" start="2391" end="2409" title="Prinair Flight 277" label="Prinair Flight 277"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="2448" end="2452" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459239" start="2618" end="2641" title="Aviation Safety Network" label="Aviation Safety Network"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384968" wikidata="Q847194" url="?curid=384968" title="Asiatic linsang">
<text>The Asiatic linsang (Prionodon) is a genus comprising two species native to Southeast Asia: the banded linsang (&quot;Prionodon linsang&quot;) and the spotted linsang (&quot;Prionodon pardicolor&quot;). &quot;Prionodon&quot; is considered a sister taxon of the Felidae.

==Characteristics==
The coat pattern of the Asiatic linsang is distinct, consisting of large spots that sometimes coalesce into broad bands on the sides of the body; the tail is banded transversely. It is small in size with a head and body length ranging from and a long tail. The tail is nearly as long as the head and body, and about five or six times as long as the hind foot. The head is elongated with a narrow muzzle, rhinarium evenly convex above, with wide internarial septum, shallow infranarial portion, and philtrum narrow and grooved, the groove extending only about to the level of the lower edge of the nostrils. The delicate skull is long, low, and narrow with a well defined occipital and a strong crest, but there is no complete sagittal crest. The teeth also are more highly specialized, and show an approach to those of Felidae, although more primitive. The dental formula is . The incisors form a transverse, not a curved, line; the first three upper and the four lower pre-molars are compressed and trenchant with a high, sharp, median cusp and small subsidiary cusps in front and behind it. The upper carnassial has a small inner lobe set far forwards, a small cusp in front of the main compressed, high, pointed cusp, and a compressed, blade-like posterior cusp; the upper molar is triangular, transversely set, much smaller than the upper carnassial, and much wider than it is long, so that the upper carnassial is nearly at the posterior end of the upper cheek-teeth as in Felidae.

==Systematics==
===Taxonomic history===
====With Viverridae (morphological)====
&quot;Prionodon&quot; was denominated and first described by Thomas Horsfield in 1822, based on a linsang from Java. He had placed the linsang under ‘section Prionodontidae’ of the genus &quot;Felis&quot;, because of similarities to both genera &quot;Viverra&quot; and &quot;Felis&quot;. In 1864, John Edward Gray placed the genera &quot;Prionodon&quot; and &quot;Poiana&quot; in the tribe Prionodontina, as part of Viverridae. Reginald Innes Pocock initially followed Gray&#x27;s classification, but the existence of scent glands in &quot;Poiana&quot; induced him provisionally to regard the latter as a specialized form of &quot;Genetta&quot;, its likeness to &quot;Prionodon&quot; being possibly adaptive. Furthermore, the skeletal anatomy of Asiatic linsangs are said to be a mosaic of features of other viverrine-like mammals, as linsangs share cranial, postcranial and dental similarities with falanoucs, African palm civet, and oyans respectively.

====With Felidae (molecular)====
DNA analysis based on 29 species of Carnivora, comprising 13 species of Viverrinae and three species representing &quot;Paradoxurus&quot;, &quot;Paguma&quot; and Hemigalinae, confirmed Pocock&#x27;s assumption that the African linsang &quot;Poiana&quot; represents the sister-group of the genus &quot;Genetta&quot;. The placement of &quot;Prionodon&quot; as the sister-group of the family Felidae is strongly supported, and it was proposed that the Asiatic linsangs be placed in the monogeneric family Prionodontidae. There is a physical synapomorphy shared between felids and &quot;Prionodon&quot; in the presence of the specialized fused sacral vertebrae.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q847194" start="4" end="19" title="Asiatic linsang" label="Asiatic linsang"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="37" end="42" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="58" end="65" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="76" end="90" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q842799" start="96" end="110" title="banded linsang" label="banded linsang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344102" start="151" end="166" title="spotted linsang" label="spotted linsang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="241" end="253" title="sister taxon" label="sister taxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25265" start="261" end="268" title="Felidae" label="Felidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398884" start="695" end="704" title="rhinarium" label="rhinarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q346579" start="748" end="754" title="septum" label="septum"/>
<link wikidata="Q152092" start="789" end="797" title="philtrum" label="philtrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16317" start="962" end="971" title="Occiput" label="occipital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232942" start="1017" end="1031" title="sagittal crest" label="sagittal crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q273543" start="1172" end="1179" title="incisor" label="incisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189218" start="1265" end="1270" title="Molar (tooth)" label="molar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046513" start="1328" end="1332" title="Cusp (dentistry)" label="cusp"/>
<link wikidata="Q280781" start="1394" end="1404" title="carnassial" label="carnassial"/>
<link wikidata="Q507763" start="1920" end="1936" title="Thomas Horsfield" label="Thomas Horsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="1970" end="1974" title="Java (island)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q228283" start="2052" end="2057" title="Felis" label="Felis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762710" start="2110" end="2117" title="Viverra" label="Viverra"/>
<link wikidata="Q191963" start="2156" end="2172" title="John Edward Gray" label="John Edward Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q11846972" start="2223" end="2229" title="Poiana (genus)" label="Poiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q185864" start="2275" end="2285" title="Viverridae" label="Viverridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q174664" start="2287" end="2308" title="Reginald Innes Pocock" label="Reginald Innes Pocock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264033" start="2377" end="2388" title="scent gland" label="scent gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43221" start="2490" end="2497" title="Genetta" label="Genetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509689" start="2759" end="2767" title="Eupleres" label="falanouc"/>
<link wikidata="Q513081" start="2770" end="2788" title="African palm civet" label="African palm civet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11846972" start="2794" end="2798" title="Poiana (genus)" label="oyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q285223" start="2848" end="2860" title="DNA analysis" label="DNA analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25306" start="2884" end="2893" title="Carnivora" label="Carnivora"/>
<link wikidata="Q198350" start="2920" end="2930" title="Viverrinae" label="Viverrinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q887918" start="2968" end="2979" title="Paradoxurus" label="Paradoxurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q626049" start="2993" end="2999" title="Paguma" label="Paguma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018988" start="3010" end="3021" title="Hemigalinae" label="Hemigalinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25265" start="3237" end="3244" title="Felidae" label="Felidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="3331" end="3342" title="monogeneric" label="monogeneric"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="3386" end="3398" title="synapomorphy" label="synapomorphy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384969" wikidata="Q524629" url="?curid=384969" title="Chase Bank">
<text>JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., doing business as Chase, is an American national bank headquartered in New York City that constitutes the consumer and commercial banking subsidiary of the U.S. multinational banking and financial services holding company, JPMorgan Chase. The bank was known as Chase Manhattan Bank until it merged with J.P. Morgan &amp; Co. in 2000. Chase Manhattan Bank was formed by the merger of the Chase National Bank and the Manhattan Company in 1955. The bank merged with Chemical Bank New York in 1996 and later merged with Bank One Corporation in 2004 and in 2008 acquired the deposits and most assets of Washington Mutual. In May 2023, it acquired the assets of First Republic Bank.

Chase offers more than 4,700 branches and 15,000 ATMs nationwide and has 18.5 million checking accounts and 25 million debit card users as of 2023. JPMorgan Chase &amp; Co. has 250,355 employees (as of 2016) and operates in more than 100 countries. JPMorgan Chase &amp; Co. had assets of $3.31 trillion in 2022 which makes it the largest bank in the United States as well as the bank with the most branches in the United States and the only bank with a presence in all of the contiguous United States. JPMorgan Chase, through its Chase subsidiary, is one of the Big Four banks of the United States.

==History==
The Bank of The Manhattan Company (New York) was founded on September 1, 1799, and continued under that name until 1955, when it merged with the Chase National Bank, which was founded in 1877; the merged bank was called The Chase Manhattan Bank.

===The Manhattan Company===

Chase traces its history back to the founding of The Manhattan Company by Aaron Burr on September 1, 1799, in a house at 40 Wall Street:

In 2006, the modern-day Chase bought the retail banking division of the Bank of New York, which then only months later merged with Pittsburgh-based Mellon Financial to form the present-day BNY Mellon.

===Chase National Bank===
Chase National Bank was formed in 1877 by John Thompson. It was named after former United States Treasury Secretary and Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase, although Chase (having died four years earlier) did not have a connection with the bank.

The Chase National Bank acquired a number of smaller banks in the 1920s through its Chase Securities Corporation. In 1926, for instance, it acquired Mechanics and Metals National Bank. 

However, its most significant acquisition was that of the Equitable Trust Company of New York in 1930, the largest stockholder of which was John D. Rockefeller Jr. This made Chase the largest bank in the US and the world.

Chase was primarily a wholesale bank dealing with other prominent financial institutions and major corporate clients such as General Electric, which had, through its RCA subsidiary, leased prominent space and become a crucial first tenant of Rockefeller Center. They rescued that major project in 1930. The bank is also closely associated with and has financed the oil industry, having longstanding connections with its board of directors to the successor companies of Standard Oil, especially ExxonMobil, which are also part of Rockefeller holdings.

===Merger as Chase Manhattan Bank===


In 1955, Chase National Bank and The Manhattan Company merged to create the Chase Manhattan Bank. As Chase was a much larger bank, it was first intended that Chase acquire the &quot;Bank of Manhattan&quot;, as it was nicknamed, but it transpired that Burr&#x27;s original charter for the Manhattan Company had not only included the clause allowing it to start a bank with surplus funds, but another requiring unanimous consent of shareholders for the bank to be taken over. The deal was therefore structured as an acquisition by the Bank of the Manhattan Company of Chase National, with John J. McCloy becoming chairman of the merged entity. This avoided the need for unanimous consent by shareholders.

For Chase Manhattan Bank&#x27;s new logo, Chermayeff &amp; Geismar designed a stylized octagon in 1961, which remains part of the bank&#x27;s logo today. It has been reported that the Chase logo was a stylized representation of the primitive water pipes laid by the Manhattan Company, but this story was refuted in 2007 by Ivan Chermayeff himself. According to Chermayeff, the Chase logo was merely intended to be distinctive and geometric, and was not intended at all to resemble a cross-section of a wooden water pipe. According to Chase, the sides of the octagon represent forward motion, while the blank space in the middle suggests progress originates from the center; and is a single unit made up of separate parts, like the bank. The bank included an asset management business called the Chase Investors Management Corporation. Under McCloy&#x27;s successor, George Champion, the bank relinquished its antiquated 1799 state charter for a modern one. In 1969, under the leadership of David Rockefeller, the bank reorganized as a bank holding company, the Chase Manhattan Corporation.

The mergers and acquisitions during this period allowed Chase Manhattan to expand its influence over many non-financial corporations. A 1979 study titled &quot;The Significance of Bank Control over Large Corporations&quot; found that: &quot;The Rockefeller-controlled Chase Manhattan Bank tops the list, controlling 16 companies.&quot; In 1985, Chase Manhattan expanded into Arizona by acquiring Continental Bank. In 1991, Chase Manhattan expanded into Connecticut by acquiring two insolvent banks.

===Mergers with Chemical, J.P. Morgan===
In August 1995, Chemical Bank of New York and Chase Manhattan Bank announced plans to merge. The merger was completed in August 1996. Chemical&#x27;s previous acquisitions included Manufacturers Hanover Corporation, in 1991, and Texas Commerce Bank, in 1987. Although Chemical was the nominal survivor, the merged company retained the Chase name since not only was it better known (particularly outside the United States), but also the original charter of Chase required that the name be retained in any future business ventures. Hence, even today, it is known as JPMorgan Chase.

In December 2000, the combined Chase Manhattan completed the acquisition of J.P. Morgan &amp; Co. in one of the largest banking mergers to date. The combined company was renamed JPMorgan Chase. In 2004, the bank acquired Bank One, making Chase the largest credit card issuer in the United States. JPMorgan Chase added Bear Stearns and Washington Mutual to its acquisitions in 2008 and 2009 respectively. After closing nearly 400 overlapping branches of the combined company, less than 10% of its total, Chase will have approximately 5,410 branches in 23 states as of the closing date of the acquisition. According to data from SNL Financial (data as of June 30, 2008), this places Chase third behind Wells Fargo and Bank of America in terms of total U.S. retail bank branches.

In October 2010, Chase was named in two lawsuits alleging manipulation of the silver market. The suits allege that by managing giant positions in silver futures and options, the banks influenced the prices of silver on the Comex Exchange since early 2008.

The following is an illustration of the company&#x27;s major mergers and acquisitions and historical predecessors to 1995 (this is not a comprehensive list):

===Bank One Corporation===
In 2004, JPMorgan Chase merged with Chicago-based Bank One Corp., bringing on board its current chairman and CEO Jamie Dimon as president and COO and designating him as CEO William B. Harrison Jr.&#x27;s successor. Dimon&#x27;s pay was pegged at 90% of Harrison&#x27;s. Dimon quickly made his influence felt by embarking on a cost-cutting strategy and replaced former JPMorgan Chase executives in key positions with Bank One executives—many of whom were with Dimon at Citigroup. Dimon became CEO in January 2006 and chairman in December 2006 after Harrison&#x27;s resignation.

Bank One Corporation was formed upon the 1998 merger between Banc One of Columbus, Ohio and First Chicago NBD. These two large banking companies were themselves created through the merger of many banks. JPMorgan Chase completed the acquisition of Bank One in Q3 2004. The merger between Bank One and JPMorgan Chase meant that corporate headquarters were now in New York City while the retail bank operations of Chase were consolidated in Chicago.

The following is an illustration of Bank One&#x27;s major mergers and acquisitions and historical predecessors (this is not a comprehensive list):

===Washington Mutual===

On September 25, 2008, JPMorgan Chase bought most banking operations of Washington Mutual from the receivership of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). That night, the Office of Thrift Supervision, in what was by far the largest bank failure in American history, seized Washington Mutual Bank and placed it into receivership. The FDIC sold the bank&#x27;s assets, secured debt obligations and deposits to JPMorgan Chase Bank, NA for $1.888 billion, which re-opened the bank the following day. As a result of the takeover, Washington Mutual shareholders lost all their equity. Through the acquisition, JPMorgan became owner of the former accounts of Providian Financial, a credit card issuer WaMu acquired in 2005. The company completed the rebranding of Washington Mutual branches to Chase in late 2009.

===Other recent acquisitions and expansions===

In the first quarter of 2006, Chase purchased Collegiate Funding Services, a portfolio company of private equity firm Lightyear Capital, for $663 million. CFS was used as the foundation for the Chase Student Loans, previously known as Chase Education Finance. In April of that same year, Chase acquired the Bank of New York Co.&#x27;s retail and small business banking network. This gave Chase access to 338 additional branches and 700,000 new customers in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, and Indiana.

In 2019, Chase began opening retail branches in Pittsburgh and other areas within Western Pennsylvania; this coincided with Bank of America starting a similar expansion within the area the previous year. Even though Chase entered the market organically as opposed to a merger &amp; acquisition, they still had to receive approval from the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency to open branches due to Chase&#x27;s size as a whole. Before Chase and Bank of America expanded its retail presence into the market, Pittsburgh had been one of the largest U.S. cities without a retail presence from any of the &quot;Big Four&quot;, with locally based PNC Financial Services (no. 6 nationally) having a commanding market share in the area. Chase had previously considered buying National City branches from PNC that were required for divestiture following that bank&#x27;s acquisition of National City in 2009, but were instead sold to First Niagara Bank (since absorbed into KeyBank); it had been speculated that PNC intentionally sold the branches to a much smaller competitor due to not wanting to compete with a &quot;Big Four&quot; bank in its home market.

In August 2021, Chase announced that it was the first bank to have a retail presence in all 48 of the contiguous United States. The last state in the US to have a Chase branch was Montana, with the branch in Billings the first branch in the state.

===Expansion outside the US===
In September 2021, JPMorgan Chase entered the United Kingdom retail banking market by launching an app-based current account and Deposit account under the Chase brand. This is the company&#x27;s first retail banking operation outside of the United States.

==Controversies==
=== WWII Related Controversies ===
====Purchase of Nazi Germany&#x27;s Reichsmarks====
A press release from the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) in 2004 announced that many of the new Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) files had become declassified. This declassification enabled the discovery that before and during the early years of World War II, the German government sold a special kind of Reichsmark, known as Rückwanderer [returnee] Marks, to American citizens of German descent. Chase National Bank, along with other businesses, were involved in these transactions. Through Chase, this allowed Nazi sympathizers to purchase Marks with dollars at a discounted rate. Specifically, &quot;The financial houses understood that the German government paid the commissions (to its agents, including Chase) through the sale of discounted, blocked Marks that came mainly from Jews who had fled Germany.&quot; In other words, Nazi Germany was able to offer these Marks below face-value because they had been stolen from émigrés fleeing the Nazi regime. Between 1936 and 1941, the Nazis amassed over $20 million, and the businesses enabling these transactions earned $1.2 million in commissions. Of these commissions, over $500,000 went to Chase National Bank and its subagents.

These facts were discovered when the FBI began its investigation in October 1940. The purpose of the investigation was to follow German-Americans who had bought the Marks. However, Chase National Bank&#x27;s executives were never federally prosecuted because Chase&#x27;s lead attorney threatened to reveal FBI, Army, and Navy &quot;sources and methods&quot; in court. Publicly naming the sources and methods could have posed security risks and threatened future intelligence gathering. To avoid such revelations, the executives&#x27; violations of the Johnson Act, the Espionage Act, and the Foreign Agents Registration Act were never prosecuted.

During the occupation of France by the Nazis, there was a controversial scheme known as the Rückwanderer Mark Scheme. In addition to this, NARA records revealed another controversy involving the release of funds to Nazi Germany. From the late 1930s until June 14, 1941, when President Franklin D. Roosevelt (FDR) issued an Executive Order freezing German assets, Chase National Bank worked with the Nazi government. The order, which blocked access to French accounts in the U.S. by anyone, especially the Nazis, was issued by Secretary of the Treasury, Henry Morgenthau Jr., with the approval of FDR. Despite this order, Chase unblocked the accounts within hours and the funds were transferred through South America to Nazi Germany.

====Refusal to release funds belonging to Jews in occupied France====
U.S. Treasury officials wanted an investigation of French subsidiaries of American banks, including: Chase Bank, J.P. Morgan &amp; Co, National City Corporation, Guaranty Bank, Bankers Trust, and American Express. Of these banks, only Chase and Morgan remained open in France during the Nazi occupation. The Chase branch chief in Paris, France, Carlos Niedermann, told his supervisor in New York that there had been an &quot;expansion of deposits&quot;. Also, Niedermann was, &quot;very vigorous in enforcing restrictions against Jewish property, even going so far as to refuse to release funds belonging to Jews in anticipation that a decree with retroactive provisions prohibiting such release might be published in the near future by the occupying Nazi authorities&quot; .

In 1998, Chase general counsel William McDavid said that Chase did not have control over Niedermann. Whether that claim was true or not, Chase Manhattan Bank acknowledged seizing about 100 accounts during the Vichy regime. Kenneth McCallion, a partner in the New York firm Goodkind Labaton Rudoff &amp; Sucharow, led a lawsuit against Barclays Bank for the illegal seizure of assets during World War Two and has since turned his attention toward Chase. The World Jewish Congress (WJC), entered into discussions with Chase and a spokesperson for the WJC said, &quot;Nobody at Chase today is guilty. They were not involved in whatever happened, but they do accept that they have an institutional responsibility.&quot; A Chase spokesman said, &quot;This is a moral issue that we take very seriously.&quot; Chase general counsel McDavid added, &quot;that Chase intends to compensate Jewish account holders whose assets were illegally plundered&quot;. In 1999, the French government formed a commission to report findings to Prime Minister Lionel Jospin. Claire Andrieu, a commission member and history professor at the Sorbonne, said that under the Vichy regime, French banks received visits from Nazi officials but U.S. banks did not. At that time, they did not have to report Jewish accounts, but they did just as the French banks did. She goes on to say that an American ambassador protected the U.S. subsidiaries.

====Related legal action====

In May 1999, Chase Manhattan reached a settlement with 20 plaintiffs who filed an asset reparations lawsuit, such as the Claims Conference, a Jewish restitution organization, and the WJC. The settlement subjected Chase to an independent probe of its conduct of activity which occurred from the company&#x27;s offices in Paris and Châteauneuf-sur-Cher, in southern France, during the World War II-era. The settlement also made possible the company having to eventually a pay modest but symbolically important, payouts to former Chase customers after the probe was completed. It was determined that Chase only owned a sum that was well under $1 million in asset reparations by this point in time. The settlement made Chase Manhattan the first bank to reach a settlement over Holocaust-related claims.

====Public acknowledgement from Chase Manhattan====
In February 2000, more than fifty years after information regarding the ties between Chase and Nazi Germany was revealed during Congressional hearings, Chase Manhattan publicly acknowledged the deal its predecessor Chase National Bank made with Nazi Germany which helped the German government exchange marks and which also likely originated from the forced sale of assets by Jewish refugees.

===Recent controversies===
JPMorgan Chase has paid $16 billion in fines, settlements, and other litigation expenses from 2011 to 2013. Of the $16 billion JPMorgan Chase has paid, about $8.5 billion were for fines and settlements resulting from illegal actions taken by bank executives, according to Richard Eskow at the Campaign for America&#x27;s Future, who cited a new report from Joshua Rosner of Graham Fisher &amp; Co.

The $16 billion total does not include a recent settlement that calls for JPMorgan Chase to pay $100 million to waive $417 million in claims it had made against clients of the firm MF Global.

The U.S. Treasury&#x27;s Office of Foreign Assets Control found that JPMorgan had illegally aided dictatorships in Cuba, Sudan, Liberia and Iran, including transferring 32,000 ounces of gold bullion (valued at approximately $20,560,000) to the benefit of a bank in Iran. JPMorgan did not voluntarily self-disclose the Iranian matter to OFAC.

Among its other transgressions, JPMorgan has been found to have:
* Misled investors
* Engaged in fictitious trades
* Collected illegal flood insurance commissions
* Wrongfully foreclosed on soldiers; charged veterans hidden fees for refinancing
* Violated the Federal Trade Commission Act by making false statements to people seeking automobile loans
* Illegally increased their collection of overdraft fees by processing large transactions before smaller ones
* Helped drive Jefferson County, Alabama, into bankruptcy by switching its fixed-rate debt to variable
* Violated antitrust provision of the Sherman Act relating to bid rigging
* Stole and auctioned items from deposit boxes of private individuals &amp; governments.

====Targeted account closures====
During 2013 and 2014, Chase and other banks received media attention for the practice of cancelling the personal and business accounts of hundreds of legal sex workers, citing in some instances the &quot;morality clause&quot; of their account agreement. Later it was discovered that this practice included mortgage accounts and business loans. Chase canceled the mortgage refinancing process for one individual, that the bank had initiated, whose production company made soft core films like those broadcast on Cinemax. This resulted in a lawsuit which cited evasive dealings and misleading statements by several Chase executives including Securities Vice President Adam Gelcich, Legal Fair Lending Department Vice President Deb Vincent, and an unnamed executive director and assistant general counsel.

In addition to closing accounts for sex workers, the bank has also been using its &quot;morality clause&quot; to disassociate from other types of businesses. Some of these other businesses include medical marijuana dispensaries and any that are &quot;gun related&quot;. Another was a woman-owned condom manufacturing company called Lovability Condoms. Company founder Tiffany Gaines was rejected by Chase Paymentech services &quot;as processing sales for adult-oriented products is a prohibited vertical&quot; and was told that it was a &quot;reputational risk&quot; to process payment for condoms. Gaines then started a petition to ask Chase to review and change its policy of classifying condoms as an &quot;adult oriented product&quot;. The bank later reversed its decision and invited Gaines to submit an application citing that was already doing business with a &quot;wide variety of merchants, including grocers and drug stores, that sell similar products&quot;.

In 2019, the bank faced growing criticism for its alleged practice of arbitrarily targeting the personal accounts of outspoken online personalities such as Martina Markota and Proud Boys chairman Enrique Tarrio. Although the specific motives behind the closures were not officially disclosed the assumption among many on the right was that they were political in nature.

====Dakota Access Pipeline====
Financial documents from Energy Transfer Partners, the pipeline builder for the Dakota Access Pipeline, lists a number of large banking institutions that have provided credit for the project, including JP Morgan Chase. Because of these financial ties, Chase and other banks were a target of the Dakota Access Pipeline protests during 2016 and 2017.

==== Parental leave policy ====
JPMorgan Chase agreed to pay $5 million to compensate their male employees who did not receive the same paid parental leave as women from 2011 to 2017. In December 2017, the bank &quot;clarified its policy to ensure equal access to men and women looking to be their new child&#x27;s main caregiver&quot;. According to the involved attorneys, this is the biggest recorded settlement in a U.S. parental leave discrimination case. JPMorgan agreed to train and monitor to ensure equal parental leave benefits and stated that &quot;its policy was always intended to be gender-neutral&quot;.

==== Fossil fuel investment ====
Chase has faced criticism and protests over its high rate of investment in various fossil fuel industries such as coal, oil, and gas. A study released in October 2019 indicated that Chase invests more ($75 billion) in fossil fuels than any other bank.

==== Unequal lending practices ====
An analysis of home purchases in Chicago from 2012 to 2018 by City Bureau and WBEZ Chicago showed that JP Morgan Chase, &quot;loaned 41 times more in Chicago&#x27;s white neighborhoods than it did in the city&#x27;s black neighborhoods&quot;. The report prompted protests at Chicago Chase branches in June 2020. At a reopening of a remodeled Chase branch in Chicago&#x27;s South Shore, Dimon said via video, &quot;we have targets now to do $600 million (over the next five years) in new mortgages for Blacks and new homeowners in Chicago neighborhoods&quot;.

==== Facilitation of sex trafficking ====
The U.S. government sued JP Morgan Chase Bank in 2022, alleging that JP Morgan &quot;facilitated, sustained, and concealed the human trafficking network operated by Jeffrey Epstein.&quot;

==== ATM glitch incident ====
In 2024, a glitch occurred in Chase&#x27;s ATMs which allowed users to withdraw money using fraudulent checks. This type of bank fraud is commonly known as Check kiting.

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q524629" start="0" end="25" title="Chase Bank" label="JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q1417728" start="27" end="44" title="Trade name" label="doing business as"/>
<link wikidata="Q524629" start="45" end="50" title="Chase Bank" label="Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q124803020" start="67" end="80" title="National bank (United States)" label="national bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="98" end="111" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548025" start="133" end="141" title="retail banking" label="consumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q848507" start="146" end="156" title="commercial bank" label="commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="188" end="201" title="Multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="233" end="248" title="holding company" label="holding company"/>
<link wikidata="Q192314" start="250" end="264" title="JPMorgan Chase" label="JPMorgan Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q524629" start="288" end="308" title="Chase Bank" label="Chase Manhattan Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633403" start="330" end="351" title="J.P. Morgan &amp;amp; Co." label="J.P. Morgan &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q4856207" start="442" end="459" title="Manhattan Company" label="Manhattan Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090395" start="490" end="503" title="Chemical Bank" label="Chemical Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882621" start="543" end="563" title="Bank One Corporation" label="Bank One Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q926203" start="625" end="642" title="Washington Mutual" label="Washington Mutual"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453752" start="683" end="702" title="First Republic Bank" label="First Republic Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="754" end="758" title="Automated teller machine" label="ATMs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017867" start="1035" end="1068" title="List of largest banks in the United States" label="largest bank in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="1181" end="1205" title="contiguous United States" label="contiguous United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1267" end="1281" title="Big Four (banking)#United States" label="Big Four banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856207" start="1317" end="1350" title="The Manhattan Company" label="The Bank of The Manhattan Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1462" end="1481" title="#Chase National Bank" label="Chase National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q179090" start="1667" end="1677" title="Aaron Burr" label="Aaron Burr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548025" start="1772" end="1786" title="retail banking" label="retail banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="1862" end="1872" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305204" start="1879" end="1895" title="Mellon Financial" label="Mellon Financial"/>
<link wikidata="Q589288" start="1920" end="1930" title="The Bank of New York Mellon" label="BNY Mellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260662" start="2001" end="2014" title="John Thompson (American banker)" label="John Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="2042" end="2074" title="United States Treasury Secretary" label="United States Treasury Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q433051" start="2093" end="2108" title="Salmon P. Chase" label="Salmon P. Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804594" start="2349" end="2383" title="Mechanics and Metals National Bank" label="Mechanics and Metals National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q363984" start="2527" end="2550" title="John D. Rockefeller Jr." label="John D. Rockefeller Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7997582" start="2632" end="2646" title="wholesale banking" label="wholesale bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="2735" end="2751" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="2776" end="2779" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11277" start="2852" end="2870" title="Rockefeller Center" label="Rockefeller Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q862571" start="2975" end="2987" title="oil industry" label="oil industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="3079" end="3091" title="Standard Oil" label="Standard Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="3104" end="3114" title="ExxonMobil" label="ExxonMobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q563577" start="3788" end="3802" title="John J. McCloy" label="John J. McCloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092023" start="3947" end="3971" title="Chermayeff &amp;amp; Geismar" label="Chermayeff &amp;amp; Geismar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11239" start="4895" end="4912" title="David Rockefeller" label="David Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512624" start="4940" end="4960" title="bank holding company" label="bank holding company"/>
<link wikidata="Q524629" start="4966" end="4993" title="Chase Manhattan Corporation" label="Chase Manhattan Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="5371" end="5378" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="5449" end="5460" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090395" start="5553" end="5566" title="Chemical Bank" label="Chemical Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753088" start="5718" end="5751" title="Manufacturers Hanover Corporation" label="Manufacturers Hanover Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143505" start="5766" end="5785" title="Texas Commerce Bank" label="Texas Commerce Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633403" start="6194" end="6215" title="J.P. Morgan &amp;amp; Co." label="J.P. Morgan &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q192314" start="6296" end="6310" title="JPMorgan Chase" label="JPMorgan Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882621" start="6339" end="6347" title="Bank One" label="Bank One"/>
<link wikidata="Q813018" start="6436" end="6448" title="Bear Stearns" label="Bear Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q926203" start="6453" end="6470" title="Washington Mutual" label="Washington Mutual"/>
<link wikidata="Q868587" start="6745" end="6758" title="S&amp;amp;P Global" label="SNL Financial"/>
<link wikidata="Q744149" start="6818" end="6829" title="Wells Fargo" label="Wells Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q487907" start="6834" end="6849" title="Bank of America" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="7375" end="7382" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882621" start="7389" end="7403" title="Bank One Corporation" label="Bank One Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="7448" end="7451" title="Chief executive officer" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q922169" start="7452" end="7463" title="Jamie Dimon" label="Jamie Dimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q623279" start="7481" end="7484" title="Chief operating officer" label="COO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004799" start="7512" end="7535" title="William B. Harrison Jr." label="William B. Harrison Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q219508" start="7807" end="7816" title="Citigroup" label="Citigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882621" start="7917" end="7937" title="Bank One Corporation" label="Bank One Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="7990" end="8004" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452612" start="8009" end="8026" title="First Chicago Bank" label="First Chicago NBD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882621" start="8164" end="8172" title="Bank One" label="Bank One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594302" start="8637" end="8649" title="receivership" label="receivership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345065" start="8657" end="8694" title="Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation" label="Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881025" start="8719" end="8747" title="Office of Thrift Supervision" label="Office of Thrift Supervision"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997173" start="9119" end="9125" title="Equity investment" label="equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252536" start="9200" end="9219" title="Providian Financial" label="Providian Financial"/>
<link wikidata="Q926203" start="9242" end="9246" title="Washington Mutual" label="WaMu"/>
<link wikidata="Q192314" start="9450" end="9477" title="Collegiate Funding Services" label="Collegiate Funding Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546636" start="9522" end="9539" title="Lightyear Capital" label="Lightyear Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q589288" start="9711" end="9731" title="Bank of New York Mellon" label="Bank of New York Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="9871" end="9881" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="9900" end="9907" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="9958" end="9968" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988152" start="9992" end="10012" title="Western Pennsylvania" label="Western Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q487907" start="10034" end="10049" title="Bank of America" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881026" start="10249" end="10290" title="Office of the Comptroller of the Currency" label="Office of the Comptroller of the Currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q858859" start="10517" end="10537" title="Big Four (banks)" label="&amp;quot;Big Four&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q38928" start="10558" end="10580" title="PNC Financial Services" label="PNC Financial Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045073" start="10685" end="10698" title="National City Corp." label="National City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971507" start="10779" end="10790" title="National City acquisition by PNC" label="acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453450" start="10842" end="10860" title="First Niagara Bank" label="First Niagara Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740314" start="10882" end="10889" title="KeyBank" label="KeyBank"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="11171" end="11195" title="contiguous United States" label="contiguous United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="11249" end="11256" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q166304" start="11277" end="11285" title="Billings, Montana" label="Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="11395" end="11409" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q695430" start="11458" end="11473" title="Transaction account" label="current account"/>
<link wikidata="Q10948641" start="11478" end="11493" title="Deposit account" label="Deposit account"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104284" start="11504" end="11509" title="Chase (UK)" label="Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="11736" end="11780" title="National Archives and Records Administration" label="National Archives and Records Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="11827" end="11858" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11982" end="11994" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="12000" end="12017" title="Nazi Germany" label="German government"/>
<link wikidata="Q155009" start="12041" end="12051" title="Reichsmark" label="Reichsmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="12289" end="12296" title="American dollar" label="dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="12520" end="12524" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="12538" end="12545" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989857" start="12663" end="12669" title="émigré" label="émigré"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="12723" end="12728" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="13229" end="13232" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="13234" end="13238" title="United States Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="13244" end="13248" title="United States Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="13385" end="13407" title="intelligence gathering" label="intelligence gathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809759" start="13475" end="13486" title="Johnson Act" label="Johnson Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118913" start="13492" end="13505" title="Espionage Act" label="Espionage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263070" start="13515" end="13546" title="Foreign Agents Registration Act" label="Foreign Agents Registration Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="14375" end="14388" title="U.S. Treasury" label="U.S. Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633403" start="14488" end="14508" title="J.P. Morgan &amp;amp; Co" label="J.P. Morgan &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045073" start="14510" end="14535" title="National City Corporation" label="National City Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633403" start="14537" end="14550" title="Guaranty Trust Company of New York" label="Guaranty Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q806739" start="14552" end="14565" title="Bankers Trust" label="Bankers Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q194360" start="14571" end="14587" title="American Express" label="American Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="14662" end="14677" title="Military Administration in France (Nazi Germany)" label="Nazi occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q328293" start="15023" end="15034" title="Ex post facto law" label="retroactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="15361" end="15373" title="Vichy government" label="Vichy regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q245343" start="15487" end="15500" title="Barclays Bank" label="Barclays Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15542" end="15555" title="World War Two" label="World War Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q541010" start="15609" end="15630" title="World Jewish Congress" label="World Jewish Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587677" start="16172" end="16186" title="Prime Minister of France" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q187099" start="16187" end="16200" title="Lionel Jospin" label="Lionel Jospin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16202" end="16216" title=":fr:Claire Andrieu" label="Claire Andrieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="16267" end="16275" title="University of Paris (post-1970)" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q121998" start="16522" end="16532" title="ambassador" label="ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q457363" start="16718" end="16735" title="Claims Conference" label="Claims Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="16917" end="16922" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q632443" start="16927" end="16947" title="Châteauneuf-sur-Cher" label="Châteauneuf-sur-Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="17370" end="17379" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q664017" start="17799" end="17820" title="Aryanization" label="forced sale of assets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339791" start="18449" end="18458" title="MF Global" label="MF Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="18465" end="18478" title="United States Department of the Treasury" label="U.S. Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620015" start="18486" end="18518" title="Office of Foreign Assets Control" label="Office of Foreign Assets Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155727" start="18576" end="18580" title="Government of Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q46694" start="18582" end="18587" title="Government of Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154846" start="18589" end="18596" title="Government of Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16052369" start="18601" end="18605" title="Government of Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q945025" start="18647" end="18659" title="gold bullion" label="gold bullion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620015" start="18797" end="18801" title="OFAC" label="OFAC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18901" end="18918" title="fictitious trades" label="fictitious trades"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460068" start="18939" end="18954" title="flood insurance" label="flood insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440467" start="19064" end="19092" title="Federal Trade Commission Act" label="Federal Trade Commission Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739666" start="19096" end="19119" title="making false statements" label="making false statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129100" start="19197" end="19210" title="overdraft fee" label="overdraft fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="19280" end="19305" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="19312" end="19322" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="19379" end="19388" title="antitrust" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425088" start="19406" end="19417" title="Sherman Act" label="Sherman Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903976" start="19430" end="19441" title="bid rigging" label="bid rigging"/>
<link wikidata="Q852857" start="19722" end="19733" title="sex workers" label="sex workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909174" start="19770" end="19785" title="Morals clause" label="morality clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000136" start="20037" end="20046" title="Softcore pornography" label="soft core"/>
<link wikidata="Q249892" start="20077" end="20084" title="Cinemax" label="Cinemax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033379" start="20567" end="20584" title="medical marijuana" label="medical marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005823" start="20702" end="20720" title="Lovability Condoms" label="Lovability Condoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087180" start="20769" end="20785" title="Chase Paymentech" label="Chase Paymentech"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21496" end="21511" title="Martina Markota" label="Martina Markota"/>
<link wikidata="Q29096457" start="21516" end="21526" title="Proud Boys" label="Proud Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q99826651" start="21536" end="21550" title="Enrique Tarrio" label="Enrique Tarrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377000" start="21768" end="21792" title="Energy Transfer Partners" label="Energy Transfer Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619061" start="21823" end="21845" title="Dakota Access Pipeline" label="Dakota Access Pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q27643296" start="22038" end="22069" title="Dakota Access Pipeline protests" label="Dakota Access Pipeline protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q772989" start="22234" end="22248" title="parental leave" label="parental leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="22828" end="22839" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q72043226" start="23096" end="23107" title="City Bureau" label="City Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947099" start="23112" end="23124" title="WBEZ" label="WBEZ Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492273" start="23407" end="23418" title="South Shore, Chicago" label="South Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904131" start="23801" end="23816" title="Jeffrey Epstein" label="Jeffrey Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232246" start="24011" end="24023" title="Check kiting" label="Check kiting"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384971" wikidata="Q4704544" url="?curid=384971" title="Al Nipper">
<text>Albert Samuel Nipper (born April 2, 1959) is an American former professional baseball player and coach. A right-handed pitcher, he appeared in 144 Major League games over seven seasons for the Boston Red Sox, Chicago Cubs and Cleveland Indians. He was listed as tall and .

==Major League Baseball playing career==
Born in San Diego, Nipper grew up in Missouri, where he graduated from Hazelwood West High School and Truman State University in Kirkville (formerly Northeast Missouri State University). He was the Red Sox&#x27; eighth selection in the 1980 Major League Baseball draft.

Nipper pitched for the Red Sox from to . He was included with the league&#x27;s top players in the ballot for Rookie of the Year in . But then a succession of injuries limited his success. He started 26 games for the 1986 Red Sox, posting a mediocre 10–12 win–loss record and 5.38 earned run average as Boston won the American League East Division title. He did not appear in the ALCS against the California Angels, but made two appearances on the mound for the Red Sox in the 1986 World Series against the New York Mets. Nipper started Game 4 on October 22 at Fenway Park and held the Mets scoreless through three innings, but in the fourth, he surrendered three runs, two on a home run by Gary Carter. Nipper righted himself after that inning and pitched through the sixth, but the three runs he allowed held up as the winning margin in a 6–2 New York victory. Then, in the winner-take-all Game 7 at Shea Stadium October 27, Nipper was called upon in relief as Boston&#x27;s fifth pitcher of the contest. Entering in the eighth inning with the Mets leading 6–5, Nipper was ineffective. He retired only one batter and allowed three hits, including a lead-off home run to Darryl Strawberry and a run-scoring single to opposing pitcher Jesse Orosco, enabling the Mets to pad their lead to an insurmountable 8–5; they won the world championship one inning later.

Nipper was traded to the Cubs in a deal for closer Lee Smith after the 1987 season. He pitched in 22 games, 12 as a starter, for the Cubs in 1988, then missed the entire 1989 season recovering from elbow and knee injuries. On June 27, 1988, Nipper recorded the only save of his MLB career, retiring the final out of the game to preserve a 2-1 Cubs victory over the Phillies.

 He signed as a free agent with Cleveland in 1990; in a season spent mostly with the Triple-A Colorado Springs Sky Sox, Nipper won his final two MLB games in mid-season.

He then signed a minor league contract with his hometown St. Louis Cardinals in 1991, but was not called up from Triple-A. It was his final season as a pitcher.

In his 144 total major league regular-season games played (124 as a starting pitcher), he finished with a career record of 46–50 and a 4.52 earned run average in 797 innings pitched, with 381 strikeouts and 21 complete games. He allowed 846 hits and 303 bases on balls. In his only postseason action, in the 1986 World Series, Nipper posted an 0–1 (7.11) record, allowing five runs, ten hits and two bases on balls in two games and 6 innings of work.

==Coaching career==

After his pitching career, Nipper became a major and minor league pitching coach and scout. He returned to the Red Sox in 1992 and served in a succession of coaching roles at the minor league level (1992 through mid-1995, and 1997) and as pitching coach on the big league staff under Kevin Kennedy from mid-1995 through mid-1996. He became the roving minor league pitching instructor for the Texas Rangers, serving for three years (1998–2000), then joined the Kansas City Royals as MLB pitching coach in 2001 and 2002. Returning to the Red Sox as pitching coach of Class A Sarasota (2003–04) and then minor league pitching coordinator (2005), he was promoted to MLB bullpen coach in 2006, although he spent much of that season as the Red Sox&#x27; interim pitching coach because of the surgery-induced absence of Dave Wallace. Then, from 2007 to 2011, he was a special assignment scout for the Red Sox, specializing in evaluating pitchers.

In 2012–13, Nipper was the minor league pitching coordinator of the Detroit Tigers and he spent 2014 as pitching coach of the Triple-A Toledo Mud Hens in the Tigers&#x27; system. In , he returned to the Royals&#x27; organization as the pitching coach of the Omaha Storm Chasers, their Triple-A affiliate.

==References==
==External links==

 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4704544" start="0" end="20" title="Al Nipper" label="Albert Samuel Nipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="77" end="85" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="86" end="92" title="baseball player" label="player"/>
<link wikidata="Q865935" start="97" end="102" title="coach (baseball)" label="coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421902" start="106" end="118" title="right-handed" label="right-handed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="119" end="126" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="147" end="159" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520118" start="160" end="165" title="games pitched" label="games"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="193" end="207" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="209" end="221" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="226" end="243" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="323" end="332" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="352" end="360" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5688204" start="386" end="412" title="Hazelwood West High School (Hazelwood, Missouri)" label="Hazelwood West High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847734" start="417" end="440" title="Truman State University" label="Truman State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q966460" start="444" end="453" title="Kirksville, Missouri" label="Kirkville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881606" start="551" end="583" title="1980 Major League Baseball draft" label="1980 Major League Baseball draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q772148" start="778" end="785" title="starting pitcher" label="started"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582879" start="803" end="815" title="1986 Boston Red Sox season" label="1986 Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q105076364" start="842" end="857" title="win–loss record (pitching)" label="win–loss record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="867" end="885" title="earned run average" label="earned run average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363291" start="904" end="933" title="American League East Division" label="American League East Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511187" start="966" end="970" title="1986 American League Championship Series" label="ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="983" end="1000" title="California Angels" label="California Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568875" start="1063" end="1080" title="1986 World Series" label="1986 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="1093" end="1106" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="1147" end="1158" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q176903" start="1201" end="1208" title="inning (baseball)" label="innings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210151" start="1250" end="1254" title="run (baseball)" label="runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="1265" end="1273" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056011" start="1277" end="1288" title="Gary Carter" label="Gary Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="1488" end="1500" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198553" start="1539" end="1545" title="relief pitcher" label="relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166727" start="1758" end="1775" title="Darryl Strawberry" label="Darryl Strawberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196988" start="1794" end="1800" title="single (baseball)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079492" start="1821" end="1833" title="Jesse Orosco" label="Jesse Orosco"/>
<link wikidata="Q997419" start="1992" end="1998" title="closer (baseball)" label="closer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078252" start="1999" end="2008" title="Lee Smith (baseball)" label="Lee Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584384" start="2081" end="2093" title="1988 Chicago Cubs season" label="Cubs in 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="2340" end="2350" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585909" start="2356" end="2373" title="1990 Cleveland Indians season" label="Cleveland in 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359555" start="2409" end="2417" title="Triple-A (baseball)" label="Triple-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083283" start="2418" end="2442" title="Colorado Springs Sky Sox" label="Colorado Springs Sky Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="2512" end="2524" title="minor league baseball" label="minor league"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="2552" end="2571" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520121" start="2702" end="2714" title="games played" label="games played"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192188" start="2823" end="2838" title="innings pitched" label="innings pitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="2849" end="2859" title="strikeouts" label="strikeouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132884" start="2867" end="2880" title="complete game" label="complete game"/>
<link wikidata="Q587180" start="2911" end="2925" title="bases on balls" label="bases on balls"/>
<link wikidata="Q865935" start="3196" end="3210" title="coach (baseball)" label="pitching coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339677" start="3215" end="3220" title="scout (sports)" label="scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396679" start="3414" end="3427" title="Kevin Kennedy (baseball)" label="Kevin Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q329816" start="3522" end="3535" title="Texas Rangers (baseball)" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="3590" end="3608" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610111" start="3695" end="3702" title="Class A (baseball)" label="Class A"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509550" start="3703" end="3711" title="Sarasota Red Sox" label="Sarasota"/>
<link wikidata="Q579478" start="3796" end="3803" title="bullpen" label="bullpen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230056" start="3943" end="3955" title="Dave Wallace (baseball)" label="Dave Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="4139" end="4153" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q787652" start="4206" end="4221" title="Toledo Mud Hens" label="Toledo Mud Hens"/>
<link wikidata="Q31532" start="4242" end="4248" title="farm system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118310" start="4329" end="4348" title="Omaha Storm Chasers" label="Omaha Storm Chasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359555" start="4356" end="4364" title="Triple-A (baseball)" label="Triple-A"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384977" wikidata="Q212383" url="?curid=384977" title="Piła Voivodeship">
<text>Piła Voivodeship () was a voivodeship (unit of administrative division and local government) in Poland from 1975 to 1998. It was superseded by the Greater Poland Voivodeship. The Voivodeship&#x27;s capital city was Piła.

==Major cities and towns (population in 1995)==
* Piła (75,700)
* Wałcz (27,000)
* Wągrowiec (24,100)
* Chodzież (20,400)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q212383" start="0" end="16" title="Piła Voivodeship" label="Piła Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q150093" start="26" end="37" title="Voivodeships of Poland" label="voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="96" end="102" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54187" start="147" end="173" title="Greater Poland Voivodeship" label="Greater Poland Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q556200" start="215" end="219" title="Piła" label="Piła"/>
<link wikidata="Q556200" start="272" end="276" title="Piła" label="Piła"/>
<link wikidata="Q935744" start="288" end="293" title="Wałcz" label="Wałcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q645022" start="305" end="314" title="Wągrowiec" label="Wągrowiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q51434" start="326" end="334" title="Chodzież" label="Chodzież"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384978" wikidata="Q1415827" url="?curid=384978" title="Konin Voivodeship">
<text>Konin Voivodeship () - a unit of administrative division and local government in Poland from 1975 to 1998, superseded by Greater Poland Voivodeship. Its capital city was Konin.

==Major cities and towns (population in 1995)==
* Konin (82,700)
* Turek (30,700)
* Koło (23,900)

==See also==
* Voivodeships of Poland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1415827" start="0" end="17" title="Konin Voivodeship" label="Konin Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="81" end="87" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54187" start="121" end="147" title="Greater Poland Voivodeship" label="Greater Poland Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q52845" start="170" end="175" title="Konin, Poland" label="Konin"/>
<link wikidata="Q52845" start="228" end="233" title="Konin, Poland" label="Konin"/>
<link wikidata="Q924132" start="245" end="250" title="Turek" label="Turek"/>
<link wikidata="Q52853" start="262" end="266" title="Koło" label="Koło"/>
<link wikidata="Q150093" start="292" end="314" title="Voivodeships of Poland" label="Voivodeships of Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384980" wikidata="Q9377180" url="?curid=384980" title="Kalisz Voivodeship">
<text>Kalisz Voivodeship may also refer to:

*Kalisz Voivodeship (1314–1793)
*Kalisz Voivodeship (1816–1837)
*Kalisz Voivodeship (1975–1998)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13403542" start="40" end="70" title="Kalisz Voivodeship (1314–1793)" label="Kalisz Voivodeship (1314–1793)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377177" start="72" end="102" title="Kalisz Voivodeship (1816–1837)" label="Kalisz Voivodeship (1816–1837)"/>
<link wikidata="Q636580" start="104" end="134" title="Kalisz Voivodeship (1975–1998)" label="Kalisz Voivodeship (1975–1998)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384981" wikidata="Q634249" url="?curid=384981" title="Leszno Voivodeship">
<text>Leszno Voivodeship () was a unit of administrative division and local government in Poland from 1975 to 1998, superseded by Greater Poland Voivodeship. Its capital city was Leszno.

==Major cities and towns (population in 1995)==
* Leszno (61,300)
* Kościan (24,600)
* Rawicz (21,500)
* Gostyń (20,600)

==See also==
* Voivodeships of Poland

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q634249" start="0" end="18" title="Leszno Voivodeship" label="Leszno Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="84" end="90" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54187" start="124" end="150" title="Greater Poland Voivodeship" label="Greater Poland Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q52892" start="173" end="179" title="Leszno" label="Leszno"/>
<link wikidata="Q52892" start="232" end="238" title="Leszno" label="Leszno"/>
<link wikidata="Q52889" start="250" end="257" title="Kościan" label="Kościan"/>
<link wikidata="Q52898" start="269" end="275" title="Rawicz" label="Rawicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q422286" start="287" end="293" title="Gostyń" label="Gostyń"/>
<link wikidata="Q150093" start="319" end="341" title="Voivodeships of Poland" label="Voivodeships of Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384982" wikidata="Q413870" url="?curid=384982" title="Genet">
<text>Genet or Genêt may refer to:
==Aircraft==
*Armstrong Siddeley Genet, aircraft engine
*Armstrong Siddeley Genet Major, aircraft engine

==Animals and plants==
*Genet (biology), a colony of plants, fungi or bacteria that come from a single genetic source
*Genet (animal), a small predatory Old World carnivore related to the civet

==People==
* Genet (surname)
* Genêt, pen name of &quot;the New Yorker&#x27;s&quot; Paris correspondent Janet Flanner

==Places==
*Genet, Ethiopia, a town in southern Ethiopia

== See also ==
* Gené (disambiguation)
* Spanish jennet, a type of small horse</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413870" start="0" end="5" title="Genet" label="Genet"/>
<link wikidata="Q413870" start="9" end="14" title="Genet" label="Genêt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793972" start="43" end="67" title="Armstrong Siddeley Genet" label="Armstrong Siddeley Genet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793974" start="86" end="116" title="Armstrong Siddeley Genet Major" label="Armstrong Siddeley Genet Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q611804" start="159" end="174" title="Genet (biology)" label="Genet (biology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43221" start="254" end="268" title="Genet (animal)" label="Genet (animal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16870154" start="343" end="358" title="Genet (surname)" label="Genet (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q453384" start="434" end="447" title="Janet Flanner" label="Janet Flanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100565" start="461" end="476" title="Genet, Ethiopia" label="Genet, Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884228" start="524" end="545" title="Gené (disambiguation)" label="Gené (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419509" start="556" end="562" title="jennet" label="jennet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384984" wikidata="Q9377327" url="?curid=384984" title="Preemptive war">
<text>A preemptive war is a war that is commenced in an attempt to repel or defeat a perceived imminent offensive or invasion, or to gain a strategic advantage in an impending (allegedly unavoidable) war &quot;shortly before&quot; that attack materializes. It is a war that preemptively &#x27;breaks the peace&#x27; before an impending attack occurs. 

Preemptive war is sometimes confused with preventive war: the difference is that a preventive war is launched to destroy the potential threat of the targeted party, when an attack by that party is not imminent or known to be planned. The U.S. Department of Defense defines a preventive war as an armed conflict &quot;initiated in the belief that military conflict, while not imminent, is inevitable, and that to delay would involve greater risk.&quot; A preemptive war is launched in anticipation of immediate aggression by another party. Most contemporary scholarship equates preventive war with aggression, and therefore argues that it is illegitimate. The waging of a preemptive war has less stigma attached than does the waging of a preventive war.

Article 2 (4) of the UN Charter requires that states refrain from the initiation of armed conflict, that is being the first to &#x27;break the peace&#x27; unless authorized by the UN Security Council as an enforcement action under Article 42. Some authors have claimed that when a presumed adversary first appears to be beginning confirmable preparations for a possible future attack, but has not yet actually attacked, that the attack has in fact &#x27;already begun&#x27;, however this opinion has not been upheld by the UN.

==Theory and practice==
===Prior to World War I===

As early as 1625, Dutch jurist Hugo Grotius characterized a state&#x27;s right of self-defense to include the right to forestall an attack forcibly. In 1685, the Scottish government conducted a preemptive military strike against Clan Campbell. In 1837, a certain legal precedent regarding preemptive wars was established in the &quot;Caroline&quot; affair, during which an Anglo-Canadian force from Upper Canada crossed the Niagara River into the United States and captured and burnt the &quot;Caroline&quot;, a ship owned by Reformist rebels. During the affair, an American citizen was killed by a Canadian sheriff. 

The British asserted that their actions were permissible under the international law of self-defense. The United States did not deny that preemptive force might be lawful under some circumstances but claimed the facts did not support its use in this case. U.S. Secretary of State Daniel Webster wrote that when a nation uses force &quot;within the territory of a power at peace, nothing less than a clear and absolute necessity can afford ground of justification&quot; and that the necessity for the use of armed force must be &quot;instant, overwhelming, leaving no choice of means, and no moment for deliberation,&quot; which conditions did not apply in this case. That formulation is part of the &quot;Caroline&quot; test, which &quot;is broadly cited as enshrining the appropriate customary law standard.&quot;

===World War I (1914–1918)===

The Austro-Hungarian Chief of the General Staff, Franz Conrad von Hötzendorf, argued for a preemptive war against Serbia in 1913. There is however no agreement among historians that Conrad&#x27;s proposals were preemptive and not preventive. According to other historians, Conrad (a social Darwinist) proposed a &quot;preventive&quot; war against Serbia more than 20 times before, starting in 1909. Serbia had the image of an aggressive and expansionist power and was seen as a threat to Austria-Hungary in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand (June 1914) was used as an excuse for Austria-Hungary to attack Serbia, leading to World War I.

During the course of the destructive and costly World War I, for the first time in history, the concept of &quot;the war to end war&quot; began to be seriously considered. As a further expression of that hope, upon the conclusion of the war, the League of Nations was formed. Its primary aim was to prevent war, as all signatories to the League of Nations Covenant were required to agree to desist from the initiation of all wars, preemptive or otherwise. All of the victorious nations emerging out of World War I eventually signed the agreement, with the notable exception of the United States.

===League of Nations period (1919–1939)===
In the 1920s, the League peaceably settled numerous international disputes and was generally perceived as succeeding in its primary purpose. It was only in the 1930s that its effectiveness in preventing wars began to come into question. Such questions began to arise when it first became apparent in 1931 that it was incapable of halting aggression by Imperial Japan in Manchuria. In the Mukden Incident, Japan claimed to be fighting a &quot;defensive war&quot; in Manchuria, attempting to &quot;preempt&quot; supposedly-aggressive Chinese intentions towards the Japanese. According to the Japanese, the Republic of China had started the war by blowing up a South Manchurian Railway line near Mukden and that since the Chinese were the aggressors, the Japanese were merely &quot;defending themselves.&quot;&#x27; A predominance of evidence has since indicated that the railway had actually been blown up by Japanese operatives.

In 1933, the impotency of the League became more pronounced when notices were provided by Japan and Nazi Germany that they would be terminating their memberships in the League. Fascist Italy shortly followed suit by exiting the League in 1937. Soon, Italy and Germany also began engaging in militaristic campaigns designed to either enlarge their borders or to expand their sphere of military control, and the League was shown to be powerless to stop them. The perceived impotency of the League was a contributing factor to the full outbreak of World War II in 1939. The start of World War II is generally dated from the event of Germany&#x27;s invasion of Poland. It is noteworthy that Germany claimed at the time that its invasion of Poland was in fact a &quot;defensive war,&quot; as it had allegedly been invaded by a group of Polish saboteurs, signaling a potentially-larger invasion of Germany by Poland that was soon to be under way. Thus, Germany was left with no option but to preemptive invade Poland to halt the alleged Polish plans to invade Germany. It was later discovered that Germany had fabricated the evidence for the alleged Polish saboteurs as a part of the Gleiwitz incident.

===World War II (1939–1945)===

Once again, during the course of the even more widespread and lethal World War II, the hope of somehow definitively ending all war, including preemptive war, was seriously discussed. That dialogue ultimately resulted in the establishment of the successor organization to the League, the United Nations (UN). As with the League, the primary aim and hope of the UN was to prevent all wars, including preemptive wars. Unlike the League, the UN had the United States as a member.

In analyzing the many components of World War II, which one might consider as separate individual wars, the various attacks on previously-neutral countries, and the attacks against Iran and Norway might be considered to have been preemptive wars.

As for the 1940 German invasion of Norway, during the 1946 Nuremberg trials, the German defense argued that Germany had been &quot;compelled to attack Norway by the need to forestall an Allied invasion and that her action was therefore preemptive.&quot; The German defence referred to Plan R 4 and its predecessors. Norway was vital to Germany as a transport route for iron ore from Sweden, a supply that Britain was determined to stop. One adopted British plan was to go through Norway and occupy cities in Sweden. An Allied invasion was ordered on March 12, and the Germans intercepted radio traffic setting March 14 as deadline for the preparation. Peace in Finland interrupted the Allied plans, but Hitler became rightly convinced that the Allies would try again and ordered Operation Weserübung.

The new Allied plans were Wilfred and Plan R 4 to provoke a German reaction by laying mines in Norwegian waters, and once Germany showed signs of taking action, Allied forces would occupy Narvik, Trondheim and Bergen and launch a raid on Stavanger to destroy Sola airfield. However, &quot;the mines were not laid until the morning of 8 April, by which time the German ships were advancing up the Norwegian coast.&quot; However, the Nuremberg trials determined that no Allied invasion was imminent and therefore rejected Germany&#x27;s argument of being entitled to attack Norway.

In August 1941, Soviet and British forces jointly invaded Iran with the aim of preempting an Axis coup.

===Six Day War (1967)===
Israel incorporates preemptive war in its strategic doctrine to maintain a credible deterrent posture, based on its lack of strategic depth. The Six-Day War, which began when Israel launched mass attacks against Egypt on June 5, 1967, has been widely described as a preemptive war and is, according to the United States State Department, &quot;perhaps the most cited example [of preemption].&quot; Others have alternatively referred to it as a preventive war. Some have referred to the war as an act of &quot;interceptive self-defense.&quot; According to that view, no single Egyptian step may have qualified as an armed attack, but some perceive Egypt&#x27;s collective actions as clear that it was bent on an armed attack on Israel. One academic has claimed that Israel&#x27;s attack was not permissible under the &quot;Caroline&quot; test; he claims that there was no overwhelming threat to Israel&#x27;s survival.

===Invasion of Iraq (2003)===

The doctrine of preemption gained renewed interest following the American-led invasion of Iraq. The George W. Bush administration claimed that it was necessary to intervene to prevent Saddam Hussein from deploying WMDs. At the time, American decision-makers claimed that Saddam&#x27;s weapons of mass destruction might be given to militant groups and that the nation&#x27;s security was at a great risk. Congress passed its joint resolution
in October 2002, authorizing the American president to use military force against Saddam&#x27;s government. However, The Iraq Intelligence Commission confirmed in its 2005 report that no nuclear weapons or biological weapons capability existed. Many critics have questioned the true intention of the administration for invading Iraq, based on possibility of retaliation in the September 11 attacks.

====Arguments for preemptive war during Bush administration====
=====Sofaer&#x27;s four elements=====
The scholar Abraham David Sofaer identified four key elements for justification of preemption:
# The nature and magnitude of the threat involved;
# The likelihood that the threat will be realized unless preemptive action is taken;
# The availability and exhaustion of alternatives to using force;
# Whether using preemptive force is consistent with the terms and purposes of the UN Charter and other applicable international agreements.

=====Walzer&#x27;s three elements=====
Professor Mark R. Amstutz, citing Michael Walzer, adopted a similar but slightly-varied set of criteria and noted three factors to evaluate the justification of a preemptive strike.
# The existence of an intention to injure;
# The undertaking of military preparations that increase the level of danger; and
# The need to act immediately because of a higher degree of risk.

=====Counter proliferation self-help paradigm=====

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by rogue nations gave rise to a certain argument by scholars on preemption. They argued that the threat need not be &quot;imminent&quot; in the classic sense and that the illicit acquisition of the weapons, with their capacity to unleash massive destruction, by rogue states, created the requisite threat to peace and stability as to have justified the use of preemptive force. NATO&#x27;s Deputy Assistant Secretary General for WMD, Guy Roberts, cited the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis, the 1998 US attack on a Sudanese pharmaceutical plant, (identified by US intelligence to have been a chemical weapons facility) and the 1981 Israeli attack on Iraq&#x27;s nuclear facility at Osirak as examples of the counterproliferation self-help paradigm. Regarding the Osirak attack, Roberts noted that at the time, few legal scholars argued in support of the Israeli attack, but he noted further that &quot;subsequent events demonstrated the perspicacity of the Israelis, and some scholars have re-visited that attack arguing that it was justified under anticipatory self-defense.&quot; After the US invasion of Iraq in 2003, US forces captured a number of documents detailing conversations that Saddam had with his inner sanctum. The archive of documents and recorded meetings confirm that Saddam Hussein was indeed aiming to strike at Israel. In a 1982 conversation Hussein stated, &quot;Once Iraq walks out victorious, there will not be any Israel.&quot; Of Israel&#x27;s anti-Iraqi endeavors he noted, &quot;Technically, they [the Israelis] are right in all of their attempts to harm Iraq.&quot;

==== Post–Bush administration period (2009–present) ====
After the departure of the Bush administration, the Obama administration adopted and continued many policies of the Bush Doctrine.

==Intention==
The intention with a preemptive strike is to gain the advantage of initiative and to harm the enemy at a moment of minimal protection, for instance, while vulnerable during transport or mobilization.

In his &quot;Rationalist Explanations for War,&quot; James Fearon attributes the use of preemptive strikes by rational states to both offensive advantages and commitment problems between states. When a nation possesses a first strike advantage and believes itself to have a high probability of winning a war, there is a narrower &quot;de facto&quot; bargaining range between it and an opposing country for peaceful settlements. In extreme cases, if the probability of winning minus the probable costs of war is high enough, no self-enforcing peaceful outcome exists. In his discussion of preventative war arising from a commitment problem, Fearon builds an infinite-horizon model expected payoffs from period t on are (pt/(l - δ)) - Ca for state A and ((1 -pt)/(l - δ)) - Cb for
state B, where Ca and Cb are costs incurred the respective states and δ is the state discount of the future period payoffs.

The model shows that a peaceful settlement can be reached at any period that both states prefer, but strategic issues arise when there is no credible third-party guaranteer of the two states committing to a peaceful foreign policy. If there is going to be a shift in the military power between states in the future, and no credible restraint is placed on the rising military power not to exploit its future advantage, it is rational for the state with declining military power to use a preventative attack while it has a higher chance of winning the war. Fearon points out that the declining state attacks are caused not by fear of a future attack but because the future peace settlement would be worse for it than in the current period. The lack of trust that leads to a declining power&#x27;s preemptive strike stems not from uncertainty about intentions of different nations but from &quot;the situation, the structure of preferences and opportunities, that gives one party incentive to renege&quot; on its peaceful cooperation and exploit its increased military potential in the future to win a more profitable peace settlement for itself. Thus, Fearon shows that preemptive military action is taken by nations when there is an unfavorable shift in military potential in the future that leads to a shrinking bargain range for a peaceful settlement in the current period but with no credible commitment by the other party to avoid exploiting its improved military potential in the future.

==Legality==

Article 2, Section 4 of the UN Charter is generally considered to be &quot;jus cogens&quot; (literally &quot;compelling law&quot; but in practice &quot;higher international law&quot;) and prohibits all UN members from exercising &quot;the &quot;threat&quot; or &quot;use&quot; of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state&quot;. However, in the modern framework of the UN Charter, it is the phrase &quot;if an armed attack occurs&quot; in Article 51 that draws the line between legitimate and illegitimate military force. Some scholars believe it is reasonable to assume that if no armed attack has yet occurred that no automatic justification for preemptive &#x27;self-defense&#x27; has yet been made &#x27;legal&#x27; under the UN Charter. Others conclude that the &quot;inherent right of collective or individual self-defense&quot; in Article 51 includes the preemptive, or anticipatory, self-defense recognized under customary international law, as articulated in the &quot;Caroline test&quot;&quot; noted above. (See Self-defence in international law for additional discussion.) In order to be justified as an act of self-defense, two conditions must be fulfilled which are widely regarded as necessary for its justification. The first of these is that actor must have believed that the threat is real, as opposed to (merely) perceived. The second condition is that the force used in self-defense must be proportional to the harm which the actor is threatened.

==See also==

* Controversies relating to the Six-Day War
* A Clean Break: A New Strategy for Securing the Realm
* &quot;Battleplan&quot; (documentary TV series)
* Bush Doctrine
* &quot;Caroline&quot; affair
* Dwight D. Eisenhower on &#x27;preventive war&#x27; in WikiQuote
* &quot;Jus ad bellum&quot;
* War of aggression
* Pre-emptive nuclear strike (counterforce)
* Soviet offensive plans controversy
* Hobbesian trap
* The best defense is a good offense
==References==
==External links==

* Preemptive warfare: A viable strategic option
* Can a member of The United Nations unilaterally decide to use preemptive force against another state without violating the UN Charter? Vytautas Kacerauskis, International Journal of Baltic Law Volume 2, No. 1 (January, 2005) ISSN 1648-9349
* Washington Times
* ThoughtCast speaks with Alan Dershowitz about his book &quot;Preemption: A Knife that Cuts Both Ways&quot;...
* The American Strategy of Preemptive War and International Law
* The Myth of Preemptive Self-Defense Mary Ellen O’Connell Professor of Law
* Pre-emptive Self-Defence, International Law and US Policy Chris Richter
* U.S. National Security Strategy: a New Era U.S. Department of State</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9377327" start="2" end="16" title="Preemptive war" label="preemptive war"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="22" end="25" title="war" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q969619" start="389" end="403" title="preventive war" label="preventive war"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829938" start="548" end="556" title="Imminent threat" label="imminent"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="1122" end="1132" title="UN Charter" label="UN Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q154959" start="1712" end="1724" title="Hugo Grotius" label="Hugo Grotius"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="1843" end="1862" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scottish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094925" start="1910" end="1923" title="Clan Campbell" label="Clan Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044444" start="2009" end="2036" title="Caroline affair" label="&amp;quot;Caroline&amp;quot; affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="2080" end="2092" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q182343" start="2105" end="2118" title="Niagara River" label="Niagara River"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2128" end="2141" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760029" start="2207" end="2223" title="Reform movement (Upper Canada)" label="Reformist rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="2556" end="2579" title="United States Secretary of State" label="U.S. Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q106231" start="2580" end="2594" title="Daniel Webster" label="Daniel Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045267" start="2999" end="3024" title="Caroline test" label="&amp;quot;Caroline&amp;quot; test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194894" start="3085" end="3098" title="international customary law" label="customary law"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="3151" end="3167" title="Austro-Hungarian" label="Austro-Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q78521" start="3196" end="3223" title="Franz Conrad von Hötzendorf" label="Franz Conrad von Hötzendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="3261" end="3267" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202261" start="3430" end="3446" title="social Darwinist" label="social Darwinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q167246" start="3540" end="3544" title="Bosnian Crisis" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q609233" start="3654" end="3676" title="Austro-Hungarian rule in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q192050" start="3682" end="3723" title="assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand" label="assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q841559" start="3778" end="3794" title="Serbian Campaign of World War I" label="to attack Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3807" end="3818" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q31778" start="3934" end="3952" title="the war to end war" label="the war to end war"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="4067" end="4084" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769635" start="4159" end="4185" title="Covenant of the League of Nations" label="League of Nations Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="4813" end="4827" title="Empire of Japan" label="Imperial Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="4831" end="4840" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q242099" start="4849" end="4864" title="Mukden Incident" label="Mukden Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="4926" end="4935" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="5065" end="5082" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q696419" start="5119" end="5143" title="South Manchuria Railway" label="South Manchurian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="5154" end="5160" title="Shenyang" label="Mukden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="5490" end="5502" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="5567" end="5580" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5935" end="5947" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="6020" end="6053" title="Invasion of Poland" label="Germany&amp;#x27;s invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="6126" end="6132" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25980" start="6568" end="6585" title="Gleiwitz incident" label="Gleiwitz incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="6907" end="6921" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084679" start="7361" end="7386" title="German invasion of Norway" label="German invasion of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="7404" end="7420" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="7496" end="7502" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098099" start="7630" end="7638" title="Plan R 4" label="Plan R 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="7728" end="7734" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="7853" end="7859" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q150939" start="8134" end="8144" title="Weserübung" label="Weserübung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026504" start="8173" end="8180" title="Operation Wilfred" label="Wilfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098099" start="8185" end="8193" title="Plan R 4" label="Plan R 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215658" start="8335" end="8341" title="Narvik" label="Narvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q25804" start="8343" end="8352" title="Trondheim" label="Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q26793" start="8357" end="8363" title="Bergen" label="Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25416" start="8385" end="8394" title="Stavanger" label="Stavanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355258" start="8406" end="8419" title="Stavanger Airport, Sola" label="Sola airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q541369" start="8778" end="8790" title="Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran" label="invaded Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898480" start="8982" end="8997" title="strategic depth" label="strategic depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="9070" end="9075" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="9164" end="9194" title="United States State Department" label="United States State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q969619" start="9302" end="9316" title="preventive war" label="preventive war"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="9505" end="9510" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045267" start="9674" end="9699" title="Caroline test" label="&amp;quot;Caroline&amp;quot; test"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="9873" end="9902" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="American-led invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="9908" end="9937" title="George W. Bush administration" label="George W. Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="9992" end="10006" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="10022" end="10026" title="Weapon of mass destruction" label="WMDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="10093" end="10120" title="weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067763" start="10232" end="10248" title="Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002" label="joint resolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10370" end="10427" title="Iraq Intelligence Commission#Findings" label="Iraq Intelligence Commission confirmed in its 2005 report"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="10436" end="10450" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742406" start="10455" end="10472" title="biological weapon" label="biological weapon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10494" end="10581" title="Rationale for the Iraq War#Criticisms of the rationale for the Iraq war" label="Many critics have questioned the true intention of the administration for invading Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712140" start="10607" end="10618" title="retaliation" label="retaliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="10626" end="10646" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668829" start="10763" end="10783" title="Abraham David Sofaer" label="Abraham David Sofaer"/>
<link wikidata="Q445511" start="11262" end="11276" title="Michael Walzer" label="Michael Walzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q828218" start="11706" end="11719" title="rogue nations" label="rogue nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="12081" end="12085" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622564" start="12137" end="12148" title="Guy Roberts" label="Guy Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="12165" end="12185" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q837887" start="12199" end="12205" title="Operation Infinite Reach" label="attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q475353" start="12211" end="12240" title="Al-Shifa pharmaceutical factory" label="Sudanese pharmaceutical plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q725043" start="12323" end="12384" title="Operation Opera" label="1981 Israeli attack on Iraq&amp;#x27;s nuclear facility at Osirak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="12982" end="12996" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131204" start="13465" end="13478" title="Bush Doctrine" label="Bush Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q242412" start="13681" end="13693" title="mobilization" label="mobilization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16107" end="16127" title="UN Charter#Article 2" label="Article 2, Section 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="16135" end="16145" title="UN Charter" label="UN Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829938" start="17166" end="17199" title="Self-defence in international law" label="Self-defence in international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114811" start="17627" end="17668" title="Controversies relating to the Six-Day War" label="Controversies relating to the Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17671" end="17723" title="A Clean Break: A New Strategy for Securing the Realm" label="A Clean Break: A New Strategy for Securing the Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873180" start="17732" end="17742" title="Battleplan" label="Battleplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131204" start="17775" end="17788" title="Bush Doctrine" label="Bush Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044444" start="17791" end="17818" title="Caroline affair" label="&amp;quot;Caroline&amp;quot; affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="17821" end="17841" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q969619" start="17851" end="17865" title="preventive war" label="preventive war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568387" start="17893" end="17906" title="Jus ad bellum" label="Jus ad bellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q474138" start="17915" end="17932" title="War of aggression" label="War of aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208337" start="17935" end="17961" title="Pre-emptive nuclear strike" label="Pre-emptive nuclear strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176973" start="17963" end="17975" title="counterforce" label="counterforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q718833" start="17979" end="18013" title="Soviet offensive plans controversy" label="Soviet offensive plans controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10263552" start="18016" end="18030" title="Hobbesian trap" label="Hobbesian trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776939" start="18033" end="18067" title="The best defense is a good offense" label="The best defense is a good offense"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384990" wikidata="Q1367548" url="?curid=384990" title="Sex, Lies, and Videotape">
<text>Sex, Lies, and Videotape (often written in all lowercase as sex, lies, and videotape) is a 1989 American independent drama film written and directed by Steven Soderbergh. The plot tells the story of a troubled man who videotapes women discussing their sexuality and fantasies, and its impact on the relationships of a troubled married couple and the wife&#x27;s younger sister.

&quot;Sex, Lies, and Videotape&quot; won the Palme d&#x27;Or at the 1989 Cannes Film Festival, making Soderbergh the youngest solo director to win the award; he was 26 at the time. The film was influential in revolutionizing the independent film movement in the early 1990s. In 2006, &quot;Sex, Lies, and Videotape&quot; was added to the United States Library of Congress&#x27; National Film Registry, deemed &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot;.

== Plot ==
Ann Bishop Mullany lives in Baton Rouge, unhappily but comfortably married to John, a successful lawyer. She is in therapy, where she reveals that she is repulsed by the idea of him touching her.

Graham Dalton, an old close college friend of John and now a drifter with some money saved up, visits Baton Rouge to see John and perhaps stay in the city. When he arrives at their home, he meets Ann, who learns that John has invited Graham to stay with them until he finds an apartment. When John arrives home, Graham&#x27;s demeanor becomes remarkably more guarded; though he realizes he now has nothing in common with John, he and Ann get along well.

John is having an affair with Ann&#x27;s sister Cynthia, a free-spirited artist and bartender, which he rationalizes by blaming Ann&#x27;s frigidity. Ann helps Graham look for an apartment. Once he has a place, she makes an impromptu visit and notices stacks of camcorder videotapes, labeled with women&#x27;s names. When asked, Graham explains that they contain interviews with women about their deepest sexual desires and fantasies. Uncomfortable, Ann abruptly leaves.

The next day, Cynthia appears uninvited at Graham&#x27;s apartment and presses Graham to explain what &quot;spooked&quot; Ann. He reluctantly explains it was the videotapes that disturbed her and that he achieves gratification by watching the videos in private. Graham propositions Cynthia to make an interview tape, assuring her that only he will see it. She agrees, and later tells Ann about the experience. She is horrified, as is John when Cynthia later tells him.

Cleaning her home the next day, Ann discovers Cynthia&#x27;s pearl earring in her bedroom while vacuuming and deduces her affair with John. Furious, Ann goes to Graham&#x27;s apartment with the intention of making a videotape. He objects, but she is insistent.

Later, Ann demands a divorce from John and reveals that she made a tape with Graham. He rushes to Graham&#x27;s apartment and, after attacking Graham and locking him out, watches Ann&#x27;s tape. In the video, Ann says she has never felt any kind of &quot;satisfaction&quot; from sex. Graham asks if she ever thinks of having sex with other men; she admits she has thought of Graham.

Ann turns the camera on Graham, who resists opening up but soon confesses that he is haunted by his ex-girlfriend Elizabeth and that his motivation in returning to Baton Rouge was an attempt to achieve some closure. He explains that he was a pathological liar, which destroyed his relationship with her. Graham has since gone to great lengths to avoid people and relationships. Ann kisses him, then he turns off the camcorder, ending the tape.

A chastened John joins Graham on the front porch and, with obvious pleasure, confesses to having sex with Elizabeth while she and Graham were a couple, saying: &quot;She was no saint. She was good in bed, and she could keep a secret. That&#x27;s all I can say about her.&quot; After he leaves, Graham angrily destroys his camcorder and all of the videotapes.

Some time later, John is urgently summoned to his boss&#x27;s office. Ann and Cynthia reconcile at the bar Cynthia tends. Later, Ann goes to Graham&#x27;s and joins him on the front porch.

== Cast ==
* James Spader as Graham Dalton
* Andie MacDowell as Ann Bishop Mullany
* Peter Gallagher as John Mullany
* Laura San Giacomo as Cynthia Patrice Bishop
* Steven Brill as Barfly
* Ron Vawter as Therapist

== Production ==
The film was written by Steven Soderbergh in eight days on a yellow legal pad during a cross country trip (although, as Soderbergh points out in his DVD commentary track, he had been thinking about the film for a year).

Soderbergh&#x27;s commentary also reveals that he had written Andie MacDowell&#x27;s role with Elizabeth McGovern in mind, but McGovern&#x27;s agent disliked the script so much that McGovern never even got to read it. Laura San Giacomo, who was represented by the same agency, had to threaten to leave that agency in order to be able to play Cynthia. Soderbergh was reluctant to audition MacDowell but she surprised him, getting the role after two extremely successful auditions. The role of John would have been played by Tim Daly, but delays in completing the financing for the film led to Peter Gallagher&#x27;s getting the role instead as Daly was cast in the TV series &quot;Almost Grown&quot;.

With a budget of only $1.2 million, a week of rehearsal and a month-long shoot in August 1988 was all Soderbergh could afford. He would later call it: “the only movie I’ve ever made where I felt like I had all the money and all the time I needed.” Principal photography took place in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.

== Reception and legacy ==
=== Box office ===
&quot;Sex, Lies, and Videotape&quot; opened in a limited release on August 4, 1989, in four theaters and grossed $155,982, with an average of 30 patrons per showing in the first two–three weeks; the studio released the film nationwide. The widest release for the film was 534 theaters and it ended up earning $24,741,667 in the United States, and around $36.74 million worldwide.

=== Critical response ===
&quot;Sex, Lies, and Videotape&quot; was well received in its initial release in 1989 and holds a rating of 96% on Rotten Tomatoes based on 52 reviews with an average score of 8.00/10. The consensus states: &quot;In his feature directorial debut, Steven Soderbergh demonstrates a mastery of his craft well beyond his years, pulling together an outstanding cast and an intelligent script for a nuanced, mature film about neurosis and human sexuality&quot;. The film also has a score of 86 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 17 reviews.

In 2006, &quot;Sex, Lies, and Videotape&quot; was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being deemed &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot;.

===Accolades===
At the 1989 Cannes Film Festival, the film won the Palme d&#x27;Or and the FIPRESCI Prize, with Spader getting the Best Actor Award. It also won an Audience Award at the Sundance Film Festival. Soderbergh was nominated for an Academy Award for his screenplay.

== Home media ==
The DVD includes a &quot;director&#x27;s dialogue&quot; between Soderbergh and playwright/director Neil LaBute, recorded in 1998. LaBute&#x27;s presence leads to conversational tangents unrelated to the film, although most of the tangents are related to the question of what it means to be a director, and are intended, as Soderbergh summarizes at the end, to &quot;demystify&quot; the process of making a film. LaBute&#x27;s presence prompts Soderbergh to talk about reverse zooms, dolly shots, how actors have varying expectations of their director, the difference between stealing from a film you admire and paying tribute to it, shooting out of sequence, how the role of a director changes as their success (and their budgets) grow and other filmmaking topics.

== Adaptations ==
The movie was presented as a staged play in Hollywood at the Next Stage from December 13, 2003, to January 17, 2004. Directed by Seth Wiley and a cast that featured Amanda Bauman (Ann), Emily Williams (Therapist), Shauna Slade (Cynthia), Justin Christenson (Graham) and Jack Sundmacher (John).

== &quot;Full Frontal&quot;: &quot;an unofficial sequel of sorts&quot; ==
A sequel was announced in 2001 and Catherine Keener was the first actor attached to the project, named &quot;How to Survive a Hotel Room Fire&quot;. It was billed by Miramax as &quot;an unofficial sequel of sorts.&quot; In October, it was announced the movie would star Julia Roberts, David Hyde Pierce and David Duchovny. After the September 11 attacks, the title was changed to &quot;The Art of Negotiating a Turn&quot;. Miramax head Harvey Weinstein did not like the new title, and consequently Soderbergh suggested the title, &quot;Full Frontal&quot;, under which the film was released.

== Possible sequel ==
In May 2020, Soderbergh revealed that he wrote a sequel during the coronavirus quarantine. In December of that year, he stated that the sequel would be &quot;about the two sisters 30 years later. One of them has had a child who is about the same age that she was in the original.&quot; He also said that MacDowell and San Giacomo agreed to reprise their roles.

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* 
* &quot;sex, lies, and videotape: Some Kind of Skin Flick&quot; an essay by Amy Taubin at the Criterion Collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="105" end="116" title="Independent film" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="117" end="127" title="Drama (film and television)" label="drama film"/>
<link wikidata="Q103917" start="152" end="169" title="Steven Soderbergh" label="Steven Soderbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="424" end="439" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q304162" start="447" end="472" title="1989 Cannes Film Festival" label="1989 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="731" end="750" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="757" end="779" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="896" end="907" title="Baton Rouge, Louisiana" label="Baton Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23906234" start="1126" end="1133" title="Vagrancy" label="drifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q303555" start="1659" end="1668" title="Hypoactive sexual desire disorder" label="frigidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q335234" start="1782" end="1791" title="camcorder" label="camcorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q296928" start="4117" end="4129" title="James Spader" label="James Spader"/>
<link wikidata="Q208558" start="4149" end="4164" title="Andie MacDowell" label="Andie MacDowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q309900" start="4189" end="4204" title="Peter Gallagher" label="Peter Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q234220" start="4223" end="4240" title="Laura San Giacomo" label="Laura San Giacomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q345259" start="4269" end="4281" title="Steven Brill (scriptwriter)" label="Steven Brill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421128" start="4294" end="4304" title="Ron Vawter" label="Ron Vawter"/>
<link wikidata="Q103917" start="4360" end="4377" title="Steven Soderbergh" label="Steven Soderbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q440991" start="4485" end="4505" title="Audio commentary (DVD)" label="DVD commentary track"/>
<link wikidata="Q208558" start="4619" end="4634" title="Andie MacDowell" label="Andie MacDowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q233868" start="4652" end="4670" title="Elizabeth McGovern" label="Elizabeth McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q234220" start="4775" end="4792" title="Laura San Giacomo" label="Laura San Giacomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q351479" start="5080" end="5088" title="Tim Daly" label="Tim Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q309900" start="5149" end="5164" title="Peter Gallagher" label="Peter Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927312" start="5237" end="5249" title="Almost Grown (TV series)" label="Almost Grown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="5506" end="5527" title="Principal photography" label="Principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="5542" end="5564" title="Baton Rouge, Louisiana" label="Baton Rouge, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491297" start="5662" end="5677" title="limited release" label="limited release"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="6135" end="6150" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="6522" end="6532" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="6652" end="6674" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="6682" end="6701" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q304162" start="6810" end="6835" title="1989 Cannes Film Festival" label="1989 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="6854" end="6869" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q253988" start="6878" end="6892" title="FIPRESCI" label="FIPRESCI Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q586140" start="6918" end="6934" title="Best Actor Award (Cannes Film Festival)" label="Best Actor Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6951" end="6965" title="List of Sundance Film Festival award winners#1989" label="Audience Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="6973" end="6995" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q41417" start="7029" end="7042" title="Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q965498" start="7180" end="7191" title="Neil LaBute" label="Neil LaBute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235811" start="7564" end="7569" title="Camera dolly" label="dolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q230378" start="8269" end="8285" title="Catherine Keener" label="Catherine Keener"/>
<link wikidata="Q40523" start="8504" end="8517" title="Julia Roberts" label="Julia Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q373976" start="8519" end="8536" title="David Hyde Pierce" label="David Hyde Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q484365" start="8541" end="8555" title="David Duchovny" label="David Duchovny"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="8567" end="8587" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q531599" start="8670" end="8686" title="Harvey Weinstein" label="Harvey Weinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432710" start="8770" end="8782" title="Full Frontal (film)" label="Full Frontal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749412" start="9330" end="9340" title="Amy Taubin" label="Amy Taubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="9348" end="9368" title="The Criterion Collection" label="Criterion Collection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384991" wikidata="Q6145434" url="?curid=384991" title="James White (theologian)">
<text>James Robert White is a Reformed Baptist theologian. He is the director of Alpha and Omega Ministries, a Christian apologetics organization based in Phoenix, Arizona. He is a Christian scholar and has authored several books.

==Early life and education==
White graduated with a BA from Grand Canyon University (formerly known as Grand Canyon College) and an MA from Fuller Theological Seminary. His ThM, Th.D. and D.Min. degrees are from Columbia Evangelical Seminary (formerly Faraston Theological Seminary), an unaccredited online school. The legitimacy of White&#x27;s academic credentials has been questioned.

==Career==
White served as an elder of Phoenix Reformed Baptist Church in Phoenix, Arizona, from 1998 until 2018. He became Scholar-in-Residence at Apologia Church in Tempe, Arizona in 2018, and was installed as one of the pastor/elders in 2019.

White is the director of Alpha and Omega Ministries, a Christian apologetics organization based in Phoenix, Arizona. As director of Alpha and Omega Ministries, White also hosts a daily Dividing Line Podcast and radio show on the Alpha and Omega Ministries YouTube Channel. He was also a critical consultant for the Lockman Foundation&#x27;s New American Standard Bible.

White often engages in public debate, having participated in more than 170 public moderated debates, covering topics such as Calvinism, Roman Catholicism, Islam, Mormonism, Infant baptism the King James Only movement, Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, and atheism. His debate opponents have included scholars such as Bart Ehrman, John Dominic Crossan, Marcus Borg, Robert M. Price, Joe Ventilacion of Iglesia ni Cristo and popularizers such as Dan Barker, Jimmy Akin and John Shelby Spong. James White has criticized fundamentalist views and King James Onlyism. He has argued that the King James version has multiple translation errors.

White has written multiple books critical of Roman Catholic theology, including the books; &quot;The Roman Catholic Controversy, Mary: Another Redeemer?&quot; and &quot;The Fatal Flaw.&quot;

White supports Creationism and Theonomy. 

==Personal life==
He is married and he and his wife have two children. He also has two grandchildren.

White is a Reformed Baptist and a Calvinist.

==Selected works==
*
*
*
*
*
*

==See also==
* King James Onlyism
* Protestant opposition to papal supremacy

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6145434" start="0" end="18" title="James White (theologian)" label="James Robert White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122370" start="24" end="40" title="Reformed Baptists" label="Reformed Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377898" start="105" end="126" title="Christian apologetics" label="Christian apologetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="149" end="165" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570025" start="286" end="309" title="Grand Canyon University" label="Grand Canyon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q262617" start="366" end="393" title="Fuller Theological Seminary" label="Fuller Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q705899" start="513" end="525" title="unaccredited" label="unaccredited"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996789" start="526" end="539" title="online school" label="online school"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="689" end="705" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q51685" start="782" end="796" title="Tempe, Arizona" label="Tempe, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="917" end="926" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q191776" start="927" end="938" title="apologetics" label="apologetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665706" start="1177" end="1195" title="Lockman Foundation" label="Lockman Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q733399" start="1203" end="1230" title="New American Standard Bible" label="New American Standard Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="1358" end="1367" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1369" end="1386" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="1388" end="1393" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q747802" start="1395" end="1404" title="Mormonism" label="Mormonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741926" start="1406" end="1420" title="Infant baptism" label="Infant baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411760" start="1425" end="1449" title="King James Only movement" label="King James Only movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="1451" end="1475" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="1481" end="1488" title="atheism" label="atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q127876" start="1542" end="1553" title="Bart Ehrman" label="Bart Ehrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336892" start="1555" end="1575" title="John Dominic Crossan" label="John Dominic Crossan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040253" start="1577" end="1588" title="Marcus Borg" label="Marcus Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370306" start="1590" end="1605" title="Robert M. Price" label="Robert M. Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138908" start="1626" end="1643" title="Iglesia ni Cristo" label="Iglesia ni Cristo"/>
<link wikidata="Q742825" start="1669" end="1679" title="Dan Barker" label="Dan Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q9011764" start="1681" end="1691" title="Jimmy Akin" label="Jimmy Akin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196186" start="1696" end="1713" title="John Shelby Spong" label="John Shelby Spong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411760" start="1767" end="1785" title="King James Only movement" label="King James Onlyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="2070" end="2081" title="Creationism" label="Creationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q431934" start="2086" end="2094" title="Theonomy" label="Theonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="2221" end="2228" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="2235" end="2244" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411760" start="2294" end="2312" title="King James Only movement" label="King James Onlyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q111992748" start="2315" end="2355" title="Protestant opposition to papal supremacy" label="Protestant opposition to papal supremacy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384992" wikidata="Q2314717" url="?curid=384992" title="Treaty of Paris between Italy and the Allied Powers">
<text>The [[Treaty of Paris (1947)|Treaty of Paris]] between [[Italian Empire|Italy]] and the [[Allies of World War II|Allied Powers]] was signed on 10 February 1947, formally ending hostilities between both parties. It came into general effect on 15 September 1947.

==Territorial changes== 

* Transfer of the Adriatic islands of Cres, Lošinj, Lastovo and Palagruža; of Istria south of the river Mirna; of the exclave territory of Zadar in Dalmatia; of the city of Rijeka and the region known as the Julian March to the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia;
* Transfer of the Italian Islands of the Aegean to the Kingdom of Greece;
* Transfer to France of Briga and Tenda, and minor revisions of the Franco-Italian border;
* Recognition of the independence of the People&#x27;s Republic of Albania and transfer to Albania of the island of Sazan;
* Renunciation of claims to Ethiopia and restoration of the Ethiopian Empire;
* Renunciation of claims to colonies (including Libya, Eritrea and Somaliland) and dissolution of the Italian Empire;
* Cancellation of favourable commercial treaties with the Republic of China (including cessation of the Concession in Tianjin held by Italy since 7 September 1901)
* Trieste and the surrounding area were incorporated into a new independent state called the Free Territory of Trieste. In 1954, the administration of the Free Territory was handed over to the Italian Government, while the mandate of the Yugoslav Army was ceded to the Yugoslav Government with the Memorandum of Understanding of London regarding the Free Territory of Trieste. This was formalised by the 1975 Treaty of Osimo.
* As provided by Annex XI of the Treaty, upon the recommendation of the United Nations General Assembly in Resolution 390 (V) of 2 December 1950, Eritrea was federated with Ethiopia on 11 September 1952. Eritrea gained its independence from Ethiopia de facto on 24 May 1991 and de jure on 24 May 1993.

Italian Somaliland was under British administration until 1949 when it became a United Nations Trust Territory under Italian administration. Italian Somaliland combined with British Somaliland on 1 July 1960 and together they became the Somali Republic.

==Reparations==
Italy was obliged to pay the following war reparations (article 74):
:$125,000,000 US to Yugoslavia
:$105,000,000 US to Greece
:$100,000,000 US to the Soviet Union 
:$25,000,000 US to Ethiopia
:$5,000,000 US to Albania

The amounts were valued in the US dollar at its gold parity on 1 July 1946 ($35 for one ounce of gold). The reparations were to be paid in goods and services over a seven-year period.

==Military clauses==
Articles 47 and 48 called for the demolition of all permanent fortifications along the Franco-Italian and Yugoslav-Italian frontier. Italy was banned from possessing, building or experimenting with atomic weapons, guided missiles, guns with a range of over 30 km, non-contact naval mines and torpedoes as well as manned torpedoes (article 51).

The military of Italy was limited in size. Italy was allowed a maximum of 200 heavy and medium tanks (article 54). Former officers and non-commissioned officers of the Blackshirts and the National Republican Army were barred from becoming officers or non-commissioned officers in the Italian military (except those exonerated by the Italian courts, article 55).

The Italian navy was reduced. Some warships were awarded to the governments of the Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom and France (articles 56 and 57). Italy was ordered to scuttle all its submarines (article 58) and was banned from acquiring new battleships, submarines and aircraft carriers (article 59). The navy was limited to a maximum force of 25,000 personnel (article 60). The Italian army was limited to a size of 185,000 personnel plus 65,000 Carabinieri for a maximum total of 250,000 personnel (article 61). The Italian air force was limited to 200 fighters and reconnaissance aircraft plus 150 transport, air-rescue, training and liaison aircraft and was banned from owning and operating bomber aircraft (article 64). The number of air force personnel was limited to 25,000 (article 65). Most of the military restrictions were lifted upon Italy becoming a founding member of NATO in 1949.

==Political clauses==
Article 17 of the treaty banned fascist organisations (&quot;whether political, military, or semi-military&quot;) in Italy.

==Annexes==
A subsequent annex to the treaty provided for the cultural autonomy of the German minority in South Tyrol.

== Greece–Turkey relations ==
Article 14 of the treaty ceded the Italian islands in the Aegean to Greece and further stipulated that they &quot;shall be and shall remain demilitarized&quot;. 

Turkey is the intended third party beneficiary of the demilitarization treaty by law (Vienna Convention of Treaties, art. 36(2)). Turkey had no title in signing any treaty ceding Rhodes to Greece, as the whole Dodecanese had been ceded by Turkey to Italy with the First Treaty of Lausanne (Often referred as &quot;Treaty of Ouchy&quot; to prevent confusion with Treaty of Lausanne) of 1912, but demanded demilitarization of those islands at the peace talks held in Lausanne in 1923. This was eventually inserted in the Paris Peace Treaty of 1947, to which Turkey is not a signatory party.

==See also==
* Paris Peace Treaties, 1947
* Armistice of Cassibile
* Italian Instrument of Surrender

==References==
==External links==
* Full text of the treaty (French, English and Russian texts are authentic) - archive link.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2314717" start="4" end="128" title="Treaty of Paris between Italy and the Allied Powers" label="[[Treaty of Paris (1947)|Treaty of Paris]] between [[Italian Empire|Italy]] and the [[Allies of World War II|Allied Powers]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="306" end="314" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13280" start="326" end="330" title="Cres" label="Cres"/>
<link wikidata="Q461426" start="332" end="338" title="Lošinj" label="Lošinj"/>
<link wikidata="Q216878" start="340" end="347" title="Lastovo" label="Lastovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q378556" start="352" end="361" title="Palagruža" label="Palagruža"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="366" end="372" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096129" start="392" end="397" title="Mirna (Adriatic Sea)" label="Mirna"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="406" end="413" title="exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="427" end="432" title="Zadar" label="Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="436" end="444" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="461" end="467" title="Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q958521" start="496" end="508" title="Julian March" label="Julian March"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="516" end="556" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131555" start="576" end="605" title="Dodecanese" label="Italian Islands of the Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="613" end="630" title="Kingdom of Greece" label="Kingdom of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q69829" start="646" end="652" title="French Fourth Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q387498" start="656" end="661" title="La Brigue" label="Briga"/>
<link wikidata="Q236609" start="666" end="671" title="Tende" label="Tenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q467864" start="764" end="797" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Albania" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q733645" start="839" end="844" title="Sazan Island" label="Sazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207521" start="906" end="922" title="Ethiopian Empire" label="Ethiopian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="972" end="977" title="Italian Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232988" start="979" end="986" title="Italian Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q319984" start="991" end="1001" title="Italian Somaliland" label="Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q926295" start="1026" end="1040" title="Italian Empire" label="Italian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="1100" end="1117" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q961423" start="1146" end="1167" title="Italian concession of Tianjin" label="Concession in Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="1176" end="1181" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="1208" end="1215" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q391980" start="1299" end="1324" title="Free Territory of Trieste" label="Free Territory of Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773971" start="1399" end="1417" title="Government of Italy" label="Italian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="1444" end="1457" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Yugoslav Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q933745" start="1615" end="1630" title="Treaty of Osimo" label="Treaty of Osimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="1882" end="1890" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="1910" end="1917" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q985073" start="2015" end="2045" title="United Nations Trust Territory" label="United Nations Trust Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q616221" start="2052" end="2074" title="Trust Territory of Somaliland" label="Italian administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q662653" start="2109" end="2127" title="British Somaliland" label="British Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="2172" end="2187" title="Somalia" label="Somali Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q194181" start="2245" end="2260" title="war reparations" label="war reparations"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="2830" end="2844" title="atomic weapons" label="atomic weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="2846" end="2860" title="guided missile" label="guided missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537989" start="2863" end="2894" title="Cannone da 381/50 Ansaldo M1934" label="guns with a range of over 30 km"/>
<link wikidata="Q816356" start="2945" end="2959" title="manned torpedo" label="manned torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q771712" start="3055" end="3060" title="heavy tank" label="heavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069116" start="3065" end="3076" title="medium tank" label="medium tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="3112" end="3136" title="non-commissioned officer" label="non-commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q846081" start="3145" end="3156" title="Blackshirts" label="Blackshirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732910" start="3165" end="3189" title="National Republican Army (Italian Socialist Republic)" label="National Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q54852" start="3809" end="3820" title="Carabinieri" label="Carabinieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="3917" end="3925" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368478" start="3999" end="4015" title="liaison aircraft" label="liaison aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="4057" end="4063" title="bomber" label="bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="4244" end="4248" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="4313" end="4320" title="Fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q701092" start="4420" end="4436" title="Gruber-De Gasperi Agreement" label="subsequent annex"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="4512" end="4523" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q193258" start="5081" end="5099" title="Treaty of Lausanne" label="Treaty of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q322943" start="5324" end="5350" title="Paris Peace Treaties, 1947" label="Paris Peace Treaties, 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="5353" end="5375" title="Armistice of Cassibile" label="Armistice of Cassibile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623140" start="5378" end="5409" title="Italian Instrument of Surrender" label="Italian Instrument of Surrender"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384998" wikidata="Q746639" url="?curid=384998" title="Savoy Hotel">
<text>The Savoy Hotel is a luxury hotel located in the Strand in the City of Westminster in central London, England. Built by the impresario Richard D&#x27;Oyly Carte with profits from his Gilbert and Sullivan opera productions, it opened on 6 August 1889. It was the first in the Savoy group of hotels and restaurants owned by Carte&#x27;s family for over a century. The Savoy was the first hotel in Britain to introduce electric lights throughout the building, electric lifts, bathrooms in most of the lavishly furnished rooms, constant hot and cold running water and many other innovations. Carte hired César Ritz as manager and Auguste Escoffier as &quot;chef de cuisine&quot;; they established an unprecedented standard of quality in hotel service, entertainment and elegant dining, attracting royalty and other rich and powerful guests and diners.

The hotel became Carte&#x27;s most successful venture. Its bands, Savoy Orpheans and the Savoy Havana Band, became famous, and other entertainers (who were also often guests) included George Gershwin, Frank Sinatra, Lena Horne and Noël Coward. Other famous guests have included Edward VII, Oscar Wilde, Enrico Caruso, Charlie Chaplin, Babe Ruth, Harry Truman, Joan Crawford, Judy Garland, John Wayne, Laurence Olivier, Marilyn Monroe, Humphrey Bogart, Elizabeth Taylor, Barbra Streisand, Bob Dylan, Bette Midler, the Beatles and many others. Winston Churchill often took his cabinet to lunch at the hotel.

The hotel is managed by Fairmont Hotels and Resorts. It has been called &quot;London&#x27;s most famous hotel&quot;. It has 267 guest rooms and panoramic views of the River Thames across Savoy Place and the Thames Embankment. The hotel is a Grade II listed building.

==History==

===Site===
The House of Savoy was the ruling family of Savoy, descended from Humbert I, Count of Sabaudia (or &quot;Maurienne&quot;), who became count in 1032. The name Sabaudia evolved into &quot;Savoy&quot; (or &quot;Savoie&quot;). Count Peter (or &quot;Piers&quot; or &quot;Piero&quot;) of Savoy (d. 1268) was the maternal uncle of Eleanor of Provence, queen-consort of Henry III of England, and came with her to London.
King Henry III made Peter Earl of Richmond and, in 1246, gave him the land between the Strand and the River Thames, where Peter built the Savoy Palace in 1263. Peter gave the palace and the manor of the Savoy to the Congregation of Canons of the Great Saint Bernard, and the palace became the &quot;Great Hospital of St Bernard de Monte Jovis in Savoy&quot;. The manor was subsequently purchased by Queen Eleanor, who gave the site to her second son, Edmund, Earl of Lancaster. Edmund&#x27;s great-granddaughter, Blanche, inherited the site. Her husband, John of Gaunt, 1st Duke of Lancaster, built a magnificent palace that was burned down by Wat Tyler&#x27;s followers in the Peasants&#x27; Revolt of 1381. King Richard II was still a child, and his uncle John of Gaunt was the power behind the throne, and so a main target of the rebels.

About 1505, Henry VII planned a great hospital for &quot;pouer, nedie people&quot;, leaving money and instructions for it in his will. The hospital was built in the palace ruins and licensed in 1512. Drawings show that it was a magnificent building, with a dormitory, dining hall and three chapels. Henry VII&#x27;s hospital lasted for two centuries, but suffered from poor management. The sixteenth-century historian Stow noted that the hospital was being misused by &quot;loiterers, vagabonds and strumpets&quot;. In 1702, the hospital was dissolved, and the hospital buildings were used for other purposes. Part of the old palace was used as a military prison in the eighteenth century. In the nineteenth century, the old hospital buildings were demolished, and new buildings were erected.
In 1864, a fire burned everything except the stone walls and the Savoy Chapel. The property sat empty until the impresario Richard D&#x27;Oyly Carte bought it in 1880, to build the Savoy Theatre specifically for the production of the Gilbert and Sullivan operas, of which he was the producer.

===Early years===
Having seen the opulence of American hotels during his many visits to the United States, Carte decided to build a luxury hotel in Britain, to attract a foreign clientele as well as British visitors to London. Opened in 1889, the hotel was designed by architect Thomas Edward Collcutt, who also designed the Wigmore Hall. Carte chose the name &quot;Savoy&quot; to commemorate the history of the property. His investors in the venture were, in addition to his relatives, Carl Rosa, George Grossmith, François Cellier, George Edwardes, Augustus Harris and Fanny Ronalds. His friend, the composer Sir Arthur Sullivan, was a shareholder and sat on the board of directors.

The hotel was built on a plot of land, next to the Savoy Theatre, that Carte originally purchased to house an electrical generator for the theatre (built in 1881), which was the first public building in the world to be lit entirely by electricity. The construction of the hotel took five years and was financed by the profits from the Gilbert and Sullivan partnership, particularly from &quot;The Mikado&quot;. It was the first hotel in Britain lit by electric lights and the first with electric lifts. Other innovations included en-suite marble bathrooms with hot and cold running water in most of its 268 rooms; glazed brickwork designed to prevent London&#x27;s smoke-laden air from spoiling the external walls; and its own artesian well.
At first the Savoy did well, but within six months of opening, the hotel was losing money. The board of directors instructed Carte to replace the management team, headed by W. Hardwicke as manager and M. Charpentier as chef de cuisine. As manager he engaged César Ritz, later the founder of the Ritz Hotel; Ritz brought in the chef Auguste Escoffier and the maître d&#x27;hôtel Louis Echenard and put together what he described as &quot;a little army of hotel men for the conquest of London&quot;; Escoffier recruited French cooks and reorganised the kitchens. The Savoy under Ritz and his partners soon attracted distinguished and wealthy clientele, headed by the Prince of Wales. Aristocratic women, hitherto unaccustomed to dining in public, were now &quot;seen in full regalia in the Savoy dining and supper rooms&quot;. The hotel became such a financial success that Carte bought other luxury hotels.

At the same time, Ritz continued to manage his own hotels and businesses in Europe. Nellie Melba, among others, noted that Ritz was less focused on the Savoy. In 1897, Ritz and his partners were dismissed from the Savoy. Ritz and Echenard were implicated in the disappearance of over £3,400 (equivalent to £ at ), of wine and spirits, and Escoffier had been receiving gifts from the Savoy&#x27;s suppliers. In a 1938 biography of her husband, Ritz&#x27;s widow maintained that he resigned and that Escoffier, Echenard, and other senior employees resigned with him. This fiction was perpetuated for many years, with the consent of the Savoy company. In fact, however, after a damning report by the company&#x27;s auditors and the advice of the prominent lawyer, Sir Edward Carson, that it was the board&#x27;s &quot;imperative duty to dismiss the manager and the chef&quot;, Carte handed Ritz, Escoffier and Echenard letters of dismissal:

Ritz threatened to sue the hotel company for wrongful dismissal, but was evidently dissuaded by Escoffier, who felt that their interests would be better served by keeping the scandal quiet. It was not until 1985 that the facts became public knowledge.

The Savoy group purchased Simpson&#x27;s-in-the-Strand in 1898. The next year, Carte engaged M. Joseph, proprietor of the Marivaux Restaurant in Paris, as his new maître d&#x27;hôtel and in 1900, appointed George Reeves-Smith as the next managing director of the Savoy hotel group. Reeves-Smith served in this capacity until 1941.
After Richard D&#x27;Oyly Carte died in 1901, his son Rupert D&#x27;Oyly Carte became chairman of the Savoy hotel group in 1903 and supervised the expansion of the hotel and the modernisation of the other hotels in the group&#x27;s ownership, such as Claridge&#x27;s. The expansion of the hotel in 1903–04 included new east and west wings, and moving the main entrance to Savoy Court off the Strand. The additions pioneered the use of steel frame construction in London. At that time, the hotel added Britain&#x27;s first serviced apartments, with access to all the hotel&#x27;s amenities. Many famous figures became residents, such as Sarah Bernhardt and Sir Thomas Dewar, some of whom lived there for decades. Spectacular parties were held at the hotel. For example, in 1905 the American millionaire George A. Kessler hosted a &quot;Gondola Party&quot; where the central courtyard was flooded to a depth of four feet, and scenery was erected around the walls. Costumed staff and guests re-created Venice. The two dozen guests dined in an enormous gondola. After dinner, Enrico Caruso sang, and a baby elephant brought in a five-foot birthday cake.

When the hotel was expanded, Rupert D&#x27;Oyly Carte decided to develop a luxurious, handcrafted bed unique to the Savoy and his other hotels. His Savoy Bed, also called the No. 2 Bed, was covered in a ticking whose design is attributed to his stepmother, Helen Carte. In 1924, the hotel bought James Edwards Limited, the manufacturer of the bed. Later, the Savoy Group sold the company, which became Savoir Beds in 1997. Savoir Beds continues to make the Savoy Bed for the hotel.

1899, Guccio Gucci worked at the Savoy as a luggage porter before founding his fashion house in 1921.

===1913 to WWII===
After the death of Helen Carte in 1913, Rupert D&#x27;Oyly Carte became the controlling stockholder of the hotel group. In 1919, he sold the Grand Hotel, Rome, which his father had acquired in 1894 at the urging of Ritz. For the Savoy, he hired a new chef, François Latry, who served from 1919 to 1942. In the 1920s he ensured that the Savoy continued to attract a fashionable clientele by a continuous programme of modernisation and the introduction of dancing in the large restaurants. It also became the first hotel with air conditioning, steam-heating and soundproofed windows in the rooms, 24-hour room service and telephones in every bathroom. It also manufactured its own mattresses. One famous incident during Rupert&#x27;s early years was the 1923 shooting, at the hotel, of a wealthy young Egyptian, Prince Fahmy Bey, by his French wife, Marguerite. The widow was acquitted of murder after it was revealed that her husband had treated her with extreme cruelty throughout the six-month marriage and had stated that he was going to kill her.
Until the 1930s, the Savoy group had not thought it necessary to advertise, but Carte and Reeves-Smith changed their approach. &quot;We are endeavouring by intensive propaganda work to get more customers; this work is going on in the U.S.A., in Canada, in the Argentine and in Europe.&quot; In 1938 Hugh Wontner joined the Savoy hotel group as Reeves-Smith&#x27;s assistant, and he became managing director in 1941.

During World War II, Wontner and his staff had to cope with bomb damage, food rationing, manpower shortage and a serious decline in the number of foreign visitors. After the US entered the war, business picked up as the Savoy became a favourite of American officers, diplomats, journalists and others. The hotel became a meeting place for war leaders: Winston Churchill often took his cabinet to lunch at the hotel, Lord Mountbatten, Charles de Gaulle, Jan Masaryk and General Wavell were among the regular Grill Room diners, and the hotel&#x27;s air-raid shelters were &quot;the smartest in London&quot;. Wontner cooperated fully with the government&#x27;s wartime restrictions, helping to draw up an order imposing a five-shilling limit on the price of a restaurant meal.

===1946–2007===
After World War II, the Savoy Group experienced a strike of its employees in support of a waiter dismissed from the hotel. The matter was judged so serious that the government set up a court of inquiry. Nevertheless, the hotel continued to attract celebrities. In 1946, Wontner set up &quot;The Savoy Management Scheme&quot;, a school to train hoteliers, that was maintained for half a century. The last major appointments of Rupert D&#x27;Oyly Carte&#x27;s chairmanship were Wyllie Adolf Hofflin, general manager from 1941 to 1960, and August Laplanche, head chef from 1946 to 1965. When Carte died in 1948, his daughter Bridget did not wish to become chairman, accepting instead the vice-chairman position, and the Savoy board elected Wontner, the first person to combine the roles of chairman and managing director since the Savoy&#x27;s founder, Richard D&#x27;Oyly Carte. Wontner remained managing director until 1979 and chairman until 1984, and he was president thereafter until 1992.
To mark Queen Elizabeth II&#x27;s coronation on 2 June 1953, the hotel hosted the Savoy Coronation Ball, attended by 1,400 people, including Hollywood stars, royalty and other notables, who paid 12 guineas (equivalent to £ as of ), each. Sixteen Yeomen Warders from the Tower of London lined the entrance staircase. The interior of the Savoy was decked in hundreds of yards of dove-grey material and heraldic banners in scarlet, blue and yellow. The design was supervised by Bridget D&#x27;Oyly Carte, whose fellow organisers included Cecil Beaton and Ninette de Valois. The cabaret was under the direction of Laurence Olivier, Noël Coward and John Mills.

Under Wontner&#x27;s leadership, the Savoy appointed its first British head chef, Silvino Trompetto, who was maître-chef from 1965 to 1980. Giles Shepard (1937–2006), succeeded Wontner as managing director from 1979 to 1994 and helped to defend the Savoy Group against Charles Forte&#x27;s attempt to take control of the Board in the 1980s. Forte gained a majority of the shares, but was unable to take control due to the company&#x27;s ownership structure. Shepard also introduced competitive salaries for the staff, increased international marketing of the hotel, and led the Savoy&#x27;s centenary celebrations. Ramón Pajares was managing director from 1994 to 1999. The Savoy continued to be a popular meeting place. &quot;&quot;Le tout&quot; London was there it seemed, from film stars to businessmen to politicians, all staying or being entertained at the grand old fun palace on the Strand.&quot;

Bridget D&#x27;Oyly Carte died childless in 1985, bringing an end to her family line. In 1998, an American private equity house, The Blackstone Group, purchased the Savoy hotel group. They sold it in 2004 to Quinlan Private, who sold the Savoy hotel and restaurant Simpson&#x27;s-In-The-Strand eight months later, for an estimated £250 million, to Al-Waleed bin Talal to be managed by Al-Waleed&#x27;s affiliate, Fairmont Hotels and Resorts of Canada. Quinlan&#x27;s group retained the rest of the hotels under the name Maybourne Hotel Group.

===2010 refurbishment to present===

In December 2007, the hotel closed for a complete renovation, the cost of which was budgeted at £100 million. The hotel conducted a sale of 3,000 pieces of its famous furnishings and memorabilia. The projected reopening date was delayed more than a year to October 2010, as structural and system problems held up construction. The building&#x27;s façade required extensive stabilisation, and the cost of the renovations grew to £220 million. The new energy-efficient design reduced the hotel&#x27;s electricity usage by approximately 50% and reuse and recycling increased.

The new design features a Thames Foyer with a winter garden gazebo under a stained-glass cupola with natural light, which is the venue for late-night dining and the hotel&#x27;s famous afternoon tea. The glass dome had been covered since World War II. A new teashop and patisserie is called Savoy Tea, and a glass-enclosed fitness gallery with rooftop swimming pool, gym and spa are located above the Savoy Theatre. The new Beaufort Bar has an Art Deco interior of jet-black and gold and offers nightly cabaret. The River Restaurant (now renamed Kaspar&#x27;s), facing the Thames, is also decorated in the Art Deco style, but the American Bar is nearly unchanged. The rooms are decorated in period styles harmonised with the adjacent hallways, and they retain built-in wardrobes and bedroom cabinets. The decor is Edwardian on the Thames river side and Art Deco on the Strand side. Butler service was also reintroduced to the hotel. Gordon Ramsay manages the Savoy Grill with Stuart Gillies as Chef Director and Andy Cook as Head Chef. In a nod to the hotel&#x27;s origins, six private dining rooms are named after Gilbert and Sullivan operas. The hotel contains a small museum next to the American Bar, open to the public, with a revolving exhibition of items from the hotel&#x27;s archives. A motor launch is available to take small parties from the Savoy Pier in front of the hotel for champagne river tours.

The critic for &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; wrote: &quot;The Savoy is still The Savoy, only better. ... [The rooms] are calm ... you are the personality, not the room. ... [The hotel is] a saviour of The Strand I suspect now. The lobby is bigger and grander, and JUST THE SAME.&quot; A review in &quot;The Guardian&quot; noted that reception &quot;now is sheer sleight of hand. ... In under five minutes I have been expertly drawn into the world of Savoy. [Furniture and furnishings] conspire to enhance my stay&quot;. While the same reviewer found the spa disappointing, she gave highest marks to the hotel&#x27;s personalised service, the Savoy Tea, afternoon tea in the Thames Foyer, and the Beaufort bar, concluding: &quot;The Savoy is back where it belongs – right on top.&quot; The Savoy Grill, however, lost its Michelin star and reopened to mixed reviews. Three years after the reopening, the owners announced that business had been disappointing, and the hotel was in jeopardy of closing. The hotel celebrated its 125th anniversary in 2014, at which time it received a glowing review from the &quot;London Evening Standard&quot;.

==Notable guests==

Numerous notable guests have stayed at the hotel. Claude Monet and James Whistler both painted or drew views, from their Savoy rooms, of the River Thames. The Savoy featured prominently in guest Oscar Wilde&#x27;s trial for gross indecency. Other celebrity guests in the hotel&#x27;s early decades included the future King Edward VII, Sarah Bernhardt, Enrico Caruso, Lillie Langtry, H. G. Wells, George Bernard Shaw, Nellie Melba, Charlie Chaplin, Al Jolson, Errol Flynn, Fred Astaire, Marlene Dietrich, Lionel Barrymore, Harry Truman, Audrey Hepburn, Judy Garland, Josephine Baker, Cary Grant, Babe Ruth, Ivor Novello and Noël Coward. The hotel kept records of its guests&#x27; preferences, so that it could provide for them in advance. For Coward, the staff made history by taking the first photographs of a hotel guest&#x27;s toilet articles so that they could lay them out in his bathroom exactly as he liked them. They made sure to provide a fireproof eiderdown quilt to Barrymore, as he always smoked while reading in bed.

Bob Dylan stayed in the hotel in 1965 and filmed the video clip &quot;Subterranean Homesick Blues&quot; in an adjacent alley. Laurence Olivier and Vivien Leigh met at the hotel. Frank Sinatra, Marilyn Monroe, John Wayne, Louis Armstrong, Humphrey Bogart, Elizabeth Taylor, Richard Burton, Maria Callas, Coco Chanel, Christian Dior, Sophia Loren, Julie Andrews, Lena Horne, Marlon Brando, Jane Fonda, Barbra Streisand, Jimi Hendrix, the Beatles, Elton John, U2, Led Zeppelin, the Who, George Clooney, Whoopi Goldberg and Stephen Fry are just a few of the celebrities who stayed there in recent decades. Richard Harris lived at the hotel for the last several years of his life. While being carried out on a stretcher before he died, he joked, &quot;It was the food.&quot;

==The arts==

===Fine art===
The Savoy hotel has long been associated with the arts. Whistler stayed in 1896 with his wife Beatrix and painted eight lithograph views of the Thames from his top-floor room. Monet stayed at the hotel on three occasions in 1899, 1900 and 1901, and served as the hotel&#x27;s first artist-in-residence. He worked on paintings there including views of Charing Cross Bridge (1899–1901) and Waterloo Bridge (1903). 26 pastels survive from his visits to the hotel. A study in 2010 concluded that Monet had stayed in rooms 610–611 in 1899 and later in 510–511, although the Savoy markets rooms 512 and 513 as their &quot;Monet Suite&quot;.

The artist-in residence position has continued in the 21st century. For example, in 2012, the British artist, David Downes, worked in the hotel&#x27;s lobby to create a large-scale drawing, displayed in the hotel&#x27;s front hall, depicting the Thames Diamond Jubilee Pageant. The following year, South African artist Jonty Hurwitz created a chrome and resin anamorphic sculpture of Kaspar, the hotel&#x27;s cat mascot, titled &quot;The 14th Guest&quot;, found at the entrance to the hotel&#x27;s restaurant, Kaspar&#x27;s Seafood Bar &amp; Grill. Kaspar&#x27;s story begins with the legend of an 1898 dinner at the Savoy given for 14 guests by Woolf Joel, a South African diamond tycoon. One of the diners was unable to attend, leaving the number of guests an unlucky 13, and another diner predicted that whoever first left the table would soon die. The first to leave was Joel, who was shot dead a few weeks later in Johannesburg. After this, the hotel offered to seat a member of its staff at tables of 13 to ward off bad luck. Finally, in 1926, the designer Basil Ionides sculpted a 3-foot high art-deco black cat called Kaspar, which is used as the 14th guest. Kaspar is given a full place setting, a napkin is tied around his neck, and he is served each course. Winston Churchill liked Ionides&#x27;s Kaspar so much that he insisted that the sculpture join his parties of any size when dining at the Savoy.

===Music===
The hotel established its first dinner dances in 1912, laying a dance-floor in the centre of the Thames Foyer in time to take advantage of the popularity of the tango, which exploded in 1913. William de Mornys became head of entertainment after the First World War and helped set up the Savoy Havana Band and the Savoy Orpheans dance band, led by Debroy Somers. The bands were described in &quot;The Times&quot; as &quot;probably the best-known bands in Europe&quot;, and they broadcast regularly from the hotel. The BBC, which had set up its Savoy Hill studios next to the hotel in 1922, took full advantage of the proximity. George Gershwin gave the British premiere of &quot;Rhapsody in Blue&quot; at the hotel in 1925, simultaneously broadcast on BBC radio.

Rupert D&#x27;Oyly Carte engaged Richard Collet to run the cabaret at the Savoy, which opened in April 1929. In 1931 Carroll Gibbons took over as leader of the Orpheans, continuing until 1950 when he became the hotel&#x27;s Director of Entertainments until his death in 1954. Ian Stewart then became head of the hotel&#x27;s music, retiring in 1978.

Lena Horne and others made their British debuts there. Frank Sinatra, who regularly stayed at the hotel, played the piano and sang there. The 1960s and 1970s saw cabaret appearances from artists including Cilla Black, Sandie Shaw and The New Seekers. Traditional dinner, dancing and cabaret evenings came to an end in 1980. But in 2013, the hotel reintroduced its dinner dances, with resident dance band Alex Mendham &amp; His Orchestra playing music from the 1920s and &#x27;30s.

===In films and novels===
The hotel has often been used as a film location. For example, the romantic finale to &quot;Notting Hill&quot; (1999) is set in the hotel&#x27;s Lancaster Room, where Anna (Julia Roberts) and William (Hugh Grant) declare their mutual love. In 1921, the hotel was used in the film &quot;Kipps&quot;, based on the novel by H. G. Wells. It also featured in &quot;The French Lieutenant&#x27;s Woman&quot; (1981), &quot;Entrapment&quot; (1999) and &quot;Gambit&quot; (2012), among others. In 2011, the hotel was used as the setting for Duran Duran&#x27;s music video for their song &quot;Girl Panic!&quot; from their album &quot;All You Need Is Now&quot;.

Arnold Bennett wrote the novel &quot;Imperial Palace&quot; in 1930, based on his research at the hotel. The novel fictionalises the hotel&#x27;s operations. Michael Morpurgo wrote a children&#x27;s book fictionalising the hotel&#x27;s mascot, Kaspar, as an adventurer: &quot;Kaspar: Prince of Cats&quot; (2008), which was released in the US as &quot;Kaspar: The Titanic Cat&quot; (2012).

==Restaurants and bars==
===Restaurants===
The hotel has three restaurants, all managed by Gordon Ramsay: the Savoy Grill, on the north side of the building, with its entrance off the Strand, The River Restaurant (formerly known as Kaspars, and before that the Savoy Restaurant), on the south side, overlooking the River Thames, and Restaurant 1890. The River Restaurant has long been famous for its inventive chefs, beginning in 1890, with the celebrity chef Auguste Escoffier. Escoffier created many famous dishes at the Savoy. In 1893, he invented the &quot;pêche Melba&quot; in honour of the Australian singer Nellie Melba, and in 1897, Melba toast. Other Escoffier creations were &quot;bombe Néro&quot; (a flaming ice), &quot;fraises à la Sarah Bernhardt&quot; (strawberries with pineapple and Curaçao sorbet), &quot;baisers de Vierge&quot; (meringue with vanilla cream and crystallised white rose and violet petals) and &quot;suprêmes de volailles Jeannette&quot; (jellied chicken breasts with foie gras). Another signature dish is the omelette Arnold Bennett, created by the chef Jean Baptiste Virlogeux.
Under Ritz and Escoffier, evening dress was required in the restaurant, and Ritz was innovative in hiring popular musicians to play background music during dinner and in printing daily menus. Even today, elegant dining at the Savoy includes formal afternoon tea with choral and other performances at Christmastime. The Savoy has a Sunday brunch, which includes free-flow champagne, and special events, such as New Year&#x27;s Eve dinner. August Laplanche was head chef at the hotel from 1946 to 1965, Silvino Trompetto was maître-chef from 1965 to 1980, and Anton Edelmann was maître chef des cuisines for 21 years, from 1982 to 2003.

As part of the 2010 refurbishment, the restaurant was completely redecorated in the Art Deco style, with a leopard print carpet. In 2013, the restaurant became Kaspar&#x27;s Seafood Bar &amp; Grill. The menu features oysters, cured and smoked fish. The interior design follows the hotel&#x27;s 1920s style and its black and green livery, and the room offers views of the Thames and some of London&#x27;s landmarks. The restaurant is open all day, seven days a week. Reviews for the restaurant have improved since the re-opening: &quot;The smoked and cured fish here is to die for, and a whole roast sea bream for two was simply brilliant.&quot;

Since Ramsay employed his former protégé Marcus Wareing in the less formal Savoy Grill, the restaurant earned its first Michelin star. The Grill was originally &quot;where people go to eat a modest luncheon or to dine on the way to the theatre without spending too much time or too much money&quot;. Since 2010, the chef patron has been Stuart Gillies. From 2015 to 2017, Kim Woodward, a former contestant on the TV show &quot;&quot;, became the Grill&#x27;s first female head chef. The Thames Foyer serves breakfast, morning coffee, light lunch and supper, as well as afternoon tea, accompanied by the hotel&#x27;s resident pianist. Also part of the hotel buildings is Simpson&#x27;s-in-the-Strand, featuring classic British style cuisine. Its specialties are aged Scottish beef on the bone, potted shrimps, roast saddle of lamb and steak and kidney pie.

In February 2022 Ramsay opened Restaurant 1890 in the hotel. In February 2024 it was awarded a Michelin star.

===Bars===
The American Bar at the Savoy Hotel was one of the earliest establishments to introduce American-style cocktails to Europe. The term &quot;American Bar&quot; was used in London to designate the sale of American cocktails from the late 19th century.

The head barmen, in chronological order, have been as follows:
*Frank Wells, 1893 to 1902.

*Ada &quot;Coley&quot; Coleman, 1903 to 1924. She concocted the &quot;Hanky-Panky&quot; cocktail for Sir Charles Hawtrey.
*Harry Craddock, 1925 to 1938. Born in England, Craddock trained as a barman in the US but fled 1920s Prohibition to head the Savoy&#x27;s bars; author of &quot;The Savoy Cocktail Book&quot; and reputed inventor of such cocktails as the &quot;White Lady&quot;.
*Eddie Clark, 1939 to 1942. During the Second World War, he created a cocktail for each branch of the armed services: &quot;Eight Bells&quot; for the Navy, &quot;New Contemptible&quot; for the Army, and &quot;Wings&quot; for the RAF.
*Reginald &quot;Johnnie&quot; Johnson, 1942 to 1954. He invented &quot;Wedding Bells&quot; for the wedding of Princess Elizabeth and Prince Philip.
*Joe Gilmore, 1954 to 1975. Among his many creations was the &quot;Moonwalk&quot; to honour Neil Armstrong&#x27;s achievement. His hangover cure was two aspirins and a corpse reviver.
*Harry &quot;Vic&quot; Viccars, 1975 to 1981. His cocktails included &quot;Speedbird,&quot; one of three drinks created for the first commercial flight of the Concorde in 1976.
*Victor Gower, 1981 to 1985
*Peter Dorelli, 1985 to 2003. His 1889er celebrated the hotel&#x27;s centenary in 1989, and together with Salim Khoury, he created the &quot;Millennium&quot; to celebrate the end of the 20th century.
*Salim Khoury, 2003 to 2010. In 1992, he won the UK Barman of the Year competition by inventing the &quot;Blushing Monarch&quot;, inspired by Princess Diana.
*Erik Lorincz, 2010 to 2018. He created a version of the &quot;El Malecon&quot; cocktail.
*Maxim Schulte, 2018 to 2020.
*Shannon Tebay, 2021 to 2022
*Chelsie Bailey, 2022 to 2024 
*Angelo Sparvol, 2024 to current

The American Bar is decorated in a warm Art Deco design, with cream and ochre walls, and electric blue and gold chairs. The walls feature the photos of famous guests. A pianist plays classic American jazz every day on a baby grand piano in the centre of the room.

The Beaufort Bar is a new bar created in the 2010 renovation, specialising in champagne as well as cocktails. Decorated in an Art Deco design of jet-black and gold, it offers a nightly cabaret.

===&quot;The Savoy Cocktail Book&quot;===
In 1930, the Savoy Hotel first published its cocktail book, &quot;The Savoy Cocktail Book&quot;, with 750 recipes compiled by Harry Craddock of the American Bar and Art Deco &quot;decorations&quot; by Gilbert Rumbold. The book has remained in print since then and was subsequently republished in 1952, 1965, 1985, 1996, and expanded in 1999 and 2014.

==Savoy Court==

In Savoy Court, vehicles are required to drive on the right. This is said to date from the days of the hackney carriage when a cab driver would reach his arm out of the driver&#x27;s door window to open the passenger&#x27;s door (which opened backwards and had the handle at the front), without having to get out of the cab himself. Additionally, the hotel entrance&#x27;s small roundabout meant that vehicles needed a turning circle of to navigate it. This is still the legally required turning circle for all London cabs.

==See also==
* The Other Club (a dining club) used to dine in the Pinafore Room of the hotel.
* 

== Notes ==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
==External links==
* 
* Fairmont Hotels – The Savoy
* Pathé footage of film stars&#x27; cocktail party in 1947
* Purr &#x27;n&#x27; Fur: Kaspar, of the Savoy
* Review by &quot;The Critics Guide&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q746639" start="4" end="15" title="Savoy Hotel" label="Savoy Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27686" start="21" end="33" title="luxury hotel" label="luxury hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q756819" start="49" end="55" title="Strand, London" label="Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="63" end="82" title="City of Westminster" label="City of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q943995" start="124" end="134" title="impresario" label="impresario"/>
<link wikidata="Q953440" start="135" end="160" title="Richard D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte" label="Richard D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="183" end="203" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q114347" start="600" end="610" title="César Ritz" label="César Ritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q313744" start="626" end="643" title="Auguste Escoffier" label="Auguste Escoffier"/>
<link wikidata="Q10514696" start="653" end="668" title="chef de cuisine" label="chef de cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428440" start="915" end="929" title="Savoy Orpheans" label="Savoy Orpheans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428434" start="938" end="955" title="Savoy Havana Band" label="Savoy Havana Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q123829" start="1033" end="1048" title="George Gershwin" label="George Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="1050" end="1063" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q112307" start="1065" end="1075" title="Lena Horne" label="Lena Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="1080" end="1091" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="1127" end="1137" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="1139" end="1150" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q170726" start="1152" end="1165" title="Enrico Caruso" label="Enrico Caruso"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="1167" end="1182" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="1184" end="1193" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="1195" end="1207" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q40475" start="1209" end="1222" title="Joan Crawford" label="Joan Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="1224" end="1236" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="1238" end="1248" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="1250" end="1266" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616" start="1268" end="1282" title="Marilyn Monroe" label="Marilyn Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16390" start="1284" end="1299" title="Humphrey Bogart" label="Humphrey Bogart"/>
<link wikidata="Q34851" start="1301" end="1317" title="Elizabeth Taylor" label="Elizabeth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="1319" end="1335" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="1337" end="1346" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190631" start="1348" end="1360" title="Bette Midler" label="Bette Midler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="1362" end="1373" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="1391" end="1408" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393345" start="1480" end="1507" title="Fairmont Hotels and Resorts" label="Fairmont Hotels and Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="1623" end="1635" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428442" start="1643" end="1654" title="Savoy Place" label="Savoy Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251243" start="1663" end="1680" title="Thames Embankment" label="Thames Embankment"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1697" end="1712" title="Grade II listed" label="Grade II listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="1752" end="1766" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14118" start="1792" end="1797" title="Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451436" start="1814" end="1842" title="Humbert I of Savoy" label="Humbert I, Count of Sabaudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q723562" start="1971" end="1982" title="Peter II of Savoy" label="Count Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q228885" start="2072" end="2091" title="Eleanor of Provence" label="Eleanor of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="2110" end="2130" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="2161" end="2175" title="Henry III of England" label="King Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q375236" start="2187" end="2203" title="Earl of Richmond" label="Earl of Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q756819" start="2248" end="2254" title="Strand, London" label="Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="2263" end="2275" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886295" start="2299" end="2311" title="Savoy Palace" label="Savoy Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542204" start="2351" end="2369" title="Liberty of the Savoy" label="manor of the Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q736265" start="2407" end="2426" title="Bernard of Menthon" label="Great Saint Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q228885" start="2560" end="2573" title="Eleanor of Provence" label="Queen Eleanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q447802" start="2612" end="2637" title="Edmund Crouchback" label="Edmund, Earl of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q238334" start="2674" end="2681" title="Blanche of Lancaster" label="Blanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q193752" start="2716" end="2752" title="John of Gaunt, 1st Duke of Lancaster" label="John of Gaunt, 1st Duke of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q311820" start="2805" end="2814" title="Wat Tyler" label="Wat Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q498871" start="2839" end="2860" title="Peasants Revolt" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="2875" end="2885" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="3015" end="3024" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q64636" start="3861" end="3873" title="Savoy Chapel" label="Savoy Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q943995" start="3908" end="3918" title="impresario" label="impresario"/>
<link wikidata="Q953440" start="3919" end="3944" title="Richard D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte" label="Richard D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165797" start="3977" end="3990" title="Savoy Theatre" label="Savoy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="4030" end="4050" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789267" start="4369" end="4391" title="Thomas Edward Collcutt" label="Thomas Edward Collcutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q781834" start="4415" end="4427" title="Wigmore Hall" label="Wigmore Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040285" start="4577" end="4586" title="Carl Rosa" label="Carl Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564825" start="4588" end="4604" title="George Grossmith" label="George Grossmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q15487488" start="4606" end="4622" title="François Cellier" label="François Cellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538900" start="4624" end="4639" title="George Edwardes" label="George Edwardes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917056" start="4641" end="4656" title="Augustus Harris" label="Augustus Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434058" start="4661" end="4674" title="Fanny Ronalds" label="Fanny Ronalds"/>
<link wikidata="Q212692" start="4701" end="4720" title="Arthur Sullivan" label="Sir Arthur Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131502" start="4886" end="4906" title="electrical generator" label="electrical generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195818" start="5169" end="5179" title="The Mikado" label="The Mikado"/>
<link wikidata="Q114347" start="5776" end="5786" title="César Ritz" label="César Ritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481002" start="5813" end="5823" title="The Ritz London Hotel" label="Ritz Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q313744" start="5850" end="5867" title="Auguste Escoffier" label="Auguste Escoffier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634473" start="5876" end="5895" title="maître d&amp;#x27;hôtel" label="maître d&amp;#x27;hôtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="6183" end="6198" title="Edward VII of the United Kingdom" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="6709" end="6710" title="Pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q177235" start="7186" end="7203" title="Edward Carson" label="Sir Edward Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783593" start="7643" end="7671" title="Simpson&amp;#x27;s-in-the-Strand" label="Simpson&amp;#x27;s-in-the-Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543778" start="7823" end="7842" title="George Reeves-Smith" label="George Reeves-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451435" start="8002" end="8026" title="Rupert D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte" label="Rupert D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748565" start="8199" end="8214" title="Claridge&amp;#x27;s" label="Claridge&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727909" start="8383" end="8394" title="steel frame" label="steel frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605" start="8584" end="8599" title="Sarah Bernhardt" label="Sarah Bernhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q38367" start="8604" end="8620" title="Thomas Dewar, 1st Baron Dewar" label="Sir Thomas Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170726" start="9020" end="9033" title="Enrico Caruso" label="Enrico Caruso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800690" start="9302" end="9309" title="ticking" label="ticking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5701994" start="9356" end="9367" title="Helen Carte" label="Helen Carte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428402" start="9501" end="9512" title="Savoir Beds" label="Savoir Beds"/>
<link wikidata="Q714126" start="9588" end="9600" title="Guccio Gucci" label="Guccio Gucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933094" start="11053" end="11065" title="Hugh Wontner" label="Hugh Wontner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="11523" end="11540" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="11587" end="11603" title="Lord Mountbatten" label="Lord Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="11605" end="11622" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q315531" start="11624" end="11635" title="Jan Masaryk" label="Jan Masaryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q315540" start="11640" end="11654" title="Archibald Wavell" label="General Wavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966711" start="12584" end="12591" title="Bridget D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte" label="Bridget"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="12962" end="12980" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q597266" start="13200" end="13214" title="Yeomen Warders" label="Yeomen Warders"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="13224" end="13239" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q697096" start="13489" end="13501" title="Cecil Beaton" label="Cecil Beaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q234436" start="13506" end="13523" title="Ninette de Valois" label="Ninette de Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="13564" end="13580" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="13582" end="13593" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q315728" start="13598" end="13608" title="John Mills" label="John Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632769" start="13880" end="13893" title="Charles Forte" label="Charles Forte"/>
<link wikidata="Q880942" start="14645" end="14665" title="The Blackstone Group" label="The Blackstone Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262290" start="14724" end="14739" title="Derek Quinlan" label="Quinlan Private"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="14847" end="14848" title="Pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q293679" start="14864" end="14883" title="Al-Waleed bin Talal" label="Al-Waleed bin Talal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393345" start="14929" end="14956" title="Fairmont Hotels and Resorts" label="Fairmont Hotels and Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796994" start="15036" end="15057" title="Maybourne Hotel Group" label="Maybourne Hotel Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="16115" end="16123" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q185852" start="16485" end="16494" title="Edwardian era" label="Edwardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15280" start="16604" end="16617" title="Gordon Ramsay" label="Gordon Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626576" start="16647" end="16661" title="Stuart Gillies" label="Stuart Gillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="16786" end="16806" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="17105" end="17124" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q666494" start="18195" end="18218" title="London Evening Standard" label="London Evening Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="18297" end="18309" title="Claude Monet" label="Claude Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q203643" start="18314" end="18328" title="James McNeill Whistler" label="James Whistler"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="18388" end="18400" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="18442" end="18453" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467353" start="18471" end="18486" title="Labouchere Amendment" label="gross indecency"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="18570" end="18580" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605" start="18582" end="18597" title="Sarah Bernhardt" label="Sarah Bernhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q170726" start="18599" end="18612" title="Enrico Caruso" label="Enrico Caruso"/>
<link wikidata="Q297743" start="18614" end="18628" title="Lillie Langtry" label="Lillie Langtry"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="18630" end="18641" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="18643" end="18662" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q237607" start="18664" end="18676" title="Nellie Melba" label="Nellie Melba"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="18678" end="18693" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q128532" start="18695" end="18704" title="Al Jolson" label="Al Jolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q93188" start="18706" end="18717" title="Errol Flynn" label="Errol Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q100937" start="18719" end="18731" title="Fred Astaire" label="Fred Astaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612" start="18733" end="18749" title="Marlene Dietrich" label="Marlene Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q295593" start="18751" end="18767" title="Lionel Barrymore" label="Lionel Barrymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="18769" end="18781" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q42786" start="18783" end="18797" title="Audrey Hepburn" label="Audrey Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="18799" end="18811" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q151972" start="18813" end="18828" title="Josephine Baker" label="Josephine Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q83410" start="18830" end="18840" title="Cary Grant" label="Cary Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="18842" end="18851" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q436693" start="18853" end="18865" title="Ivor Novello" label="Ivor Novello"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="18870" end="18881" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q26696" start="19204" end="19213" title="Common eider" label="eiderdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="19277" end="19286" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430567" start="19347" end="19374" title="Subterranean Homesick Blues" label="Subterranean Homesick Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="19403" end="19419" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q129429" start="19424" end="19436" title="Vivien Leigh" label="Vivien Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="19455" end="19468" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616" start="19470" end="19484" title="Marilyn Monroe" label="Marilyn Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="19486" end="19496" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="19498" end="19513" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16390" start="19515" end="19530" title="Humphrey Bogart" label="Humphrey Bogart"/>
<link wikidata="Q34851" start="19532" end="19548" title="Elizabeth Taylor" label="Elizabeth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q151973" start="19550" end="19564" title="Richard Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q128297" start="19566" end="19578" title="Maria Callas" label="Maria Callas"/>
<link wikidata="Q45661" start="19580" end="19591" title="Coco Chanel" label="Coco Chanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q159694" start="19593" end="19607" title="Christian Dior" label="Christian Dior"/>
<link wikidata="Q43252" start="19609" end="19621" title="Sophia Loren" label="Sophia Loren"/>
<link wikidata="Q161819" start="19623" end="19636" title="Julie Andrews" label="Julie Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q112307" start="19638" end="19648" title="Lena Horne" label="Lena Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="19650" end="19663" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q41142" start="19665" end="19675" title="Jane Fonda" label="Jane Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="19677" end="19693" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="19695" end="19707" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="19709" end="19720" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="19722" end="19732" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="19734" end="19736" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="19738" end="19750" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="19752" end="19759" title="the Who" label="the Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q23844" start="19761" end="19775" title="George Clooney" label="George Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001" start="19777" end="19792" title="Whoopi Goldberg" label="Whoopi Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="19797" end="19808" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q106775" start="19879" end="19893" title="Richard Harris" label="Richard Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074352" start="20428" end="20448" title="Charing Cross Bridge (Monet series)" label="Charing Cross Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795196" start="20465" end="20480" title="Waterloo Bridge (Monet series)" label="Waterloo Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709878" start="20959" end="20989" title="Thames Diamond Jubilee Pageant" label="Thames Diamond Jubilee Pageant"/>
<link wikidata="Q19294817" start="21032" end="21045" title="Jonty Hurwitz" label="Jonty Hurwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q217422" start="21073" end="21083" title="anamorphosis" label="anamorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867192" start="21776" end="21789" title="Basil Ionides" label="Basil Ionides"/>
<link wikidata="Q338450" start="22301" end="22306" title="tango" label="tango"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="22389" end="22404" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428434" start="22427" end="22444" title="Savoy Havana Band" label="Savoy Havana Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428440" start="22453" end="22467" title="Savoy Orpheans" label="Savoy Orpheans"/>
<link wikidata="Q25753214" start="22487" end="22500" title="Debroy Somers" label="Debroy Somers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="22657" end="22660" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428442" start="22683" end="22693" title="Savoy Place" label="Savoy Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q123829" start="22767" end="22782" title="George Gershwin" label="George Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q722599" start="22818" end="22834" title="Rhapsody in Blue" label="Rhapsody in Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451435" start="22903" end="22927" title="Rupert D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte" label="Rupert D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046567" start="23020" end="23035" title="Carroll Gibbons" label="Carroll Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q131442391" start="23179" end="23190" title="Ian Edward Stewart" label="Ian Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q112307" start="23254" end="23264" title="Lena Horne" label="Lena Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="23309" end="23322" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q286525" start="23459" end="23470" title="Cilla Black" label="Cilla Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q229356" start="23472" end="23483" title="Sandie Shaw" label="Sandie Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q934498" start="23488" end="23503" title="The New Seekers" label="The New Seekers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510723" start="23658" end="23690" title="Alex Mendham &amp;amp; His Orchestra" label="Alex Mendham &amp;amp; His Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q200672" start="23854" end="23866" title="Notting Hill (film)" label="Notting Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q40523" start="23935" end="23948" title="Julia Roberts" label="Julia Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q163286" start="23963" end="23973" title="Hugh Grant" label="Hugh Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249082" start="24048" end="24053" title="Kipps" label="Kipps"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="24083" end="24094" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212928" start="24122" end="24156" title="The French Lieutenant&amp;#x27;s Woman (film)" label="The French Lieutenant&amp;#x27;s Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q578873" start="24177" end="24187" title="Entrapment (film)" label="Entrapment"/>
<link wikidata="Q276778" start="24211" end="24217" title="Gambit (2012 film)" label="Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q58381" start="24293" end="24304" title="Duran Duran" label="Duran Duran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930532" start="24345" end="24356" title="Girl Panic!" label="Girl Panic!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930532" start="24386" end="24405" title="All You Need Is Now" label="All You Need Is Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q314158" start="24414" end="24428" title="Arnold Bennett" label="Arnold Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006812" start="24451" end="24466" title="Imperial Palace (novel)" label="Imperial Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387224" start="24571" end="24587" title="Michael Morpurgo" label="Michael Morpurgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15280" start="24894" end="24907" title="Gordon Ramsay" label="Gordon Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567954" start="25364" end="25375" title="Peach Melba" label="pêche Melba"/>
<link wikidata="Q237607" start="25417" end="25429" title="Nellie Melba" label="Nellie Melba"/>
<link wikidata="Q73755" start="25444" end="25455" title="Melba toast" label="Melba toast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605" start="25547" end="25562" title="Sarah Bernhardt" label="Sarah Bernhardt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25845" end="25868" title="Arnold Bennett#Omelette" label="omelette Arnold Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999207" start="25890" end="25913" title="Jean Baptiste Virlogeux" label="Jean Baptiste Virlogeux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758522" start="27238" end="27252" title="Marcus Wareing" label="Marcus Wareing"/>
<link wikidata="Q214844" start="27317" end="27330" title="Michelin Guide" label="Michelin star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626576" start="27534" end="27548" title="Stuart Gillies" label="Stuart Gillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783593" start="27867" end="27895" title="Simpson&amp;#x27;s-in-the-Strand" label="Simpson&amp;#x27;s-in-the-Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q808266" start="28430" end="28441" title="Bartender" label="head barmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q27541549" start="28519" end="28548" title="Ada Coleman" label="Ada &amp;quot;Coley&amp;quot; Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648570" start="28588" end="28599" title="Hanky-Panky cocktail" label="Hanky-Panky"/>
<link wikidata="Q779341" start="28623" end="28638" title="Charles Hawtrey (stage actor)" label="Charles Hawtrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5668108" start="28641" end="28655" title="Harry Craddock" label="Harry Craddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q46388" start="28742" end="28753" title="Prohibition" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28883" end="28893" title="White Lady (cocktail)#White Lady" label="White Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979114" start="29234" end="29281" title="Wedding of Princess Elizabeth and Philip Mountbatten, Duke of Edinburgh" label="wedding of Princess Elizabeth and Prince Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210041" start="29284" end="29295" title="Joe Gilmore" label="Joe Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="29375" end="29389" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172602" start="29451" end="29465" title="corpse reviver" label="corpse reviver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505" start="29626" end="29634" title="Concorde" label="Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="30014" end="30028" title="Princess Diana" label="Princess Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351542" start="30093" end="30103" title="El Malecon cocktail" label="El Malecon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5668108" start="30872" end="30886" title="Harry Craddock" label="Harry Craddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="31156" end="31174" title="right-hand traffic" label="drive on the right"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273735" start="31218" end="31234" title="hackney carriage" label="hackney carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="31242" end="31252" title="cab driver" label="cab driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693740" start="31345" end="31399" title="suicide door" label="which opened backwards and had the handle at the front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525" start="31494" end="31504" title="roundabout" label="roundabout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558948" start="31534" end="31548" title="turning circle" label="turning circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273735" start="31626" end="31636" title="London cab" label="London cab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413285" start="31655" end="31669" title="The Other Club" label="The Other Club"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="384999" wikidata="Q925092" url="?curid=384999" title="Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome">
<text>Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome (WPWS) is a disorder due to a specific type of problem with the electrical system of the heart involving an accessory pathway able to conduct electrical current between the atria and the ventricles, thus bypassing the atrioventricular node. About 60% of people with the electrical problem developed symptoms, which may include an abnormally fast heartbeat, palpitations, shortness of breath, lightheadedness, or syncope. Rarely, cardiac arrest may occur. The most common type of irregular heartbeat that occurs is known as paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia.
The cause of WPW is typically unknown and is likely due to a combination of chance and genetic factors. A small number of cases are due to a mutation of the PRKAG2 gene which may be inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. The underlying mechanism involves an accessory electrical conduction pathway between the atria and the ventricles. It is associated with other conditions such as Ebstein anomaly and hypokalemic periodic paralysis. The diagnosis of WPW occurs with a combination of palpitations and when an electrocardiogram (ECG) show a short PR interval and a delta wave. It is a type of pre-excitation syndrome.
WPW syndrome may be monitored or treated with either medications or an ablation (destroying the tissues) such as with radiofrequency catheter ablation. It affects between 0.1 and 0.3% in the population. The risk of death in those without symptoms is about 0.5% per year in children and 0.1% per year in adults. In some cases, non-invasive monitoring may help to more carefully risk stratify patients into a lower risk category. In those without symptoms ongoing observation may be reasonable. In those with WPW complicated by atrial fibrillation, cardioversion or the medication procainamide may be used. The condition is named after Louis Wolff, John Parkinson, and Paul Dudley White who described the ECG findings in 1930.

==Signs and symptoms==
People with WPW are usually asymptomatic when not having a fast heart rate. However, individuals may experience palpitations, dizziness, shortness of breath, or infrequently syncope (fainting or near fainting) during episodes of supraventricular tachycardia. WPW is also associated with a very small risk of sudden death due to more dangerous heart rhythm disturbances.

==Pathophysiology==

Electrical activity in the normal human heart begins when a cardiac action potential arises in the sinoatrial (SA) node, which is located in the right atrium. From there, the electrical stimulus is transmitted via internodal pathways to the atrioventricular (AV) node. After a brief delay at the AV node, the stimulus travels through the bundle of His to the left and right bundle branches and then to the Purkinje fibers and the endocardium at the apex of the heart, then finally to the ventricular myocardium.

The AV node serves an important function as a &quot;gatekeeper&quot;, limiting the electrical activity that reaches the ventricles. In situations where the atria generate excessively rapid electrical activity (such as atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter), the AV node limits the number of signals conducted to the ventricles. For example, if the atria are electrically activated at 300 beats per minute, half those electrical impulses may be blocked by the AV node, so that the ventricles are stimulated at only 150 beats per minute – resulting in a pulse of 150 beats per minute. Another important property of the AV node is that it slows down individual electrical impulses. This is manifested on the electrocardiogram as the PR interval (the time from electrical activation of the atria to electrical activation of the ventricles), which is usually shortened to less than 120 milliseconds in duration.

Individuals with WPW have an accessory pathway that communicates between the atria and the ventricles, in addition to the AV node. This accessory pathway is known as the bundle of Kent. This accessory pathway does not share the rate-slowing properties of the AV node and may conduct electrical activity at a significantly higher rate than the AV node. For instance, in the example above, if an individual had an atrial rate of 300 beats per minute, the accessory bundle may conduct all the electrical impulses from the atria to the ventricles, causing the ventricles to contract at 300 beats per minute. Extremely rapid heart rates such as this may result in hemodynamic instability or cardiogenic shock. In some cases, the combination of an accessory pathway and abnormal heart rhythms can trigger ventricular fibrillation, a leading cause of sudden cardiac death.

WPW may be associated with PRKAG2, a protein kinase enzyme encoded by the &quot;PRKAG2&quot; gene.

===Bundle of Kent===
The bundle of Kent is an abnormal extra or accessory conduction pathway between the atria and ventricles that is present in a small percentage (between 0.1 and 0.3%) of the general population. This pathway may communicate between the left atrium and the left ventricle, in which case it is termed a &quot;type A pre-excitation&quot;, or between the right atrium and the right ventricle, in which case it is termed a &quot;type B pre-excitation&quot; in old, currently abandoned classification. Problems arise when this pathway creates an electrical circuit that bypasses the AV node. The AV node is capable of slowing the rate of conduction of electrical impulses to the ventricles, whereas the bundle of Kent lacks this capability. When an aberrant electrical connection is made via the bundle of Kent, tachydysrhythmias may therefore result.

==Diagnosis==
WPW is commonly diagnosed on the basis of the electrocardiogram in an asymptomatic individual. In this case, it is manifested as a delta wave, which is a slurred upstroke in the QRS complex that is associated with a short PR interval. The short PR interval and slurring of the QRS complex are reflective of the impulse making it to the ventricles early (via the accessory pathway) without the usual delay experienced in the AV node.

If a person with WPW experiences episodes of atrial fibrillation, the ECG shows a rapid polymorphic wide-complex tachycardia (without &quot;torsades de pointes&quot;). This combination of atrial fibrillation and WPW is considered dangerous, and most antiarrhythmic drugs are contraindicated.

When an individual is in normal sinus rhythm, the ECG characteristics of WPW are a short PR interval (less than 120 milliseconds in duration), widened QRS complex (greater than 120 milliseconds in duration) with slurred upstroke of the QRS complex, and secondary repolarization changes (reflected in ST segment-T wave changes).

In individuals with WPW, electrical activity that is initiated in the SA node travels through the accessory pathway, as well as through the AV node to activate the ventricles via both pathways. Since the accessory pathway does not have the impulse slowing properties of the AV node, the electrical impulse first activates the ventricles via the accessory pathway, and immediately afterwards via the AV node. This gives the short PR interval and slurred upstroke of the QRS complex known as the delta wave.

In case of type A pre-excitation (left atrioventricular connections), a positive R wave is seen in V1 (&quot;positive delta&quot;) on the precordial leads of the electrocardiogram, while in type B pre-excitation (right atrioventricular connections), a predominantly negative delta wave is seen in lead V1 (&quot;negative delta&quot;).

People with WPW may have more than one accessory pathwayin some cases, as many as eight abnormal pathways have been found. This has been seen in individuals with Ebstein&#x27;s anomaly.

Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome is sometimes associated with Leber&#x27;s hereditary optic neuropathy, a form of mitochondrial disease.

===Risk stratification===
WPW carries a small risk of sudden death, presumably due to rapidly conducted atrial fibrillation causing ventricular fibrillation. While the overall risk is approximately 2.4 per 1000 person years, the risk in an individual is dependent on the properties of the accessory pathway causing pre-excitation.

A higher risk accessory pathway may be suggested by a history of syncope, but risk stratification is best performed by assessing how frequently a pathway can conduct impulse to the ventricles, usually via programmed electrical stimulation (PES) in the cardiac electrophysiology laboratory. This is an invasive but generally low-risk procedure during which the atria are stimulated to try to induce tachycardia. If a tachycardia involving the accessory pathway can be triggered, the cardiologist can then assess how rapidly the accessory pathway is able to conduct. The faster it can conduct, the higher the likelihood the accessory pathway can conduct fast enough to trigger a lethal tachycardia.

High-risk features that may be present during PES include an effective refractory period of the accessory pathway less than 250 ms, multiple pathways, septal location of pathway, and inducibility of supraventricular tachycardia (AVRT, atrial fibrillation). Individuals with any of these high-risk features are generally considered at increased risk for SCD or symptomatic tachycardia, and should be treated accordingly (i.e.: catheter ablation).

It is unclear whether invasive risk stratification (with PES) is necessary in the asymptomatic individual. While some groups advocate PES for risk stratification in all individuals under 35 years old, others only offer it to individuals who have history suggestive of a tachydysrhythmia, since the incidence of sudden cardiac death is so low (less than 0.6% in some reports).

Other methods of risk stratification include observing the ventricular rate during spontaneous atrial fibrillation on a 12-lead ECG. RR intervals of less than 250 ms suggest a higher risk pathway. During exercise testing, abrupt loss of pre-excitation as heart rate increases also suggest a lower risk pathway. However, this approach is hampered by the normal improvement in AV node conduction during exercise which can also mask pre-excitation despite ongoing conduction down the accessory pathway.

==Treatment==
According to the ACLS protocol, people with WPW who are experiencing rapid abnormal heart rhythms (tachydysrhythmias) may require synchronized electrical cardioversion if they are demonstrating severe signs or symptoms (for example, low blood pressure or lethargy with altered mental status). If they are relatively stable, medication may be used.

===Medications===
WPW pattern with hemodynamically stability and orthodromic AVRT leading to a regular narrow complex tachycardia may be managed similarly to other regular narrow complex supraventricular tachycardias: first with vagal maneuvers followed by a trial of adenosine (first-line therapy). The 2015 ACC/AHA/HRS guidelines recommend beta-blockers or calcium channel blockers as second-line agents, electric cardioversion is reserved for refractory arrhythmias. However, if there is any doubt about the diagnosis of orthodromic AVRT or if aberrant conduction leading to a wide complex QRS is observed, it may be prudent to manage as undifferentiated wide complex tachycardia.

People with atrial fibrillation and rapid ventricular response may be treated with amiodarone or procainamide to stabilize their heart rate. Procainamide and cardioversion are accepted treatments for conversion of tachycardia found with WPW. Amiodarone in atrial fibrillation with WPW, is linked to ventricular fibrillation, and thus may be worse than procainamide.

AV node blockers should be avoided in atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter with WPW or history of it; this includes adenosine, diltiazem, verapamil, other calcium channel blockers, and beta blockers. They can exacerbate the syndrome by blocking the heart&#x27;s normal electrical pathway (therefore favoring 1:1 atrial to ventricle conduction through the pre-excitation pathway, potentially leading to unstable ventricular arrhythmias).

===Catheter ablation===
The definitive treatment of WPW is the destruction of the abnormal electrical pathway by catheter ablation. Two main types of catheter ablation include radiofrequency ablation with heat or cryoablation with cold energy. This procedure is performed by cardiac electrophysiologists and has high success rate in the hands of an experienced electrophysiologist. Findings from 1994 indicate success rates of as high as 95% in people treated with radiofrequency catheter ablation for WPW. If radiofrequency catheter ablation is successfully performed, the condition is generally considered cured. Recurrence rates are typically less than 5% after a successful ablation. Some patients, such as the ones with underlying Ebstein&#x27;s anomaly and inherited cardiomyopathies, may have multiple accessory pathways.

==History==
The bundle of Kent is eponymously named for British physiologist Albert Frank Stanley Kent (18631958), who described lateral branches in the atrioventricular groove of the monkey heart (erroneously believing these constituted the normal atrioventricular conduction system).

In 1915, Frank Norman Wilson (18901952) became the first to describe the condition later called Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome. Alfred M. Wedd (18871967) was the next to describe the condition in 1921. Cardiologists Louis Wolff (18981972), John Parkinson (18851976) and Paul Dudley White (18861973) are credited with the definitive description of the disorder in 1930.

==Notable cases==
* LaMarcus Aldridge, American basketball player
* Michael Cera, Canadian actor
* Max Duggan, American football player
* Nathan Eagleton, former Australian rules football player
* Jeff Garlin, American actor, writer, and comedian
* Quentin Groves, American football player who died of a heart attack at age 32
* Dan Hardy, British UFC welterweight fighter, turned analyst and commentator
* Alicia Hoskin, New Zealand Olympic canoeist.
* Mitch Hurwitz, American television writer and producer, creator of &quot;Arrested Development&quot;
* Jessie J, British musician
* Marilyn Manson, American musician, painter, and actor
* Meat Loaf, American musician
* Michael Montgomery, American football player
* Montel Vontavious Porter, professional wrestler
* Michael Rupp, American ice hockey player

== See also ==
* Re-entry ventricular arrhythmia

== References ==
== External links ==
* Genetics Home Reference: Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (United States National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland)
* Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome Clinic, The University of Wisconsin - Madison</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q925092" start="0" end="30" title="Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome" label="Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q925092" start="32" end="36" title="Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome" label="WPWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q72711" start="95" end="112" title="Electrical conduction system of the heart" label="electrical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="120" end="125" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672543" start="139" end="156" title="accessory pathway" label="accessory pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074839" start="204" end="209" title="Atrium (heart)" label="atria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002035" start="218" end="227" title="Ventricle (heart)" label="ventricle"/>
<link wikidata="Q509053" start="249" end="270" title="atrioventricular node" label="atrioventricular node"/>
<link wikidata="Q209583" start="361" end="386" title="tachycardia" label="abnormally fast heartbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123260" start="388" end="400" title="palpitations" label="palpitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q188008" start="402" end="421" title="shortness of breath" label="shortness of breath"/>
<link wikidata="Q57823162" start="423" end="438" title="lightheadedness" label="lightheadedness"/>
<link wikidata="Q180007" start="443" end="450" title="syncope (medicine)" label="syncope"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="460" end="474" title="cardiac arrest" label="cardiac arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="510" end="529" title="Heart arrhythmia" label="irregular heartbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q28032350" start="554" end="593" title="paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia" label="paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="736" end="744" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18040277" start="752" end="758" title="PRKAG2" label="PRKAG2"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="777" end="786" title="heredity" label="inherited"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="793" end="811" title="autosomal dominant" label="autosomal dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672543" start="858" end="897" title="accessory pathway" label="accessory electrical conduction pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074839" start="910" end="915" title="Atrium (heart)" label="atria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002035" start="924" end="934" title="Ventricle (heart)" label="ventricles"/>
<link wikidata="Q277452" start="983" end="998" title="Ebstein anomaly" label="Ebstein anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q622828" start="1003" end="1033" title="hypokalemic periodic paralysis" label="hypokalemic periodic paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79785" start="1110" end="1127" title="electrocardiogram" label="electrocardiogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3800650" start="1147" end="1158" title="PR interval" label="PR interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064167" start="1193" end="1216" title="pre-excitation syndrome" label="pre-excitation syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q436572" start="1336" end="1368" title="radiofrequency catheter ablation" label="radiofrequency catheter ablation"/>
<link wikidata="Q815819" start="1744" end="1763" title="atrial fibrillation" label="atrial fibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729126" start="1765" end="1778" title="cardioversion" label="cardioversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q417597" start="1797" end="1809" title="procainamide" label="procainamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263315" start="1852" end="1863" title="Louis Wolff" label="Louis Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182251" start="1865" end="1879" title="John Parkinson (cardiologist)" label="John Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q366363" start="1885" end="1902" title="Paul Dudley White" label="Paul Dudley White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123260" start="2079" end="2090" title="palpitation" label="palpitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10916362" start="2093" end="2102" title="dizziness" label="dizziness"/>
<link wikidata="Q188008" start="2104" end="2123" title="Dyspnea" label="shortness of breath"/>
<link wikidata="Q180007" start="2141" end="2148" title="Syncope (medicine)" label="syncope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598909" start="2196" end="2224" title="supraventricular tachycardia" label="supraventricular tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882301" start="2419" end="2443" title="cardiac action potential" label="cardiac action potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q286020" start="2458" end="2468" title="sinoatrial node" label="sinoatrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074839" start="2504" end="2516" title="right atrium" label="right atrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q509053" start="2600" end="2616" title="atrioventricular node" label="atrioventricular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577202" start="2697" end="2710" title="bundle of His" label="bundle of His"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014587" start="2765" end="2780" title="Purkinje fibers" label="Purkinje fibers"/>
<link wikidata="Q721856" start="2789" end="2800" title="endocardium" label="endocardium"/>
<link wikidata="Q84133" start="2859" end="2869" title="cardiac muscle" label="myocardium"/>
<link wikidata="Q815819" start="3090" end="3109" title="atrial fibrillation" label="atrial fibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506572" start="3113" end="3127" title="atrial flutter" label="atrial flutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q191733" start="3424" end="3429" title="pulse" label="pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3800650" start="3602" end="3613" title="PR interval" label="PR interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924939" start="3629" end="3663" title="P wave (electrocardiography)" label="electrical activation of the atria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969239" start="3667" end="3706" title="QRS complex" label="electrical activation of the ventricles"/>
<link wikidata="Q723733" start="3753" end="3764" title="millisecond" label="millisecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477062" start="4466" end="4483" title="cardiogenic shock" label="cardiogenic shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="4544" end="4566" title="cardiac dysrhythmia" label="abnormal heart rhythms"/>
<link wikidata="Q848662" start="4579" end="4603" title="ventricular fibrillation" label="ventricular fibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18040277" start="4674" end="4680" title="PRKAG2" label="PRKAG2"/>
<link wikidata="Q58321" start="4684" end="4698" title="protein kinase" label="protein kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="4699" end="4705" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="4740" end="4744" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672543" start="4811" end="4839" title="accessory pathway" label="accessory conduction pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q132629" start="5306" end="5324" title="Electrical network" label="electrical circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25105032" start="5509" end="5517" title="Cardiac aberrancy" label="aberrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625433" start="6201" end="6220" title="torsades de pointes" label="torsades de pointes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12335414" start="6386" end="6398" title="sinus rhythm" label="sinus rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576883" start="6654" end="6664" title="ST segment" label="ST segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672706" start="6665" end="6671" title="T wave" label="T wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q277452" start="7688" end="7710" title="Ebstein&amp;#x27;s anomaly" label="Ebstein&amp;#x27;s anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262161" start="7773" end="7813" title="Leber&amp;#x27;s hereditary optic neuropathy" label="Leber&amp;#x27;s hereditary optic neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q935710" start="7825" end="7846" title="mitochondrial disease" label="mitochondrial disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q356991" start="8386" end="8419" title="Electrophysiology study" label="programmed electrical stimulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302130" start="8433" end="8458" title="cardiac electrophysiology" label="cardiac electrophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859019" start="9108" end="9112" title="Atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia" label="AVRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q379607" start="10235" end="10239" title="Advanced cardiac life support" label="ACLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q209583" start="10317" end="10334" title="tachydysrhythmias" label="tachydysrhythmias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729126" start="10372" end="10385" title="cardioversion" label="cardioversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q275419" start="10451" end="10469" title="Hypotension" label="low blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736316" start="10487" end="10508" title="Altered level of consciousness" label="altered mental status"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287189" start="10796" end="10810" title="vagal maneuver" label="vagal maneuver"/>
<link wikidata="Q410061" start="11335" end="11345" title="amiodarone" label="amiodarone"/>
<link wikidata="Q417597" start="11349" end="11361" title="procainamide" label="procainamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q190012" start="11737" end="11746" title="adenosine" label="adenosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422229" start="11748" end="11757" title="diltiazem" label="diltiazem"/>
<link wikidata="Q410291" start="11759" end="11768" title="verapamil" label="verapamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q421700" start="11776" end="11799" title="calcium channel blocker" label="calcium channel blocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q816759" start="11806" end="11818" title="beta blocker" label="beta blocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q436572" start="12172" end="12189" title="catheter ablation" label="catheter ablation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302130" start="12334" end="12361" title="cardiac electrophysiologist" label="cardiac electrophysiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q277452" start="12795" end="12817" title="Ebstein&amp;#x27;s anomaly" label="Ebstein&amp;#x27;s anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q847583" start="12832" end="12848" title="Cardiomyopathy" label="cardiomyopathies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12966" end="12991" title="Albert Frank Stanley Kent" label="Albert Frank Stanley Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443859" start="13185" end="13204" title="Frank Norman Wilson" label="Frank Norman Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10379" start="13378" end="13391" title="Cardiology" label="Cardiologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263315" start="13392" end="13403" title="Louis Wolff" label="Louis Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182251" start="13416" end="13430" title="John Parkinson (cardiologist)" label="John Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q366363" start="13446" end="13463" title="Paul Dudley White" label="Paul Dudley White"/>
<link wikidata="Q316243" start="13566" end="13583" title="LaMarcus Aldridge" label="LaMarcus Aldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="13594" end="13604" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q309555" start="13614" end="13626" title="Michael Cera" label="Michael Cera"/>
<link wikidata="Q114349716" start="13645" end="13655" title="Max Duggan" label="Max Duggan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969033" start="13684" end="13699" title="Nathan Eagleton" label="Nathan Eagleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="13708" end="13733" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian rules football"/>
<link wikidata="Q983082" start="13743" end="13754" title="Jeff Garlin" label="Jeff Garlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763206" start="13795" end="13809" title="Quentin Groves" label="Quentin Groves"/>
<link wikidata="Q390290" start="13875" end="13884" title="Dan Hardy" label="Dan Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186471" start="13894" end="13897" title="Ultimate Fighting Championship" label="UFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q107108885" start="13953" end="13966" title="Alicia Hoskin" label="Alicia Hoskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992236" start="14000" end="14013" title="Mitch Hurwitz" label="Mitch Hurwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11598" start="14073" end="14093" title="Arrested Development (TV series)" label="Arrested Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q18814" start="14102" end="14110" title="Jessie J" label="Jessie J"/>
<link wikidata="Q186327" start="14131" end="14145" title="Marilyn Manson" label="Marilyn Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q152929" start="14187" end="14196" title="Meat Loaf" label="Meat Loaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308393" start="14218" end="14236" title="Michael Montgomery" label="Michael Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q44638" start="14265" end="14289" title="Montel Vontavious Porter" label="Montel Vontavious Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="14291" end="14312" title="Professional wrestling" label="professional wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929129" start="14315" end="14327" title="Michael Rupp" label="Michael Rupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="14338" end="14348" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299957" start="14374" end="14405" title="Re-entry ventricular arrhythmia" label="Re-entry ventricular arrhythmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q611833" start="14504" end="14546" title="United States National Library of Medicine" label="United States National Library of Medicine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385000" wikidata="Q510865" url="?curid=385000" title="Texas Ranger Division">
<text>The Texas Ranger Division, also known as the Texas Rangers and nicknamed the , is an investigative law enforcement agency with statewide jurisdiction in the U.S. state of Texas, based in the capital city Austin. The Texas Rangers have investigated crimes ranging from murder to political corruption, acted in riot control and as detectives, protected the governor of Texas, tracked down fugitives, served as a security force at important state locations, including the Alamo, and functioned as a paramilitary force at the service of both the Republic (1836–1846) and the State of Texas.

The Texas Rangers were unofficially created by Stephen F. Austin in a call-to-arms written in 1823. After a decade, on August 10, 1835, Daniel Parker introduced a resolution to the Permanent Council creating a body of rangers to protect the Mexican border. The unit was dissolved by the federal authorities after the Civil War during the Reconstruction Era but was quickly reformed upon the reinstitution of home government. Since 1935, the organization has been a division of the Texas Department of Public Safety (TxDPS); it fulfills the role of Texas&#x27; state bureau of investigation. As of 2019, there are 166 commissioned members of the Ranger force.

The Rangers have taken part in many of the most important events of Texas history, such as stopping the assassination of presidents William Howard Taft and Porfirio Díaz in El Paso, and in some of the best-known criminal cases in the history of the Old West, such as those of gunfighter John Wesley Hardin, bank robber Sam Bass, and outlaws Bonnie and Clyde. 

Scores of books have been written about the Rangers, from well-researched works of nonfiction to pulp novels and other such fiction, making the Rangers significant participants in the mythology of the Wild West and modern culture. The Lone Ranger, perhaps the best-known example of a fictional character derived from the Texas Rangers, draws his alias from having once been a Texas Ranger. Other well-known examples include the radio and television series &quot;Tales of the Texas Rangers&quot;, Augustus McCrae and Woodrow Call from the Larry McMurtry novel series &quot;Lonesome Dove&quot;, and Chuck Norris portraying Cordell Walker in &quot;Walker, Texas Ranger&quot;. The Major League Baseball (MLB) team Texas Rangers is named after the division.

The Rangers are legally protected against disbandment. There is a museum dedicated to the Texas Rangers known as the Texas Ranger Hall of Fame and Museum in Waco, Texas, which celebrates the cultural significance of the Rangers.

==History==

The rangers were founded in 1823 when Stephen F. Austin, known as the Father of Texas, employed ten men to act as rangers to protect 600 to 700 newly settled families who arrived in Mexican Texas following the Mexican War of Independence. While there is some discussion as to when Austin actually employed men as &quot;rangers&quot;, Texas Ranger lore dates the year of their organization to this event. The Texas Rangers were formally constituted in 1835, and in November, Robert McAlpin Williamson was chosen to be the first Major of the Texas Rangers. Within two years the Rangers comprised more than 300 men.

Following the Texas Revolution and the creation of the Republic of Texas, newly elected president Mirabeau B. Lamar (the second elected president of the Republic) raised a force of 56 Rangers to fight the Cherokee and the Comanche, partly in retaliation for the support they had given the Mexicans at the Cordova Rebellion against the Republic. Ten Rangers were killed in the Battle of Stone Houses in 1837. The size of the Ranger force was increased from 56 to 150 men by Sam Houston, as President of the Republic, in 1841 (the second time he was elected president of the Republic).

The Rangers continued to participate in skirmishes with Native Americans through 1846, when the annexation of Texas to the United States and the Mexican–American War saw several companies of Rangers mustered into federal service. They played important roles at various battles, acting as guides and participating in counter-guerrilla warfare, soon establishing a fearsome reputation among both Mexicans and Americans. At the Battle of Monterrey in September 1846, famous Texas Rangers such as John Coffee &quot;Jack&quot; Hays, Ben McCulloch, Bigfoot Wallace and Samuel Hamilton Walker played important roles in the battle, including advising General William Jenkins Worth on the tactics required to fight inside a Mexican city. Richard Addison Gillespie, a famed Texas Ranger, died at Monterrey, and General Worth renamed a hill &quot;Mount Gillespie&quot; after him. The First Regiment of Texas Mounted Rifle Volunteers was also known as &quot;Hays&#x27; Texas Rangers&quot;. Colonel Hays organized a second regiment of Texas Rangers, including Rip Ford, who fought with General Winfield Scott in his Mexico City Campaign and the Anti-guerrilla campaign along his line of communications to Vera Cruz. 

John Jackson Tumlinson Sr., the first alcalde of the Colorado district, is considered by many Texas Ranger historians to be the first Texas Ranger killed in the line of duty. One of his most urgent issues was protection of settlers from theft and murder by marauders. On his way to San Antonio in 1823 to discuss the issue with the governor, Tumlinson was killed by Native Americans. His traveling companion, a Mr. Newman, escaped. Tumlinson&#x27;s body was never found.

Following the end of the war in 1848, the Rangers were largely disbanded, but the election of Hardin Richard Runnels as governor in 1857 meant US$70,000 () was allocated to fund the Rangers under John Salmon &quot;Rip&quot; Ford, a veteran of the Mexican war. The now 100-strong Rangers participated in campaigns against the Comanche and other tribes, whose raids against the settlers and their properties had become common. Ford and his Rangers fought the Comanche in the Battle of Little Robe Creek in 1858 and then Juan Cortina in the Battle of Rio Grande City the following year with Capt. Peter Tumlinson.
The success of a series of campaigns in the 1860s marked a turning point in Rangers&#x27; history. The U.S. Army could provide only limited and thinly-stretched protection in the enormous territory of Texas. By contrast, the Rangers&#x27; effectiveness when dealing with these threats convinced both the people of the state and the political leaders that a well-funded and organized state Ranger force was essential. Such a force could use the deep familiarity with the territory and the proximity with the theater of operations as major advantages in its favor. This option was not pursued, in view of the emerging national political problems (prelude to the American Civil War), and the Rangers were again dissolved.

Many Rangers enlisted to fight for the Confederacy following the secession of Texas from the United States in 1861 during the Civil War. The 8th Texas Cavalry Regiment was also known as Terry&#x27;s Texas Rangers. In 1870, during Reconstruction, the Rangers were briefly replaced by a Union-controlled version called the Texas State Police; supplemented by the 30 man Texas Special Police. Both organizations were disbanded only three years later. The state election of 1873 saw newly elected Governor Richard Coke and the state legislature recommission the Rangers. During these times, many of the Rangers&#x27; myths were born, such as their success in capturing or killing notorious criminals and &quot;desperados&quot; (including bank robber Sam Bass and gunfighter John Wesley Hardin), their involvement in the Mason County War, the Horrell-Higgins Feud, and their decisive role in the defeat of the Comanche, Kiowa and Apache peoples. The Apache &quot;dreaded the Texas Rangers...whose guns were always loaded and whose aim was unerring; they slept in the saddle and ate while they rode, or done without...when they took up our trail they followed it determinedly and doggedly day and night.&quot; Also during these years, the Rangers suffered the only defeat in their history when they surrendered at the Salinero Revolt in 1877.

Despite the fame of their deeds, the conduct of the Rangers during this period was illegally excessive. In particular, Leander H. McNelly and his men used ruthless methods that often rivaled the brutality of their opponents, such as taking part in summary executions and confessions induced by torture and intimidation.
The Rangers next saw serious action at the summit of William Howard Taft and President Porfirio Díaz in 1909, preventing an assassination of both presidents, and during the subsequent Mexican Revolution. The breakdown of law and order on the Mexican side of the border, coupled with the lack of federal military forces, meant the Rangers were once again called upon to restore and maintain law and order, by any necessary means, which again led to excesses. However, the situation necessitated the appointment of hundreds of new special Rangers by the state, which neglected to carefully screen aspiring members. The Rangers were responsible for several incidents, ending in the January 28, 1918 massacre of the male population (15 Mexican men and boys ranging in age from 16 to 72 years) of the tiny community of Porvenir, Texas, on the Mexican border in western Presidio County. Before the decade was over, thousands of people died, Texans and Mexicans alike. In January 1919, an investigation launched by Texas lawmaker José Tomás Canales found that from 300 to 5,000 people, mostly of Hispanic descent, had been killed by Rangers from 1910 to 1919, and that members of the Rangers had been involved in many acts of brutality and injustice. The Rangers were reformed by a resolution of the Legislature in 1919, which saw the special Ranger groups disbanded and a complaints system instituted. 

The Great Depression forced both the federal and state governments to cut down on personnel and funding of their organizations, and the number of commissioned officers was reduced to 45, with the only means of transportation afforded to Rangers being free railroad passes or using their personal horses. The agency was again damaged after supporting Governor Ross Sterling in his re-election campaign—after his opponent Miriam Amanda &quot;Ma&quot; Ferguson won, she proceeded to discharge all serving Rangers in 1933.

The ensuing disorganization of law enforcement in the state caused the Legislature to engage a firm of consultants to reorganize the state security agencies. The consultants recommended merging the Rangers with the Texas Highway Patrol under a new agency called the Texas Department of Public Safety (DPS). This change took place in 1935, with an initial budget of US$450,000 (). With minor rearrangements over the years, the 1935 reforms have ruled the Texas Rangers&#x27; organization until present day. Hiring new members, which had been largely a political decision, was achieved through a series of examinations and merit evaluations. Promotion relied on seniority and performance in the line of duty. Today, the historical importance and symbolism of the Texas Rangers is such that they are protected by statute from being disbanded.

== 1919 Canales investigation ==
On January 31, 1919, the Joint Committee of the Senate and the House convened at the state capitol in Austin, Texas, to begin an investigation of the Texas Rangers. The investigation was prompted by José Tomás Canales, a state representative from Brownsville, Texas. Canales filed 19 charges against the Texas Rangers and declared a state of emergency as a result of the violent policing practices that he alleged were routinely used by the state force against Mexican Americans and Mexican nationals living along the US-Mexico border. Canales also introduced a piece of legislation, House Bill 5, which proposed reorganizing the Texas Rangers and increasing the minimum qualifications and pay. 

From January 31 to February 13, 1919, the committee heard testimony from people across the state, including victims of state violence, witnesses or surviving relatives, and members of the Texas Rangers. The Texas State Library and Archives Commission has preserved the full transcript of the investigation, which consists of over 1600 pages of testimony and evidence.

The testimony revealed many issues within the Texas Rangers and highlighted several high-profile cases of abuse. For example, in January 1918, a group consisting of Texas Rangers belonging to Company B and four local ranchers executed 15 innocent Mexican men and boys in Porvenir, a small community in West Texas. In the aftermath, Texas Ranger Captain James Monroe Fox falsified official reports to Adjutant General James Harley to claim that the Porvenir residents had fired on the group of Rangers. Fox would later amend his statements and ultimately resigned under pressure in 1918. However, other Texas Rangers involved in the massacre remained on the force. 

Another incident that came to light during the 1919 Investigation was the murder of Toribio Rodriguez, a Brownsville police officer, in December of 1912. Rodriguez encountered a group of Texas Rangers and county law enforcement traveling in a hack with no lights. After Rodriguez asked the men to light the lamps on the hack, they began shooting at him. He returned home with a minor wound. However, the group of men went to Rodriguez&#x27;s house, shot him in the back, and took him to the jail. Rodriguez died a few days later on November 14, 1912. At the time of the investigation, at least one of the Rangers involved, Captain John J. Sanders, was still active on the force. 

Both particularly egregious cases offered a small sample of the many accounts of abuse that appear throughout the transcript. Witnesses also testified that violence by Texas Rangers extended beyond the US-Mexico border region and that other racial groups, and particularly African Americans, were subject to harassment and violence from the state agents.

On February 19, 1919, the committee presented its findings to the Texas House of Representatives. However, despite the revelations, the 1919 investigation did not produce the sweeping changes in the organization&#x27;s culture that policymakers like Canales had wanted. Ultimately, no Texas Rangers were prosecuted for their involvement in acts of violence like the Porvenir Massacre or the murder of Toribio Rodriguez. While the committee acknowledged that “the conduct of certain members of the ranger force... is most reprehensible,” they justified the Rangers’ continuing presence along the border and praised the majority of the state agents for their “great service... in the protection of property.” 

However, there were a few notable changes. The state legislators decided to reduce the force from well over 1,000 men to just 68 Rangers. The majority of the reduction came from eliminating the &quot;Loyalty Rangers,&quot; a group of unpaid volunteer Rangers that was established during World War I to monitor acts of &quot;disloyalty&quot; in their communities. At the time of the investigation, there were approximately 800 Loyalty Rangers still in service. Many of the men who were dismissed moved into careers in local law enforcement or later in the US Border Patrol, which was established in 1924.

==Old West image==
From its earliest days, the Rangers were surrounded with the mystique of the Old West. Although popular culture&#x27;s image of the Rangers is typically one of rough living, tough talk and a quick draw, Ranger Captain John &quot;Rip&quot; Ford described the men who served him as this:

A large proportion ... were unmarried. A few of them drank intoxicating liquors. Still, it was a company of sober and brave men. They knew their duty and they did it. While in a town they made no braggadocio demonstration. They did not gallop through the streets, shoot, and yell. They had a specie of moral discipline which developed moral courage. They did right because it was right.

Despite the age of the agency, and the many contributions they have made to law enforcement over their entire history, Texas Rangers developed most of their reputation during the days of the Old West. Of the 79 Rangers killed in the line of duty, 30 were killed during the Old West period of 1858 through 1901. Also during this period, two of their three most high-profile captures or killings took place, the capture of John Wesley Hardin and the killing of Sam Bass, in addition to the capture of Texas gunman Billy Thompson and others.

American historian Andrew Graybill has argued that the Texas Rangers resemble the Royal Canadian Mounted Police in many ways. He argues that each organization protected the established order by confining and removing Native Americans, by tightly controlling the mixed blood peoples (the African Americans in Texas, and the Métis in Canada), assisted the large-scale ranchers against the small-scale ranchers and farmers who fenced the land, and broke the power of labor unions that tried to organize the workers of industrial corporations.

===&quot;One Riot, One Ranger&quot;===
A famous phrase associated with the Rangers is &quot;One Riot, One Ranger&quot;. It is a sensationalized apocrypha in that there was never actually a riot; rather, the phrase was coined by Ranger Captain William &quot;Bill&quot; McDonald, who was sent to Dallas in 1896 to prevent the illegal heavyweight prize fight between Pete Maher and Bob Fitzsimmons that had been organized by Dan Stuart and patronized by the eccentric &quot;Hanging Judge&quot; Roy Bean of Langtry, Texas. According to the story, McDonald&#x27;s train was met by the mayor, who asked the single Ranger where the other lawmen were. McDonald is said to have replied: &quot;Hell! Ain&#x27;t I enough? There&#x27;s only one prize-fight!&quot;

Although some measure of truth lies within the tale, it is largely an idealized account written by author Bigelow Paine and loosely based on McDonald&#x27;s statements, published in Paine&#x27;s 1909 book &quot;Captain Bill McDonald: Texas Ranger&quot;. In truth, the fight had been so heavily publicized that nearly every Ranger was on hand, including all captains and their superior, Adjutant General Woodford H. Mabry. Many of them were undecided on stopping the fight or attending it; and other famous lawmen, such as Bat Masterson, were also present. The orders of the governor were clear, however, and the bout was stopped. Stuart then tried to reorganize it in El Paso and later in Langtry, but the Rangers thwarted his attempts. Finally, the fight took place on the Mexican side of the Rio Grande near Langtry.

The motto appears on the pedestal of a bronze Texas Ranger statue that was at Dallas Love Field airport also titled One Riot, One Ranger. The statue was contributed in 1961 by Earle Wyatt and his wife. The Texas Ranger statue was removed from the airport and put in storage in 2020 after publication of the book &quot;Cult of Glory&quot;, which details a number of unsavory incidents involving the Rangers. According to &quot;Cult of Glory&quot;, the statue was modeled after Jay Banks, a pro-segregation Ranger of the era. Banks was on good terms with White Citizens&#x27; Councils and was involved in resistance to school integration after &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot;. A final status on the location of the statue is awaiting a &quot;community dialogue&quot;.

==High-profile cases==
The Texas Rangers have assisted in many high-profile cases throughout the years. Some cases are deeply entrenched in the Rangers&#x27; lore, such as those of outlaw John Wesley Hardin, bank robber Sam Bass, and Bonnie and Clyde.

===Sam Bass===

In 1878, Sam Bass and his gang, who had perpetrated a series of bank and stagecoach robberies beginning in 1877, held up two stagecoaches and four trains within 25 miles (40 km) of Dallas. The gang quickly found themselves the object of pursuit across North Texas by a special company of Texas Rangers headed by Captain Junius &quot;June&quot; Peak. Bass was able to elude the Rangers until a member of his party, Jim Murphy, turned informer, cut a deal to save himself, and led the law to the gang. As Bass&#x27;s band rode south, Murphy wrote to Major John B. Jones, commander of the Frontier Battalion of Texas Rangers.

Jones set up an ambush at Round Rock, where the Bass gang had planned to rob the Williamson County Bank. On July 19, 1878, Bass and his gang scouted the area before the actual robbery. They bought some tobacco at a store, and were noticed by Williamson County Sheriff Ahijah W. &quot;Caige&quot; Grimes, who approached the group and was shot and killed. A heavy gunfight ensued between the outlaws and the Rangers and local lawmen. A deputy named Moore was mortally wounded, as was Bass. The gang quickly mounted their horses and tried to escape while continuing to fire, and as they galloped away, Bass was shot again in the back by Ranger George Herold. Bass was later found lying helpless in a pasture north of town by the authorities. They took him into custody; he died from his wounds the next day.

===John Wesley Hardin===
One of Texas&#x27;s deadliest outlaws, John Wesley Hardin, was reputed to be the meanest man alive, an accolade he supposedly earned by killing a man for snoring. He committed his first murder at age 15, and admitted to killing more than 40 men over 27 years. In May 1874, Hardin killed Charles Webb, the deputy sheriff of Brown County and a former Texas Ranger. John Barclay Armstrong, a Texas Ranger known as &quot;McNelly&#x27;s Bulldog&quot; since he served with the Special Force as a sergeant and Captain Leander McNelly&#x27;s right hand, received permission to arrest the outlaw. He pursued Hardin across Alabama and into Florida, and caught up with him in Pensacola.

After Armstrong, Colt pistol in hand, boarded a train that Hardin and four companions were on, the outlaw shouted, &quot;Texas, by God!&quot; and drew his own pistol. When it was over, one of his gang members was killed, and his three surviving friends were staring at Armstrong&#x27;s pistol. Hardin had been knocked unconscious. Armstrong&#x27;s hat had been pierced by a bullet, but he was uninjured. Hardin was charged for murder, convicted, and sentenced to 25 years in prison. Seventeen years later, Hardin was pardoned by Governor Jim Hogg and released from prison on March 16, 1894. He moved to El Paso, where he began practicing law. On August 19, 1895, he was murdered during a poker game at the Acme Saloon over a personal disagreement.

===Taft-Díaz assassination attempt===
In 1909, Private C.R. Moore of Company A, &quot;performed one of the most important feats in the history of the Texas Rangers&quot;. William Howard Taft and Porfirio Díaz planned a summit in El Paso, Texas and Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, a historic first meeting between a U.S. president and a Mexican president and the first time an American president would cross the border into Mexico. But tensions rose on both sides of the border, including threats of assassination, so the Texas Rangers, 4,000 U.S. and Mexican troops, United States Secret Service agents and United States Marshals were all called in to provide security. Frederick Russell Burnham, the celebrated scout, was put in charge of a 250-person private security detail hired by John Hays Hammond, a nephew of Texas Ranger John Coffee Hays, who in addition to owning large investments in Mexico was a close friend of Taft from Yale University and a U.S. Vice-Presidential candidate in 1908. On October 16, the day of the summit, Burnham and Private C.R. Moore discovered a man holding a concealed palm pistol standing at the El Paso Chamber of Commerce building along the procession route. Burnham and Moore captured, disarmed, and arrested the would-be assassin within only a few feet of Taft and Díaz.

===Bandit War===
The Bandit War, a small but major campaign during the Border War, was fought in 1910–1915 in Texas. The conflict was a series of violent raids conducted by Mexican revolutionaries in the American settlements of Tamaulipas, Coahuila and Chihuahua. The Texas Rangers became the primary fighting force and protection of the Texans during the operations against the rebels. The Mexican faction&#x27;s incursion in the territory was carried out by the Seditionistas and Carrancistas, and led by major political leaders such as Basilio Ramos and Luis de la Rosca; however, the Seditionistas were never able to launch a full-scale invasion of the United States so they resorted to conducting small raids into Texas. Much of the fighting involved the Texas Ranger Division though the United States Army also engaged in operations against the rebels. The Texas Rangers were led by Captain Harry Ransom on the orders of the Governor of Texas, James E. Ferguson.

===Bonnie and Clyde===

Frank Hamer, the longtime Ranger Sergeant, left the Rangers in 1932. In 1934, at the request of Col. Lee Simmons, head of the Texas prison system, Hamer was asked to use his skills to track down Bonnie Parker and Clyde Barrow, whose Barrow gang had engineered a successful breakout of associates imprisoned at the Eastham Prison Farm in Houston County. Prisoner and Barrow friend Joe Palmer had killed a guard while escaping, and the Barrow gang was responsible for many murders, robberies, and car thefts in Texas alone. Nine law enforcement officers had already died in confrontations with the gang.

After tracking the Barrow gang across nine states, Hamer, in conjunction with officials in Louisiana, learned Bonnie and Clyde had visited a home in Bienville Parish on May 21, 1934, and that Clyde had designated a rendezvous point in the vicinity with gang member Henry Methvin, in case they were later separated. Methvin, allegedly cooperating with law enforcement, made sure he was separated from them that evening in Shreveport, and the posse set up an ambush along the route to the rendezvous at Highway 154, between Gibsland and Sailes. Led by former Rangers Hamer and B. M. &quot;Manny&quot; Gault, the posse included Sheriff Henderson Jordan and Deputy Prentiss Oakley of Bienville Parish, Louisiana, and Dallas County Deputies Bob Alcorn and Ted Hinton. They were in place by 9:00 that night, waiting all through the next day, but with no sign of Bonnie and Clyde.

Around 9:00 a.m. on May 23, the posse, concealed in the bushes and almost ready to concede defeat, heard Clyde&#x27;s stolen Ford V-8 approaching. When he stopped to speak with Henry Methvin&#x27;s father (planted there with his truck that morning to distract Clyde and force him into the lane closest to the posse), the lawmen opened fire, killing Bonnie and Clyde while shooting a combined total of approximately 130 rounds.

===Irene Garza murder===

The Texas Rangers have received widespread coverage for their role in the investigation of the death of Irene Garza, a Texas beauty queen. In 1960, Garza was last seen going to Sacred Heart Catholic Church in McAllen where Father John Feit heard her confession. Her body was found five days later in a canal. Autopsy results showed she had been raped while unconscious and died of asphyxiation, likely from suffocation. Feit was the primary suspect, but the case stalled for many years as the Hidalgo County district attorney did not feel that the evidence was sufficient to secure a conviction. Texas Ranger Rudy Jaramillo started working on the case in 2002. In 2015, under a new district attorney, Feit was indicted for murder. In December 2017, Feit was found guilty of murder with malice aforethought. Feit, aged 85, was sentenced to life imprisonment, bringing to close the longest unsolved criminal case in Hidalgo County.

==Duties==
The duties of the Texas Ranger Division consist of conducting criminal and special investigations; apprehending wanted felons; suppressing major disturbances; the protection of life and property; and rendering assistance to local law enforcement in suppressing crime and violence. The Texas Ranger Division is also responsible for the gathering and dissemination of criminal intelligence pertaining to all facets of organized crime. The Texas Ranger Division joins with all other enforcement agencies in the suppression of the same; under orders of the Director, suppress all criminal activity in any given area, when it is apparent that the local officials are unwilling or unable to maintain law and order; also upon the request or order of a judge of a court of record, Texas Rangers may serve as officers of the court and assist in the maintenance of decorum, the protection of life, and the preservation of property during any judicial proceeding; and provide protection for elected officials at public functions and at any other time or place when directed. The Texas Rangers, with the approval of the Director, may conduct investigations of any alleged misconduct on the part of other Department of Public Safety personnel.

==Organization==
The Texas Rangers&#x27; internal organization maintains the basic outlines that were set in 1935. The agency is divided into seven companies: six District Companies lettered from &quot;A&quot; to &quot;F&quot;, and Headquarters Company &quot;H&quot;. The number of personnel is set by the Texas Legislature; , the Texas Rangers number 150 commissioned officers, one forensic artist, one fiscal analyst and 24 civilian support personnel. The Legislature has also made a provision for the temporary commissioned appointment of up to 300 Special Rangers for use in investigative or emergency situations. The statewide headquarters of the Texas Rangers is located in Austin at the Texas DPS headquarters. , the Chief of the Texas Rangers is Assistant Director of DPS Randall Prince.

The District Companies&#x27; headquarters are distributed in six geographical locations:

* Houston is the headquarters for Company A
* Garland is the headquarters for Company B
* Lubbock is the headquarters for Company C
* Weslaco is the headquarters for Company D
* El Paso is the headquarters for Company E
* Waco is the headquarters for Company F

&quot;Field Rangers&quot; are supervised by a Senior Captain (Chief), Headquarters Captain (Assistant Chief), company majors and lieutenants. Sergeants and agents are also part of the rank structure of the Rangers.

Division Headquarters:
* Austin is the home of Division Headquarters, commanded by Chief Randall Prince. The Special Operations Group includes Special Weapons and Tactics Team (SWAT), Bomb Squad, Ranger Reconnaissance Team, Special Response Teams (SRT), Crisis Negotiation Teams (CNT), and Border Security Operations Center (BSOC) – Joint Operations and Intelligence Centers (JOIC). Specialized programs include the Unsolved Crimes and Public Corruption/Public Integrity investigations.

=== Texas Rangers rank structure ===
* Sergeant
* Lieutenant 
* Captain
* Major
* Assistant Chief
* Chief

==Uniforms==
Modern-day Rangers (as well as their predecessors) do not have a prescribed uniform &quot;per se&quot;, although the State of Texas does provide guidelines as to appropriate Ranger attire, including a requirement that Rangers wear clothing that is western in nature. Currently, the favored attire includes white shirt and tie, khaki/tan or gray trousers, light-colored western hat, &quot;ranger&quot; belt, and cowboy boots. Historically, according to pictorial evidence, Rangers wore whatever clothes they could afford or muster, which were usually worn out from heavy use. While Rangers still pay for their clothing today, they receive an initial stipend to offset some of the costs of boots, gunbelts and hats.

To carry out their horseback missions, Rangers adapted tack and personal gear to fit their needs. Until the beginning of the 20th century, the greatest influence was from the &quot;vaqueros&quot; (Mexican cowboys). Saddles, spurs, ropes and vests used by the Rangers were all fashioned after those of the &quot;vaqueros&quot;. Most Rangers also preferred to wear broader-brimmed &quot;sombreros&quot; as opposed to cowboy hats, and they favored square-cut, knee-high boots with a high heel and pointed toes, in a more Spanish style. Both groups carried their guns the same way, with the holsters positioned high around their hips instead of low on the thigh. This placement made it easier to draw while riding a horse.

==Badges==

The wearing of badges became more common in the late 1800s. Historians have suggested several reasons for the lack of the regular use of a badge; among them, some Rangers felt a shiny badge was a tempting target. Other historians have speculated there was no real need to show a badge to a hostile Native American or outlaw. Additionally, from a historical viewpoint, a Ranger&#x27;s pay was so scanty that the money required for such fancy accoutrements was rarely available. Nevertheless, some Rangers did wear badges, and the first of these appeared around 1875. They were locally made and varied considerably from one to another, but they invariably represented a star cut from a Mexican silver coin (usually a five-peso coin). The design is reminiscent of Texas&#x27;s Lone Star flag.

Although present-day Rangers wear the familiar &quot;star in a wheel&quot; badge, it was adopted officially only recently. The current design of the Rangers&#x27; badge was approved in 1962, when Ranger Hardy L. Purvis and his mother donated enough Mexican five-peso coins to the DPS to provide badges for all 62 Rangers who were working at that time as commissioned officers.

== Awards ==
On rare occasions, a Texas Department of Public Safety Commissioner&#x27;s Medal of Valor has been issued. According to the Texas Ranger Hall of Fame and Museum, the &quot;Medal of Valor has been awarded to four Texas Rangers - Sgt. William R. Gerth, Sgt. Stanley Keith Guffey, Sgt. John Aycock, Sgt. Danny V. Rhea.&quot; Aycock was awarded the Medal of Valor twice, in 1987 and 1995.

==Rangers killed==
Since the establishment of the Texas Department of Public Safety Texas Rangers Division, 124 Rangers have been killed in the line of duty. The following list also contains officers from the Texas Rangers, which was merged into the Texas Department of Public Safety.

The causes of death are as follows:

==Hall of Fame and Museum==

The Texas Ranger Hall of Fame and Museum opened in Waco in 1968.

==See also==
* Arizona Rangers
* Colorado Rangers
* La Matanza (1910–1920)
* List of law enforcement agencies in Texas
* New Mexico Mounted Patrol
== Citations ==
== General references ==
* Barrow, Blanche Caldwell &amp; John Neal Phillips (ed.). &quot;My Life With Bonnie &amp; Clyde&quot;, University of Oklahoma Press (2004). .
* Boessenecker, John. &quot;Texas Ranger: The Epic Life of Frank Hamer, the Man Who Killed Bonnie and Clyde&quot;, St. Martin&#x27;s Press (2016) .
* Cox, Mike. &quot;Texas Ranger Tales: Stories That Need Telling&quot;, Republic of Texas, (1998). 
* Cox, Mike. &quot;The Texas Rangers: Wearing the Cinco Peso, 1821–1900&quot; (vol. 1, 2009)
* Cox, Mike. &quot;Time of the Rangers: Texas Rangers: From 1900 to the Present&quot; (2010)
* Cantrell, Gregg. &quot;Stephen F. Austin: Empresario of Texas&quot;. (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, (1999). .
* Dishman, Christopher. &quot;A Perfect Gibraltar: The Battle for Monterrey, Mexico&quot;. University of Oklahoma Press (2010). 
* Doyle, Brett. Laird Transactions, Texas Lodge of Research, Captain Peter F. Tumlinson: Texian Ranger and Mason. Doyle, Brett Laird XXXIX (2004–2005) 113–24 Published by the Texas Lodge of Research A. F. &amp; A. M. 2006.
* Ford, John Salmon. &quot;Rip Ford&#x27;s Texas&quot;, University of Texas Press (1987). .
* 
* 
* Johnson, Benmamin Herber. &quot;Revolution in Texas: How a Forgotten Rebellion and Its Bloody Suppression Turned Mexicans into Americans&quot;, Yale University Press (2003). 
* Keil, Robert. (2002). &quot;Bosque Bonito: Violent times along the borderland during the Mexican Revolution&quot;. Alpine, TX: Sul Ross State University, Center for Big Bend Studies. 
* Knight, James R. &amp; Davis, Jonathan. &quot;Bonnie and Clyde: A Twenty-First-Century Update&quot;, Eakin Press (2003). 
* Levario, Miguel. (2012). &quot;Militarizing the Border: When Mexicans Became the Enemy&quot;. College Station, TX: Texas A &amp; M University Press. 
* Martinez, Monica Muñoz. &quot;The Injustice Never Leaves You: Anti-Mexican Violence in Texas&quot;. Harvard University Press (2018). 
* Miller, Rick. &quot;Texas Ranger John B. Jones and the Frontier Battalion, 1874–1881&quot; (University of North Texas Press; 2012) 401 pages; a history of the battalion that focuses on Jones
* Moore, Stephen L. &quot;Texas Rising: The Epic True Story of the Lone Star Republic and the Rise of the Texas Rangers, 1836–1846&quot;. William Morrow, (2015). 
* Parsons, Chuck &amp; Marianne E. Hall Little. &quot;Captain L. H. McNelly, Texas Ranger: The Life and Times of a Fighting Man&quot;, State House Press (2000). .
* Robinson, Charles. &quot;The Men Who Wear the Star: The Story of the Texas Rangers&quot;, Modern Library, (2001). 
* Swanson, Doug, J. &quot;Cult of Glory: The Bold and Brutal History of the Texas Rangers&quot;. Viking Press, (2020). 
* Utley, Robert M. &quot;Lone Star Lawmen: The Second Century of the Texas Rangers&quot;. Oxford University Press (2007). 
* Villanueva, Nicholas. (2017). &quot;The Lynching of Mexicans in the Texas Borderlands&quot;. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press. 
* Webb, Walter Prescott. &quot;The Texas Rangers: A Century of Frontier Defense&quot;, University of Texas Press (1989). 
* Wilkins, Frederick. &quot;Defending the Borders: The Texas Rangers, 1848–1861&quot;, State House Press, (2001). 
* Wilkins, Frederick. &quot;The Law Comes to Texas: The Texas Rangers 1870–1901&quot;, State House Press, (1999). .
* Wilkins, Frederick. &quot;The Legend Begins: The Texas Rangers, 1823–1845&quot;, State House Press, (1996). 

==External links==

* Official Texas Rangers website (Texas Department of Public Safety)
* Official Texas Ranger Hall of Fame and Museum
* &quot;Frontier Battalion&quot; from the &quot;Handbook of Texas Online&quot;
* &quot;Rangers and Sovereignty&quot;, published 1914, hosted by the Portal to Texas History
* &quot;In the Ranging Tradition: Texas Rangers in Worldwide Popular Culture&quot;.
* Excerpt detailing Ranger misconduct during the Mexican–American War.
* &quot;Lone Stars and Gun Smoke&quot; a Primary Source Adventure, a lesson plan hosted by the Portal to Texas History
* &quot;The Adventures of Big-Foot Wallace, the Texas Ranger and Hunter&quot;, Published 1870, hosted by the Portal to Texas History
* Full text digital copy of Captain Bill McDonald, Texas ranger: a story of frontier reform by Paine, Albert Bigelow, 1861–1937
* Texas Rangers at Monterrey - Battle of Monterrey.com
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q510865" start="4" end="25" title="Texas Ranger Division" label="Texas Ranger Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q510865" start="45" end="58" title="Texas Ranger Division" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603662" start="85" end="121" title="State bureau of investigation" label="investigative law enforcement agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="137" end="149" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="157" end="167" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="171" end="176" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="204" end="210" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160146" start="309" end="321" title="riot control" label="riot control"/>
<link wikidata="Q878323" start="355" end="372" title="List of governors of Texas" label="governor of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636724" start="465" end="474" title="Alamo Mission" label="the Alamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="496" end="508" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="542" end="550" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q250040" start="635" end="652" title="Stephen F. Austin" label="Stephen F. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164596" start="769" end="786" title="Consultation (Texas)" label="Permanent Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="829" end="843" title="Mexico–United States border#Prior to the Mexican–American War" label="Mexican border"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="905" end="914" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="926" end="944" title="Reconstruction Era" label="Reconstruction Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985379" start="1069" end="1102" title="Texas Department of Public Safety" label="Texas Department of Public Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603662" start="1148" end="1177" title="state bureau of investigation" label="state bureau of investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="1380" end="1399" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q150688" start="1404" end="1417" title="Porfirio Díaz" label="Porfirio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="1421" end="1428" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="1497" end="1505" title="American frontier" label="Old West"/>
<link wikidata="Q619851" start="1524" end="1534" title="gunfighter" label="gunfighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460778" start="1535" end="1553" title="John Wesley Hardin" label="John Wesley Hardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330543" start="1567" end="1575" title="Sam Bass (outlaw)" label="Sam Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q219937" start="1589" end="1605" title="Bonnie and Clyde" label="Bonnie and Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q865585" start="1706" end="1717" title="Pulp magazine" label="pulp novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588097" start="1844" end="1855" title="Lone Ranger" label="Lone Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233600" start="2071" end="2097" title="Tales of the Texas Rangers" label="Tales of the Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q611672" start="2147" end="2161" title="Larry McMurtry" label="Larry McMurtry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259002" start="2181" end="2194" title="Lonesome_Dove_series" label="Lonesome Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673" start="2206" end="2218" title="Chuck Norris" label="Chuck Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q426432" start="2254" end="2274" title="Walker, Texas Ranger" label="Walker, Texas Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="2286" end="2307" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q329816" start="2319" end="2332" title="Texas Rangers (baseball)" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707926" start="2480" end="2516" title="Texas Ranger Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Texas Ranger Hall of Fame and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="2520" end="2531" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315810" start="2788" end="2801" title="Mexican Texas" label="Mexican Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="2816" end="2843" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938361" start="3080" end="3105" title="Robert McAlpin Williamson" label="Robert McAlpin Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="3234" end="3250" title="Texas Revolution" label="Texas Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="3275" end="3292" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q456633" start="3318" end="3335" title="Mirabeau B. Lamar" label="Mirabeau B. Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="3425" end="3433" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="3442" end="3450" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170054" start="3525" end="3542" title="Cordova Rebellion" label="Cordova Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872443" start="3596" end="3618" title="Battle of Stone Houses" label="Battle of Stone Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="3693" end="3704" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187072" start="3901" end="3920" title="Texas annexation" label="annexation of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="3950" end="3970" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4121" end="4146" title="Guerrilla warfare#Counter-guerrilla warfare" label="counter-guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628057" start="4230" end="4249" title="Battle of Monterrey" label="Battle of Monterrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226524" start="4298" end="4331" title="John Coffee Hays" label="John Coffee &amp;quot;Jack&amp;quot; Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008915" start="4333" end="4346" title="Ben McCulloch" label="Ben McCulloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003891" start="4348" end="4363" title="Bigfoot Wallace" label="Bigfoot Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411619" start="4368" end="4390" title="Samuel Hamilton Walker" label="Samuel Hamilton Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568734" start="4456" end="4477" title="William Jenkins Worth" label="William Jenkins Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q65041676" start="4678" end="4726" title="First Regiment of Texas Mounted Rifle Volunteers" label="First Regiment of Texas Mounted Rifle Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256528" start="4852" end="4860" title="Rip Ford" label="Rip Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q354759" start="4886" end="4900" title="Winfield Scott" label="Winfield Scott"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4937" end="4960" title="Mexican–American War#Anti-guerrilla campaign" label="Anti-guerrilla campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663900" start="5048" end="5055" title="alcalde" label="alcalde"/>
<link wikidata="Q880359" start="5576" end="5598" title="Hardin Richard Runnels" label="Hardin Richard Runnels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256528" start="5678" end="5710" title="John Salmon Ford" label="John Salmon &amp;quot;Rip&amp;quot; Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871573" start="5955" end="5982" title="Battle of Little Robe Creek" label="Battle of Little Robe Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915954" start="6000" end="6012" title="Juan Cortina" label="Juan Cortina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872185" start="6020" end="6045" title="Battle of Rio Grande City" label="Battle of Rio Grande City"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="6753" end="6771" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="6852" end="6863" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6878" end="6887" title="Secede#Confederate States of America" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704015" start="6999" end="7025" title="Terry&amp;#x27;s Texas Rangers" label="Terry&amp;#x27;s Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="7043" end="7057" title="Reconstruction era of the United States" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708086" start="7134" end="7152" title="Texas State Police" label="Texas State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196633" start="7181" end="7201" title="Texas Special Police" label="Texas Special Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q880265" start="7315" end="7327" title="Richard Coke" label="Richard Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653964" start="7342" end="7353" title="Texas Legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q254508" start="7519" end="7529" title="outlaw" label="desperados"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330543" start="7559" end="7567" title="Sam Bass (outlaw)" label="Sam Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460778" start="7583" end="7601" title="John Wesley Hardin" label="John Wesley Hardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783561" start="7629" end="7645" title="Mason County War" label="Mason County War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5904977" start="7651" end="7658" title="Horrell Brothers" label="Horrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15453212" start="7659" end="7666" title="John Higgins (gunman)" label="Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q117100" start="7728" end="7733" title="Kiowa" label="Kiowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="7738" end="7744" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413801" start="8125" end="8140" title="Salinero Revolt" label="Salinero Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509524" start="8270" end="8288" title="Leander H. McNelly" label="Leander H. McNelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752350" start="8399" end="8416" title="summary execution" label="summary execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="8445" end="8452" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="8524" end="8543" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q628004" start="8548" end="8557" title="President of Mexico" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q150688" start="8558" end="8571" title="Porfirio Díaz" label="Porfirio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="8655" end="8673" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q30605422" start="9146" end="9175" title="Porvenir Massacre (1918)" label="the January 28, 1918 massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q85794104" start="9285" end="9293" title="Porvenir, Texas" label="Porvenir"/>
<link wikidata="Q113962" start="9335" end="9350" title="Presidio County, Texas" label="Presidio County"/>
<link wikidata="Q42915859" start="9453" end="9466" title="Canales investigation" label="investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41591801" start="9494" end="9512" title="José Tomás Canales" label="José Tomás Canales"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="9873" end="9889" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q880965" start="10228" end="10241" title="Ross S. Sterling" label="Ross Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q449664" start="10289" end="10326" title="Miriam A. Ferguson" label="Miriam Amanda &amp;quot;Ma&amp;quot; Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3788793" start="10604" end="10624" title="Texas Highway Patrol" label="Texas Highway Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985379" start="10655" end="10688" title="Texas Department of Public Safety" label="Texas Department of Public Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q41591801" start="11462" end="11480" title="José Tomás Canales" label="José Tomás Canales"/>
<link wikidata="Q51693" start="11510" end="11528" title="Brownsville, Texas" label="Brownsville, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30605422" start="12600" end="12608" title="Porvenir massacre (1918)" label="Porvenir"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="15028" end="15039" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q187954" start="15296" end="15312" title="US Border Patrol" label="US Border Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256528" start="15583" end="15608" title="John Salmon Ford" label="John &amp;quot;Rip&amp;quot; Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460778" start="16461" end="16479" title="John Wesley Hardin" label="John Wesley Hardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330543" start="16499" end="16507" title="Sam Bass (outlaw)" label="Sam Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605838" start="16552" end="16566" title="Billy Thompson (gunman)" label="Billy Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q335175" start="16662" end="16691" title="Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="Royal Canadian Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q262457" start="16903" end="16908" title="Métis" label="Métis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17265" end="17274" title="Apocrypha#Non-religious use" label="apocrypha"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="17415" end="17421" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010062" start="17453" end="17476" title="Fitzsimmons-Maher Prizefight" label="heavyweight prize fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175616" start="17485" end="17495" title="Peter Maher (boxer)" label="Pete Maher"/>
<link wikidata="Q472506" start="17500" end="17515" title="Bob Fitzsimmons" label="Bob Fitzsimmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344408" start="17612" end="17620" title="Roy Bean" label="Roy Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217298" start="17624" end="17631" title="Langtry, Texas" label="Langtry"/>
<link wikidata="Q132270902" start="18277" end="18294" title="Woodford H. Mabry" label="Woodford H. Mabry"/>
<link wikidata="Q704265" start="18396" end="18409" title="Bat Masterson" label="Bat Masterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="18648" end="18655" title="Mexico" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="18668" end="18678" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q613569" start="18772" end="18789" title="Dallas Love Field" label="Dallas Love Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q96397455" start="18810" end="18830" title="One Riot, One Ranger" label="One Riot, One Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q104853251" start="19012" end="19025" title="Cult of Glory" label="Cult of Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994541" start="19247" end="19276" title="White Citizens&amp;#x27; Councils" label="White Citizens&amp;#x27; Councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153125" start="19311" end="19329" title="School integration in the United States" label="school integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="19342" end="19369" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460778" start="19657" end="19675" title="John Wesley Hardin" label="John Wesley Hardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330543" start="19689" end="19697" title="Sam Bass (outlaw)" label="Sam Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q219937" start="19703" end="19719" title="Bonnie and Clyde" label="Bonnie and Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q339249" start="19811" end="19821" title="stagecoach" label="stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q128334" start="20388" end="20398" title="Round Rock, Texas" label="Round Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q112686" start="20443" end="20460" title="Williamson County, Texas" label="Williamson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q109170" start="21516" end="21528" title="Brown County, Texas" label="Brown County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220652" start="21556" end="21578" title="John Barclay Armstrong" label="John Barclay Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="21806" end="21813" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="21823" end="21830" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q486306" start="21858" end="21867" title="Pensacola, Florida" label="Pensacola"/>
<link wikidata="Q728530" start="22408" end="22416" title="Jim Hogg" label="Jim Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="22473" end="22480" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="22790" end="22809" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q150688" start="22814" end="22827" title="Porfirio Díaz" label="Porfirio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q26590" start="22867" end="22880" title="Ciudad Juárez" label="Ciudad Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q503224" start="23177" end="23205" title="United States Secret Service" label="United States Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q934866" start="23217" end="23239" title="United States Marshals Service" label="United States Marshals"/>
<link wikidata="Q458036" start="23280" end="23305" title="Frederick Russell Burnham" label="Frederick Russell Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181717" start="23396" end="23413" title="John Hays Hammond" label="John Hays Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226524" start="23440" end="23456" title="John Coffee Hays" label="John Coffee Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="23544" end="23559" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810098" start="23714" end="23725" title="Protector Palm Pistol" label="palm pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854630" start="23943" end="23953" title="Bandit War" label="Bandit War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615472" start="23993" end="24003" title="Border War (1910–19)" label="Border War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428692" start="24404" end="24416" title="Carrancistas" label="Carrancistas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="24715" end="24733" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q887077" start="24872" end="24889" title="James E. Ferguson" label="James E. Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487077" start="24916" end="24927" title="Frank Hamer" label="Frank Hamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635212" start="25149" end="25160" title="Barrow gang" label="Barrow gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819530" start="25230" end="25249" title="Eastham Unit" label="Eastham Prison Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q548007" start="25411" end="25420" title="car theft" label="car theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="25610" end="25619" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q369211" start="25668" end="25684" title="Bienville Parish, Louisiana" label="Bienville Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725841" start="25784" end="25797" title="Henry Methvin" label="Henry Methvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80517" start="25940" end="25950" title="Shreveport, Louisiana" label="Shreveport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920752" start="26041" end="26049" title="Gibsland, Louisiana" label="Gibsland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26054" end="26060" title="Sailes, Louisiana" label="Sailes"/>
<link wikidata="Q219937" start="26144" end="26168" title="Henderson Jordan (Louisiana sheriff)" label="Sheriff Henderson Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693301" start="26270" end="26280" title="Ted Hinton" label="Ted Hinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q174583" start="26813" end="26819" title="bullet" label="rounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q51698" start="27057" end="27064" title="McAllen, Texas" label="McAllen"/>
<link wikidata="Q26519" start="27341" end="27355" title="Hidalgo County, Texas" label="Hidalgo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q178844" start="27909" end="27915" title="Felony" label="felons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425563" start="28156" end="28177" title="criminal intelligence" label="criminal intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="28206" end="28221" title="organized crime" label="organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="29911" end="29918" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q49274" start="29955" end="29962" title="Garland, Texas" label="Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q49273" start="29999" end="30006" title="Lubbock, Texas" label="Lubbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q976553" start="30043" end="30050" title="Weslaco, Texas" label="Weslaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="30087" end="30094" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="30131" end="30135" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="30412" end="30418" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401609" start="31891" end="31898" title="vaquero" label="vaquero"/>
<link wikidata="Q178521" start="31915" end="31921" title="cowboy" label="cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q326735" start="32095" end="32103" title="sombrero" label="sombrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138175" start="32125" end="32135" title="cowboy hat" label="cowboy hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475429" start="32297" end="32304" title="holster" label="holster"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="32740" end="32755" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730" start="33126" end="33145" title="Mexican peso" label="Mexican silver coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19000" start="33216" end="33230" title="Flag of Texas" label="Lone Star flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q278032" start="34443" end="34458" title="Arizona Rangers" label="Arizona Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q56273744" start="34461" end="34477" title="Colorado Rangers" label="Colorado Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q65119127" start="34480" end="34502" title="La Matanza (1910–1920)" label="La Matanza (1910–1920)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625131" start="34505" end="34546" title="List of law enforcement agencies in Texas" label="List of law enforcement agencies in Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010212" start="34549" end="34574" title="New Mexico Mounted Patrol" label="New Mexico Mounted Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q89274951" start="36411" end="36433" title="Monica Muñoz Martinez" label="Martinez, Monica Muñoz"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37207" end="37270" title="Cult of Glory: The Bold and Brutal History of the Texas Rangers" label="Cult of Glory: The Bold and Brutal History of the Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347189" start="37303" end="37318" title="Robert M. Utley" label="Utley, Robert M"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519353" start="38219" end="38236" title="Handbook of Texas" label="Handbook of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895978" start="38319" end="38342" title="Portal to Texas History" label="Portal to Texas History"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385005" wikidata="Q6139952" url="?curid=385005" title="James Montgomery Boice">
<text>James Montgomery Boice (July 7, 1938 – June 15, 2000) was an American Reformed Christian theologian, Bible teacher, author, and speaker known for his writing on the authority of Scripture and the defense of Biblical inerrancy. He was also the Senior Minister of Tenth Presbyterian Church in Philadelphia from 1968 until his death.

Boice also served as Chairman of the International Council on Biblical Inerrancy for over ten years and was a founding member of the Alliance of Confessing Evangelicals.

==Biography==
Born on July 7, 1938, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, James Montgomery Boice was a Bible teacher, author, and spokesman in the United States and around the world on the topics of Scriptural authority and inerrancy. He was also the pastor of Philadelphia&#x27;s Tenth Presbyterian Church from 1968 to 2000.

Under Boice&#x27;s leadership and teaching of Christian beliefs, Tenth Presbyterian Church came to be seen as a model for ministry in America&#x27;s northeastern inner cities, offering a range of classes, fellowship groups, and specialised outreach ministries to the physically sick, women in crisis, and the homeless. In 1983, he founded City Center Academy (now The City School), a college-preparatory Christian school primarily serving minority residents of the church&#x27;s neighborhood.

Boice was active in a number of initiatives beyond Tenth Street Presbyterian. He served as Chairman of the International Council on Biblical Inerrancy (ICBI) from its founding in 1977 until the completion of its work in 1988. ICBI produced three creedal documents, published books, conducted &quot;Authority of Scripture&quot; seminars, and sponsored the large lay &quot;Congress on the Bible I,&quot; which met in Washington, D.C., in September 1987. Boice also served on the Board of Bible Study Fellowship. He helped develop the Alliance of Confessing Evangelicals, being &quot;&quot;formed in 1994 out of what was known as Evangelical Ministries when James Boice, then senior pastor of Tenth Presbyterian Church in Philadelphia and teacher on The Bible Study Hour radio program, called together a group of like-minded pastors and theologians from a variety of denominations to unite in a common cause to help revive a passion &quot;for the truth of the Gospel&quot; within the church.&quot;&quot;

Over his lifetime, Boice journeyed to more than thirty countries and teaching from the Bible in England, France, Switzerland, Canada, Japan, Australia, Guatemala, Korea and Saudi Arabia. While pursuing his doctoral studies in Switzerland, he started a Bible study group that eventually developed into the Basel Christian Fellowship.

Boice received a diploma from The Stony Brook School (1956), an A.B. from Harvard University (1960), a B.D. from Princeton Theological Seminary (1963), a Th.D from the University of Basel in Switzerland (1966), and a D.D., (honorary) from the Theological Seminary of the Reformed Episcopal Church (1982).

He died of liver cancer in Philadelphia, on June 15, 2000. Boice was married to Linda Ann Boice (born McNamara), on June 9, 1962, in Montclair, New Jersey. They had three daughters together, Elizabeth, Heather, and Jennifer Boice.

==Writings==
Boice was a prolific author, having published over 50 different works, including a collection of hymns. Some of his popular books include:

* &quot;Foundations of the Christian Faith&quot; ()
* &quot;The Doctrines of Grace: Rediscovering the Essentials of Evangelicalism&quot; ()
* &quot;Christ&#x27;s Call to Discipleship&quot; ()
* &quot;Renewing Your Mind in a Mindless World: Learning to Think and Act Biblically&quot; ()
* &quot;Parables of Jesus&quot; ()
* &quot;What Ever Happened to the Gospel of Grace?&quot; ()
* &quot;Dealing With Bible Problems: Alleged Errors and Contradictions in the Bible&quot; ()
* &quot;Ordinary Men Called by God: A Study of Abraham, Moses, and David&quot; ()

===Expositional commentaries===
Boice also published many volumes of commentaries on books of the Bible, which each were edited from his spoken teachings:

* &quot;Genesis&quot; (3 volumes; , , )
* &quot;Joshua&quot; ()
* &quot;Nehemiah&quot; ()
* &quot;Psalms&quot; (3 volumes; , , )
* &quot;Daniel&quot; ()
* &quot;The Minor Prophets&quot; (2 volumes; , )
* &quot;Gospel of Matthew&quot; (2 volumes; , )
* &quot;The Sermon on the Mount&quot; ()
* &quot;The Gospel of John&quot; (5 volumes; , , , , )
* &quot;Acts&quot; ()
* &quot;Romans&quot; (4 volumes; , , , )
* &quot;Ephesians&quot; ()
* &quot;Philippians&quot; ()
* &quot;The Epistles of John&quot; ()

Boice is also known for contributing his commentary of the Epistle of Galatians to &quot;The Expositor&#x27;s Bible Commentary&quot; ()

==See also==
*Alliance of Confessing Evangelicals

==References==
==External links==
* Boice Center at Tenth Presbyterian Church
* The Bible Study Hour on OnePlace
* The Bible Study Hour</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6139952" start="0" end="22" title="James Montgomery Boice" label="James Montgomery Boice"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="70" end="78" title="Calvinism" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="89" end="99" title="theology" label="theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q158857" start="207" end="225" title="Biblical inerrancy" label="Biblical inerrancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152002" start="243" end="258" title="pastor" label="Senior Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700879" start="262" end="287" title="Tenth Presbyterian Church" label="Tenth Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="291" end="303" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732440" start="465" end="500" title="Alliance of Confessing Evangelicals" label="Alliance of Confessing Evangelicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="542" end="566" title="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania" label="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139952" start="1970" end="1981" title="James Boice" label="James Boice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700879" start="2005" end="2030" title="Tenth Presbyterian Church" label="Tenth Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q217577" start="2668" end="2675" title="diploma" label="diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766655" start="2681" end="2703" title="The Stony Brook School" label="The Stony Brook School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="2715" end="2719" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="A.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="2725" end="2743" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="2754" end="2758" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="B.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q909696" start="2764" end="2794" title="Princeton Theological Seminary" label="Princeton Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233889" start="2805" end="2809" title="Th.D" label="Th.D"/>
<link wikidata="Q372608" start="2819" end="2838" title="University of Basel" label="University of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="2842" end="2853" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984623" start="2868" end="2872" title="Doctor of Divinity" label="D.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q828393" start="2922" end="2947" title="Reformed Episcopal Church" label="Reformed Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2984" end="2996" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q678437" start="3090" end="3111" title="Montclair, New Jersey" label="Montclair, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q484692" start="3299" end="3303" title="hymn" label="hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="3997" end="4002" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732440" start="4710" end="4745" title="Alliance of Confessing Evangelicals" label="Alliance of Confessing Evangelicals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385008" wikidata="Q571035" url="?curid=385008" title="Beautiful nuthatch">
<text>The beautiful nuthatch (Sitta formosa) is a bird species in the family Sittidae, collectively known as nuthatches. It is a large nuthatch, measuring in length, that is not sexually dimorphic. Its coloration and markings are dramatic, the upper parts being black and azure, streaked with white and pale blue on the head and lined with the same colors on the wing feathers. The are orange, and the and are ochre. An irregular, dark highlights its eye. &quot;S. formosa&quot;″s ecology is not fully described, but it is known to feed on small insects and larvae found on the trunks and epiphyte-covered branches of trees in its range. Reproduction takes place from April to May; the nest is placed in the hole of an oak, rhododendron, or other large tree. The nest is made of plant material and fur in which the bird typically lays four to six eggs.

Although the species is found in most of the countries making up the mainland of Southeast Asia, it appears to be rare throughout its range, its population being highly localized where it is found. The bird nests predominantly in montane forest at an altitudinal range from up to nearly , with some seasonal height adjustment, down to around in winter. Its apparent localization within its range makes rigorous estimates of its population difficult, but its habitat is threatened by deforestation and the species appears to be in decline. It has been classified as vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.

== Taxonomy ==

The nuthatches constitute a genus – &quot;Sitta&quot; – of small passerine birds in the family Sittidae, typified by short, compressed wings and short, square 12-feathered , a compact body, longish pointed , strong toes with long claws, and behaviorally, by their unique head-first manner of descending tree trunks. Most nuthatches have gray or bluish and a black eyestripe. &quot;Sitta&quot; is derived from the Ancient Greek name for nuthatches, , &quot;sittē&quot;. &quot;Nuthatch&quot;, first recorded in 1350, is derived from &quot;nut&quot; and a word probably related to &quot;hack&quot;, since these birds hack at nuts they have wedged into crevices. The genus may be further divided into seven subgenera, of which the beautiful nuthatch is placed alone in &quot;Callisitta&quot; (Bonaparte, 1850), and the species is therefore sometimes called &quot;Callisitta Formosa&quot;.

The beautiful nuthatch was first described in 1843 by British zoologist Edward Blyth, from a specimen he examined in Darjeeling. Its kinship with other members of the genus is unclear. The bright blue color of its invites a comparison to the blue nuthatch (&quot;S. azurea&quot;), or other blue-tinted nuthatch species such as the velvet-fronted nuthatch (&quot;S. frontalis&quot;), yellow-billed nuthatch (&quot;S. solangiae&quot;) and the sulphur-billed nuthatch (&quot;S. oenochlamys&quot;), but its distribution being focused in the eastern Himalayas, and the uniqueness of its plumage, argues against the assumption. According to the International Ornithological Congress and ornithologist Alan P. Peterson, no subspecies have been identified.
In 2014, Eric Pasquet, &quot;et al.&quot; published a phylogeny based on examination of nuclear and mitochondrial DNA of 21 nuthatch species. The position of the beautiful nuthatch within the genus was not established with certainty, having a far lower statistical association than others in the model. Nevertheless, under the findings the species appears closest evolutionarily to three clades of nuthatches: two nuthatches that prefer rocky environments, the western rock nuthatch (&quot;S. neumayer&quot;) and the eastern rock nuthatch (&quot;S. tephronota&quot;); species in the &quot;europaea&quot; group, including the Eurasian nuthatch (&quot;S. europaea&quot;), Siberian nuthatch (&quot;S. arctica&quot;), chestnut-vented nuthatch (&quot;S. nagaensis&quot;), Kashmir nuthatch (&quot;S. cashmirensis&quot;), Indian nuthatch (&quot;S. castanea&quot;), chestnut-bellied nuthatch (&quot;S. cinnamoventris&quot;) and the Burmese nuthatch (&quot;S. neglecta&quot;); as well as the white-tailed nuthatch (&quot;S. himalayensis&quot;), and therefore, the white-browed nuthatch (&quot;S. victoriae&quot;). These close relatives are generally all species that plaster the entrance to their nest with mud.

== Description ==
Described by Erik Matthysen in his 1998 treatise &quot;The Nuthatches&quot; as a bird that &quot;deserves its name&quot;, the beautiful nuthatch has highly distinctive plumage. Its upperparts are black and azure, and it is orange on the underparts. The crown and upper mantle are black, streaked with pale blue and white. The scapulars, back and rump are an azure blue. The greater and medium coverts are black, finely edged with white, forming two narrow ; the flight feathers are black and more or less lined with pale blue. The eyebrow and throat are white and buff and the eye is highlighted by an irregular, dark eyestripe. Under the wing, the white base of the contrasts sharply with gray ; a distinguishing trait when viewing the bird in flight. The iris is reddish-brown or dark brown and the bill is black but for a whitish tinge at the base of the . The lower parts are generally orange-cinnamon. The legs and feet are yellowish-brown, olive-brown or greenish-brown.

There is no sexual dimorphism. Juveniles are very similar to adults, but the streaks on the mantle are blue rather than white. The primary coverts of juveniles are also more closely lined with blue, and the underparts are paler overall, especially on the chest. Adults perform a complete moult after the breeding season, whereas juveniles only have a partial moult, in which they replace a variable number of rectrices.

The bird is large as compared with other members of the genus &quot;Sitta&quot;, measuring in length. The folded wing measures in males and in females. The tail is in males and in females. The measures between and and the tarsus is in length. The weight is not known.

== Ecology and behavior ==
=== Voice ===
&quot;S. formosa&quot;&#x27;s vocalizations are not well known, but its is described as &quot;low and sweet in tone&quot;. Its call is typical of nuthatches, and similar to that of the Eurasian nuthatch (&quot;Sitta europaea&quot;), but less strident.

=== Feeding ===
The beautiful nuthatch alone, in pairs or in small groups of four to five individuals, though an unusual gathering of 21 individuals was observed in one tree in Bhutan. It often takes part in mixed-species foraging flocks, and has been notably observed feeding with the Himalayan cutia (&quot;Cutia nipalensis&quot;) and the velvet-fronted nuthatch (&quot;Sitta frontalis&quot;) – two other species that prospect for food on tree trunks. Other foraging flock partners surveyed are the long-tailed broadbill (&quot;Psarisomus dalhousiae&quot;), the lesser racket-tailed drongo (&quot;Dicrurus remifer&quot;), the maroon oriole (&quot;Oriolus traillii&quot;) and the white-browed scimitar babbler (&quot;Pomatorhinus schisticeps&quot;).

&quot;S. formosa&quot; forages from about the middle to the apex of tall trees, exploring the trunks and epiphyte-covered branches (lichens, mosses, orchids), for small insects, but also prospect on outermost branches. In Laos, individuals were observed feeding while perched on the larger branches of a Fokienia evergreen (&quot;Fokienia hodginsii&quot;) – a tree frequently enveloped in epiphytes. The bird has been described at times as the most timid of nuthatches. It prospects in a manner typical of many others in its genus, sometimes hanging upside down for an extended time surveying its surroundings. As compared with other nuthatch, the species has been described as working &quot;unhurriedly&quot;, as they peck at trunks, lichen and other epiphytes, searching for prey. Stomach contents of collected Chinese specimens consisted of beetles and insect larvae.

=== Breeding ===
Reproduction in the species has not been well studied. In the northeast of India, the breeding season is from April to May. The nest is placed off the ground, between two and eight meters high, and is often built in a hole of a (living or dead) oak or rhododendron tree, or sometimes in other large trees. Nests are constructed using leaves and bark, held together with hair, often that of bamboo rats. If the opening of the hole is too large, it is cemented with mud to reduce the entrance size. The bird usually lays four to six white eggs, speckled with red spots, that measure . Beautiful nuthatch sexes are reported to share equally in nest building and duties.

== Distribution and habitat ==
This species lives in the eastern Himalayas, and has been reported in several scattered sites across Southeast Asia, in the northwest of Vietnam and in central Laos. Its range stretches west into the northeast of India, where it was reported seen near Darjeeling in West Bengal, but not since 1933. It is present in Bhutan, and in the Indian states of Sikkim (in the town of Rangpo), in Meghalaya (in the Khasi Hills), in Assam (in the Dima Hasao district), in the south of Arunachal Pradesh, and in Manipur and Nagaland. Its presence in Bangladesh is uncertain but it is found further east in the north of Burma, in Chin State (in the Chin Hills–Arakan Yoma montane forests), the Sagaing Region, in Kachin State and in Shan State. Data on the bird from Laos is erratic, but there are reports of sightings north of Phou Kobo, and of large numbers of the species wintering in the center of the country in the pristine wilderness of Nakai–Nam Theun. There are also reports of sightings in the southeast of China’s Yunnan province, in northern Thailand and in northwestern Vietnam. Its residential and breeding range is estimated to cover .

Beautiful nuthatches typically inhabit both the interior and outskirts of evergreen or semi-evergreen montane forest, though in northern Burma they have been recorded nesting in trees scattered across open areas. In central Laos, the bird was found associated with the Fokienia evergreen. They usually live at altitudes of and up to nearly during the warm seasons but may make seasonal vertical migration. In India, for example, the species spends the summer between and , but was observed during winter at just in Sikkim and in northeastern Arunachal Pradesh at and between and . In Burma, they were observed at between and , in China between and , in Laos between and and in Thailand, the only observation of the species was at a height of .

== Threats and protection==
The beautiful nuthatch has always been rare and very localized throughout its distribution, perhaps due to very specific ecological requirements, though this has been questioned as not in keeping with the diversity of habitats in which &quot;S. formosa&quot; has been observed. Although the species is less threatened at high elevations, its habitat has been reduced by deforestation, due to logging and forest clearance to make way for human habitation. In the center of Laos and northern Vietnam, &quot;Fokienia&quot; trees, which are a known beautiful nuthatch foraging source and nesting site, are harvested for their high commercial value. Research conducted in 2001 indicated a population comprising 2,500 to 10,000 adults, and between 3,500 and 15,000 total individuals; these numbers are in decline. The species has been classified as vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

== Footnotes ==



== Citations ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
== External links ==
* Oriental Bird Images: &quot;Beautiful Nuthatch&quot; , selected images</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q571035" start="4" end="22" title="Beautiful nuthatch" label="beautiful nuthatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="49" end="56" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="64" end="70" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q858577" start="71" end="79" title="Sittidae" label="Sittidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q858577" start="103" end="111" title="nuthatch" label="nuthatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="172" end="190" title="sexual dimorphism" label="sexually dimorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q373058" start="266" end="271" title="Azure (color)" label="azure"/>
<link wikidata="Q392655" start="357" end="370" title="Flight feather" label="wing feathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q194191" start="404" end="409" title="ochre" label="ochre"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="552" end="557" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q188238" start="583" end="591" title="epiphyte" label="epiphyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="713" end="716" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q189393" start="718" end="730" title="rhododendron" label="rhododendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="929" end="943" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="1078" end="1092" title="montane forest" label="montane forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="1331" end="1344" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q278113" start="1413" end="1423" title="Vulnerable species" label="vulnerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="1431" end="1477" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="1524" end="1529" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25341" start="1561" end="1570" title="passerine" label="passerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="1584" end="1590" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q858577" start="1591" end="1599" title="Sittidae" label="Sittidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1909" end="1922" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238261" start="2199" end="2208" title="subgenera" label="subgenera"/>
<link wikidata="Q358754" start="2454" end="2466" title="Edward Blyth" label="Edward Blyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q169997" start="2499" end="2509" title="Darjeeling" label="Darjeeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q73459" start="2624" end="2637" title="blue nuthatch" label="blue nuthatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q73714" start="2713" end="2736" title="velvet-fronted nuthatch" label="velvet-fronted nuthatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q944579" start="2765" end="2787" title="yellow-billed nuthatch" label="yellow-billed nuthatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q903933" start="2823" end="2846" title="sulphur-billed nuthatch" label="sulphur-billed nuthatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325616" start="3021" end="3058" title="International Ornithological Congress" label="International Ornithological Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="3185" end="3194" title="phylogeny" label="phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q769863" start="3219" end="3226" title="Nuclear DNA" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="3231" end="3244" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="3519" end="3524" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q749701" start="3592" end="3613" title="western rock nuthatch" label="western rock nuthatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q928415" start="3648" end="3669" title="eastern rock nuthatch" label="eastern rock nuthatch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3720" end="3728" title="Eurasian nuthatch#Subspecies" label="europaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q156767" start="3756" end="3773" title="Eurasian nuthatch" label="Eurasian nuthatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11949935" start="3801" end="3818" title="Siberian nuthatch" label="Siberian nuthatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q902434" start="3845" end="3869" title="chestnut-vented nuthatch" label="chestnut-vented nuthatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q943570" start="3898" end="3914" title="Kashmir nuthatch" label="Kashmir nuthatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311458" start="3946" end="3961" title="Indian nuthatch" label="Indian nuthatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q995599" start="3989" end="4014" title="chestnut-bellied nuthatch" label="chestnut-bellied nuthatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14555748" start="4055" end="4071" title="Burmese nuthatch" label="Burmese nuthatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q942771" start="4114" end="4135" title="white-tailed nuthatch" label="white-tailed nuthatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q534380" start="4186" end="4207" title="white-browed nuthatch" label="white-browed nuthatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q373058" start="4559" end="4564" title="Azure (color)" label="azure"/>
<link wikidata="Q136352" start="4679" end="4688" title="Bird anatomy" label="scapulars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4699" end="4703" title="Rump (animal)#Birds" label="rump"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4746" end="4753" title="Covert feather#Wing coverts" label="coverts"/>
<link wikidata="Q392655" start="4815" end="4829" title="flight feather" label="flight feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q331315" start="4884" end="4891" title="Supercilium" label="eyebrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085487" start="4917" end="4921" title="Buff (colour)" label="buff"/>
<link wikidata="Q178748" start="5110" end="5114" title="Iris (anatomy)" label="iris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5154" end="5158" title="Bird anatomy#Beak" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="5343" end="5360" title="sexual dimorphism" label="sexual dimorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q381084" start="5619" end="5624" title="Moulting" label="moult"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5740" end="5749" title="Flight feather#Rectrices" label="rectrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753079" start="5858" end="5869" title="Wing chord (biology)" label="folded wing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5974" end="5980" title="Bird measurement#Tarsus" label="tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126556" start="6092" end="6105" title="Bird vocalization" label="vocalizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115905" start="6523" end="6551" title="mixed-species foraging flock" label="mixed-species foraging flock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092863" start="6601" end="6616" title="Himalayan cutia" label="Himalayan cutia"/>
<link wikidata="Q282943" start="6816" end="6837" title="long-tailed broadbill" label="long-tailed broadbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590038" start="6879" end="6906" title="lesser racket-tailed drongo" label="lesser racket-tailed drongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719196" start="6943" end="6956" title="maroon oriole" label="maroon oriole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091417" start="6996" end="7025" title="white-browed scimitar babbler" label="white-browed scimitar babbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q193472" start="7161" end="7167" title="Trunk (botany)" label="trunks"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="7199" end="7205" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="7208" end="7212" title="moss" label="moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="7216" end="7222" title="Orchidaceae" label="orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="7236" end="7242" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="7911" end="7917" title="beetle" label="beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="7930" end="7935" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7956" end="7968" title="Bird#Breeding" label="Reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8042" end="8057" title="Seasonal breeder#Breeding season" label="breeding season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785" start="8084" end="8088" title="nest" label="nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="8201" end="8204" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q189393" start="8208" end="8220" title="rhododendron" label="rhododendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420009" start="8346" end="8356" title="bamboo rat" label="bamboo rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="8689" end="8698" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="8756" end="8770" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169997" start="8907" end="8917" title="Darjeeling" label="Darjeeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="8921" end="8932" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505" start="9007" end="9013" title="Sikkim" label="Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726240" start="9030" end="9036" title="Rangpo" label="Rangpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195" start="9042" end="9051" title="Meghalaya" label="Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182012" start="9060" end="9071" title="Khasi Hills" label="Khasi Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q42774" start="9091" end="9110" title="Dima Hasao district" label="Dima Hasao district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162" start="9129" end="9146" title="Arunachal Pradesh" label="Arunachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="9155" end="9162" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599" start="9167" end="9175" title="Nagaland" label="Nagaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q46910" start="9272" end="9282" title="Chin State" label="Chin State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099481" start="9291" end="9329" title="Chin Hills–Arakan Yoma montane forests" label="Chin Hills–Arakan Yoma montane forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q847289" start="9336" end="9350" title="Sagaing Region" label="Sagaing Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q140646" start="9355" end="9367" title="Kachin State" label="Kachin State"/>
<link wikidata="Q456847" start="9375" end="9385" title="Shan State" label="Shan State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6960168" start="9586" end="9601" title="Nakai–Nam Theun" label="Nakai–Nam Theun"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="9667" end="9673" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="9868" end="9877" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q738961" start="9881" end="9895" title="semi-deciduous" label="semi-evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="9896" end="9910" title="montane forest" label="montane forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q13060340" start="10063" end="10071" title="Fokienia" label="Fokienia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="10688" end="10698" title="Ecology" label="ecological"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="10937" end="10950" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="10959" end="10966" title="logging" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q13060340" start="11072" end="11080" title="Fokienia" label="Fokienia"/>
<link wikidata="Q278113" start="11410" end="11420" title="Vulnerable species" label="vulnerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="11428" end="11474" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385012" wikidata="Q7935064" url="?curid=385012" title="Virtual address (disambiguation)">
<text>Virtual address refers to an address identifying a virtual, i.e. non-physical, entity. For example:
* Virtual address space in computing
* Virtual address translation to physical address in computing
* Virtual postal address, see virtual mailbox or commercial mail receiving agency
* Virtual business address, see Virtual office

==See also==
* Virtual (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7935064" start="0" end="15" title="Virtual address (disambiguation)" label="Virtual address"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451721" start="102" end="123" title="Virtual address space" label="Virtual address space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="147" end="166" title="CPU_cache#Address_translation" label="address translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q96414046" start="230" end="245" title="virtual mailbox" label="virtual mailbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152571" start="249" end="281" title="commercial mail receiving agency" label="commercial mail receiving agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021684" start="314" end="328" title="Virtual office" label="Virtual office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436572" start="345" end="369" title="Virtual (disambiguation)" label="Virtual (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385022" wikidata="Q358463" url="?curid=385022" title="Poiana">
<text>Poiana may refer to:
==Geography==
=== Italy ===
* Pojana Maggiore (Poiana Maggiore), a town in the province of Vicenza, Veneto, Italy
* Villa Pojana, or Poiana, a patrician villa in Pojana Maggiore, a UNESCO World Heritage site

===Moldova===
*Poiana, Șoldănești, a commune in Șoldănești district
*Poiana, a village in Hincăuți Commune, Edineț district
*Poiana, a village in Boghenii Noi Commune, Ungheni district

===Romania===
====Inhabited places====

* Poiana, Dâmbovița, a commune in Dâmbovița County
* Poiana, Galați, a commune in Galați County
*Poiana, a village in Bistra, Alba
*Poiana, a village in Bucium, Alba
*Poiana, a village in Sohodol Commune, Alba County
*Poiana, a village in Vârfurile Commune, Arad County
*Poiana, a village in Colonești, Bacău
*Poiana, a village in Livezi, Bacău
*Poiana, a village in Mărgineni, Bacău
*Poiana, a village in Motoșeni Commune, Bacău County
*Poiana, a village in Negri, Bacău
*Poiana, a village in Criștioru de Jos Commune, Bihor County
*Poiana, a village in Tăuteu Commune, Bihor County
*Poiana, a village in Brăești, Botoșani
*Poiana, a village in Flămânzi Town, Botoșani County
*Poiana, a village in Cristinești Commune, Botoșani County
*Poiana, a village in Vorona, Botoșani
*Poiana, a village in Buchin Commune, Caraș-Severin County
*Poiana (Poiana de Arieș), a village which became a neighbourhood of Turda, Cluj County
*Poiana, a village in Ovidiu Town, Constanța County
*Poiana, a village in Turburea Commune, Gorj County
*Poiana, a village in Balșa Commune, Hunedoara County
*Poiana, a village in Ciulnița Commune, Ialomița County
*Poiana, a village in Deleni, Iași
*Poiana, a village in Schitu Duca Commune, Iași County
*Poiana, a village in Căzănești, Mehedinți
*Poiana, a village in Brusturi, Neamț
*Poiana, a village in Dulcești Commune, Neamț County
*Poiana, a village in Grințieș Commune, Neamț County
*Poiana, a village in Negrești, Neamț
*Poiana, a village in Pângărați Commune, Neamț County
*Poiana, a village in Radomirești Commune, Olt County
*Poiana, a village in Comarnic Commune, Prahova County
*Poiana, a village in Dolhasca Town, Suceava County
*Poiana, a village in Zvoriștea Commune, Suceava County
*Poiana, a village in Ciuperceni, Teleorman
*Poiana, a village in Negrești Town, Vaslui County
*Poiana, a village in Vrâncioaia Commune, Vrancea County
*Poiana, a village in Perișani Commune, Vâlcea County
* Poiana Aiudului, a village in Livezile, Alba
* Poiana Ampoiului, a village in Meteș Commune, Alba County
* Poiana Blenchii, a commune in Sălaj County
* Poiana Botizii, a village in Băiuț Commune, Maramureș County
* Poiana Brașov, a ski resort near Brașov
* Poiana Câmpina, a commune in Prahova County
* Poiana Codrului, a village in Crucișor Commune, Satu Mare County
* Poiana Copăceni, a village in Gura Vitioarei Commune, Prahova County
* Poiana Crăcăoani, a village in Crăcăoani Commune, Neamț County
* Poiana Cristei, a commune in Vrancea County
* Poiana cu Cetate, a village in Grajduri Commune, Iași County
* Poiana de Sus, a village in Țibana Commune, Iași County
* Poiana Fagului, a village in Lunca de Jos Commune, Harghita County
* Poiana Fântânii, a village in Argetoaia Commune, Dolj County
* Poiana Frății, a village in Frata Commune, Cluj County
* Poiana Galdei, a village in Galda de Jos Commune, Alba County
* Poiana Gruii, a village in Gruia, Mehedinți
* Poiana Horea, a village in Beliș Commune, Cluj County
* Poiana Humei, a village in Oniceni Commune, Neamț County
* Poiana Lacului, a commune in Argeș County
* Poiana Largului, a village in Poiana Teiului Commune, Neamț County
* Poiana lui Alexa, a village in Pușcași Commune, Vaslui County
* Poiana lui Stângă, a village in Vânătorii Mici Commune, Giurgiu County
* Poiana Lungă, a village in Cornereva Commune, Caraș-Severin County
* Poiana Măgura, a village in Sărmășag Commune, Sălaj County
* Poiana Mănăstirii, a village in Țibana Commune, Iași County
* Poiana Mărului, a village in Zăvoi Commune, Caraș-Severin County
* Poiana Mărului, a village in Ceplenița Commune, Iași County
* Poiana Mărului, a village in Mălini Commune, Suceava County
* Poiana Mare, a commune in Olt County
* Poiana Mare, a village in Bătrâni Commune, Prahova County
* Poiana Mărului, a commune in Brașov County
* Poiana Micului, a village in Mănăstirea Humorului Commune, Suceava County
* Poiana Mierlei, a village in Drajna Commune, Prahova County
* Poiana Negrii, a village in Dorna Candrenilor Commune, Suceava County
* Poiana Negustorului, a village in Blăgești, Bacău
* Poiana Onții, a village in Cristolț Commune, Sălaj County
* Poiana Pietrei, a village in Dragomirești, Vaslui
* Poiana Pletari, a village in Chiliile Commune, Buzău County
* Poiana Răchițelii, a village in Cerbăl Commune, Hunedoara County
* Poiana Sărată, a village in Oituz Commune, Bacău County
* Poiana Șcheii, a village in Șcheia, Iași
* Poiana-Seciuri, a village in Bustuchin Commune, Gorj County
* Poiana Sibiului, a commune in Sibiu County
* Poiana Stampei, a commune in Suceava County
* Poiana Stoichii, a village in Vintileasca Commune, Vrancea County
* Poiana Țapului, a village in Bușteni Town, Prahova County
* Poiana Tășad, a village in Copăcel town, Bihor County
* Poiana Teiului, a commune in Neamț County
* Poiana Trestiei, a village in Cosminele Commune, Prahova County
* Poiana Ursului, a village in Meteș Commune, Alba County
* Poiana Vadului, a commune in Alba County
* Poiana Vâlcului, a village in Mânzălești Commune, Buzău County
* Poiana Vărbilău, a village in Vărbilău Commune, Prahova County
*Poieni, Cluj, a commune in Cluj County
*Poieni, a village in Blandiana Commune, Alba County
*Poieni, a village in Bucium, Alba
*Poieni, a village in Vidra, Alba
*Poieni, a village in Parincea Commune, Bacău County
*Poieni, a village in Roșiori, Bacău
*Poieni, a village in Târgu Ocna Town, Bacău County
*Poieni, a village in Beriu Commune, Hunedoara County
*Poieni, a village in Densuș Commune, Hunedoara County
*Poieni, a village in Schitu Duca Commune, Iași County
*Poieni, a village in Piatra Șoimului Commune, Neamț County
*Poieni, a village in Pietroasa, Timiș
*Poieni-Solca, a commune in Suceava County
*Poieni-Suceava, a village in Udești Commune, Suceava County

====Mountains====
* Poiana Ruscă Mountains, a subdivision of the Romanian Carpathians

====Rivers====

* Poiana, a tributary of the Sohodol in Alba County
* Poiana, a tributary of the Mara in Maramureș County
* Poiana, a tributary of the Prut in Botoșani County
* Poiana, a tributary of the Telcișor in Bistrița-Năsăud County 
* Poiana, a tributary of the Vorona in Botoșani County
* Poiana (Someș), a tributary of the Someș in Maramureș and Sălaj Counties 
* Poiana (Topa), a tributary of the Topa in Bihor County
* Poiana Lungă, a tributary of the Dobrovăț in Iași County
* Poiana Mică, a tributary of the Rudăreasa in Vâlcea County

==Ukraine==
*, the Romanian name of Poliana, Dnistrovskyi Raion, Chernivtsi Oblast
*, the Romanian name of Bukivka, Chernivtsi Raion, Chernivtsi Oblast
*, the Romanian name of Polyana, Turiatka commune, Hlyboka Raion, Chernivtsi Raion

==Other uses==
* &quot;Poiana&quot; (genus), commonly known as oyans or African linsangs, a genus of the mammalian family Viverridae
** Central African linsang (&quot;Poiana richardsonii&quot;), a species of linsang
** West African linsang (&quot;Poiana leightoni&quot;), a species of linsang
* Poiana (brand), a brand of food in Romania owned by Kraft Foods

==See also==
*Poienești, a commune in Vaslui County, Romania
*Poienii de Jos and Poienii de Sus, villages in Buntești Commune, Bihor County
*Poienile (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q358463" start="0" end="6" title="Poiana" label="Poiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q46500" start="51" end="66" title="Pojana Maggiore" label="Pojana Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688899" start="137" end="149" title="Villa Pojana" label="Villa Pojana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991193" start="245" end="263" title="Poiana, Șoldănești" label="Poiana, Șoldănești"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858689" start="320" end="328" title="Hincăuți" label="Hincăuți"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858538" start="376" end="388" title="Boghenii Noi" label="Boghenii Noi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483885" start="458" end="475" title="Poiana, Dâmbovița" label="Poiana, Dâmbovița"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726432" start="509" end="523" title="Poiana, Galați" label="Poiana, Galați"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425212" start="574" end="586" title="Bistra, Alba" label="Bistra, Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425220" start="609" end="621" title="Bucium, Alba" label="Bucium, Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425359" start="644" end="651" title="Sohodol" label="Sohodol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5067234" start="695" end="704" title="Vârfurile" label="Vârfurile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600543" start="748" end="764" title="Colonești, Bacău" label="Colonești, Bacău"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469316" start="787" end="800" title="Livezi, Bacău" label="Livezi, Bacău"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087275" start="823" end="839" title="Mărgineni, Bacău" label="Mărgineni, Bacău"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542004" start="862" end="870" title="Motoșeni" label="Motoșeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625976" start="915" end="927" title="Negri, Bacău" label="Negri, Bacău"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425633" start="950" end="966" title="Criștioru de Jos" label="Criștioru de Jos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425738" start="1011" end="1017" title="Tăuteu" label="Tăuteu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724592" start="1062" end="1079" title="Brăești, Botoșani" label="Brăești, Botoșani"/>
<link wikidata="Q275904" start="1102" end="1110" title="Flămânzi" label="Flămânzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425830" start="1155" end="1166" title="Cristinești" label="Cristinești"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725273" start="1214" end="1230" title="Vorona, Botoșani" label="Vorona, Botoșani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064862" start="1253" end="1259" title="Buchin" label="Buchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209809" start="1359" end="1364" title="Turda" label="Turda"/>
<link wikidata="Q596043" start="1400" end="1406" title="Ovidiu" label="Ovidiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725221" start="1452" end="1460" title="Turburea" label="Turburea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054485" start="1504" end="1509" title="Balșa" label="Balșa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3793904" start="1558" end="1566" title="Ciulnița" label="Ciulnița"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113919" start="1614" end="1626" title="Deleni, Iași" label="Deleni, Iași"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113348" start="1649" end="1660" title="Schitu Duca" label="Schitu Duca"/>
<link wikidata="Q16439816" start="1704" end="1724" title="Căzănești, Mehedinți" label="Căzănești, Mehedinți"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112672" start="1747" end="1762" title="Brusturi, Neamț" label="Brusturi, Neamț"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879417" start="1785" end="1793" title="Dulcești" label="Dulcești"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066598" start="1838" end="1846" title="Grințieș" label="Grințieș"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878978" start="1891" end="1906" title="Negrești, Neamț" label="Negrești, Neamț"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113209" start="1929" end="1938" title="Pângărați" label="Pângărați"/>
<link wikidata="Q16427150" start="1983" end="1994" title="Radomirești" label="Radomirești"/>
<link wikidata="Q851037" start="2037" end="2045" title="Comarnic" label="Comarnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q276117" start="2092" end="2100" title="Dolhasca" label="Dolhasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725283" start="2144" end="2153" title="Zvoriștea" label="Zvoriștea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16427610" start="2200" end="2221" title="Ciuperceni, Teleorman" label="Ciuperceni, Teleorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q899448" start="2244" end="2252" title="Negrești" label="Negrești"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300571" start="2295" end="2305" title="Vrâncioaia" label="Vrâncioaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603579" start="2352" end="2360" title="Perișani" label="Perișani"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425290" start="2416" end="2430" title="Livezile, Alba" label="Livezile, Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425301" start="2464" end="2469" title="Meteș" label="Meteș"/>
<link wikidata="Q16427378" start="2493" end="2508" title="Poiana Blenchii" label="Poiana Blenchii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056458" start="2567" end="2572" title="Băiuț" label="Băiuț"/>
<link wikidata="Q574475" start="2601" end="2614" title="Poiana Brașov" label="Poiana Brașov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605280" start="2643" end="2657" title="Poiana Câmpina" label="Poiana Câmpina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055148" start="2719" end="2727" title="Crucișor" label="Crucișor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605142" start="2786" end="2800" title="Gura Vitioarei" label="Gura Vitioarei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066630" start="2858" end="2867" title="Crăcăoani" label="Crăcăoani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722773" start="2892" end="2906" title="Poiana Cristei" label="Poiana Cristei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068258" start="2969" end="2977" title="Grajduri" label="Grajduri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146980" start="3029" end="3035" title="Țibana" label="Țibana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058178" start="3088" end="3100" title="Lunca de Jos" label="Lunca de Jos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468510" start="3158" end="3167" title="Argetoaia" label="Argetoaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724772" start="3219" end="3224" title="Frata" label="Frata"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425261" start="3276" end="3288" title="Galda de Jos" label="Galda de Jos"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724820" start="3339" end="3355" title="Gruia, Mehedinți" label="Gruia, Mehedinți"/>
<link wikidata="Q16426147" start="3385" end="3390" title="Beliș" label="Beliș"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113611" start="3441" end="3448" title="Oniceni" label="Oniceni"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425522" start="3473" end="3487" title="Poiana Lacului" label="Poiana Lacului"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113569" start="3547" end="3561" title="Poiana Teiului" label="Poiana Teiului"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725065" start="3617" end="3624" title="Pușcași" label="Pușcași"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118466" start="3682" end="3696" title="Vânătorii Mici" label="Vânătorii Mici"/>
<link wikidata="Q16426003" start="3750" end="3759" title="Cornereva" label="Cornereva"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152399" start="3820" end="3828" title="Sărmășag" label="Sărmășag"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146980" start="3885" end="3891" title="Țibana" label="Țibana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16439456" start="3944" end="3949" title="Zăvoi" label="Zăvoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114039" start="4011" end="4020" title="Ceplenița" label="Ceplenița"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724973" start="4073" end="4079" title="Mălini" label="Mălini"/>
<link wikidata="Q16426501" start="4106" end="4117" title="Poiana Mare" label="Poiana Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q771156" start="4171" end="4178" title="Bătrâni" label="Bătrâni"/>
<link wikidata="Q580851" start="4205" end="4219" title="Poiana Mărului" label="Poiana Mărului"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724978" start="4279" end="4299" title="Mănăstirea Humorului" label="Mănăstirea Humorului"/>
<link wikidata="Q909633" start="4355" end="4361" title="Drajna" label="Drajna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16427487" start="4416" end="4433" title="Dorna Candrenilor" label="Dorna Candrenilor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600604" start="4494" end="4509" title="Blăgești, Bacău" label="Blăgești, Bacău"/>
<link wikidata="Q12685292" start="4539" end="4547" title="Cristolț" label="Cristolț"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724736" start="4601" end="4621" title="Dragomirești, Vaslui" label="Dragomirești, Vaslui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535756" start="4653" end="4661" title="Chiliile" label="Chiliile"/>
<link wikidata="Q871809" start="4718" end="4724" title="Cerbăl" label="Cerbăl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027663" start="4781" end="4786" title="Oituz" label="Oituz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16426820" start="4839" end="4851" title="Șcheia, Iași" label="Șcheia, Iași"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724601" start="4883" end="4892" title="Bustuchin" label="Bustuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064344" start="4916" end="4931" title="Poiana Sibiului" label="Poiana Sibiului"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725046" start="4961" end="4975" title="Poiana Stampei" label="Poiana Stampei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722093" start="5037" end="5048" title="Vintileasca" label="Vintileasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q265012" start="5104" end="5111" title="Bușteni" label="Bușteni"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425628" start="5162" end="5169" title="Copăcel" label="Copăcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113569" start="5191" end="5205" title="Poiana Teiului" label="Poiana Teiului"/>
<link wikidata="Q773881" start="5265" end="5274" title="Cosminele" label="Cosminele"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425301" start="5330" end="5335" title="Meteș" label="Meteș"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425329" start="5359" end="5373" title="Poiana Vadului" label="Poiana Vadului"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716877" start="5432" end="5442" title="Mânzălești" label="Mânzălești"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606128" start="5497" end="5505" title="Vărbilău" label="Vărbilău"/>
<link wikidata="Q16426229" start="5531" end="5543" title="Poieni, Cluj" label="Poieni, Cluj"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425215" start="5592" end="5601" title="Blandiana" label="Blandiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425220" start="5645" end="5657" title="Bucium, Alba" label="Bucium, Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425383" start="5680" end="5691" title="Vidra, Alba" label="Vidra, Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195040" start="5714" end="5722" title="Parincea" label="Parincea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542438" start="5767" end="5781" title="Roșiori, Bacău" label="Roșiori, Bacău"/>
<link wikidata="Q556266" start="5804" end="5814" title="Târgu Ocna" label="Târgu Ocna"/>
<link wikidata="Q793937" start="5856" end="5861" title="Beriu" label="Beriu"/>
<link wikidata="Q903830" start="5910" end="5916" title="Densuș" label="Densuș"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113348" start="5965" end="5976" title="Schitu Duca" label="Schitu Duca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066698" start="6020" end="6035" title="Piatra Șoimului" label="Piatra Șoimului"/>
<link wikidata="Q12137219" start="6080" end="6096" title="Pietroasa, Timiș" label="Pietroasa, Timiș"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725049" start="6098" end="6110" title="Poieni-Solca" label="Poieni-Solca"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725234" start="6170" end="6176" title="Udești" label="Udești"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667485" start="6222" end="6244" title="Poiana Ruscă Mountains" label="Poiana Ruscă Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362534" start="6267" end="6287" title="Romanian Carpathians" label="Romanian Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580659" start="6334" end="6341" title="Sohodol (Arieș)" label="Sohodol"/>
<link wikidata="Q918659" start="6386" end="6390" title="Mara (Iza)" label="Mara"/>
<link wikidata="Q182445" start="6440" end="6444" title="Prut" label="Prut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718546" start="6493" end="6501" title="Telcișor (river)" label="Telcișor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016460" start="6558" end="6564" title="Vorona (Siret)" label="Vorona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717750" start="6586" end="6600" title="Poiana (Someș)" label="Poiana (Someș)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207831" start="6662" end="6675" title="Poiana (Topa)" label="Poiana (Topa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682529" start="6752" end="6760" title="Dobrovăț (river)" label="Dobrovăț"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377759" start="6810" end="6819" title="Rudăreasa" label="Rudăreasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4371461" start="6874" end="6881" title="Poliana, Dnistrovskyi Raion, Chernivtsi Oblast" label="Poliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4098620" start="6945" end="6952" title="Bukivka" label="Bukivka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4466569" start="7023" end="7031" title="Turiatka" label="Turiatka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11846972" start="7091" end="7117" title="Poiana (genus)" label="&amp;quot;Poiana&amp;quot; (genus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q189978" start="7210" end="7233" title="Central African linsang" label="Central African linsang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968390" start="7293" end="7313" title="West African linsang" label="West African linsang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207819" start="7369" end="7383" title="Poiana (brand)" label="Poiana (brand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725047" start="7448" end="7457" title="Poienești" label="Poienești"/>
<link wikidata="Q12085659" start="7543" end="7551" title="Buntești" label="Buntești"/>
<link wikidata="Q362463" start="7575" end="7600" title="Poienile (disambiguation)" label="Poienile (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385025" wikidata="Q1747120" url="?curid=385025" title="Bielsko Voivodeship">
<text>The Bielsko Voivodeship (Polish: &quot;Województwo bielskie&quot;) was a voivodeship (province) of the Polish People&#x27;s Republic from 1975 to 1989, and the Third Republic of Poland from 1989 to 1998. Its capital was Bielsko-Biała. It was established on 1 June 1975, from the parts of the voivodeships of Katowice, and Kraków, and existed until 31 December 1998, when it was partitioned between then-established Lesser Poland, and Silesian Voivodeships.

== History ==
The Bielsko Voivodeship was established on 1 June 1975, as part of the administrative reform, and was one of the voivodeships (provinces) of the Polish People&#x27;s Republic. It was formed from the part of the territories of the voivodeships of Katowice, and Kraków. Its capital was located in the city of Bielsko-Biała. In 1975, it had a population of 779,300 people.

On 9 December 1989, the Polish People&#x27;s Republic was replaced by the Third Republic of Poland. In 1997, the voivodeship had a population of 924,000 people, and had an area of 3,704 km². It existed until 31 December 1998, when it was partitioned between then-established Lesser Poland, and Silesian Voivodeships.

== Subdivisions ==

In 1997, the voivodeship was divided into 59 gminas (municipalities), including 8 urban municipalities, 10 urban-rural municipalities, and 18 rural municipalities. It had 18 cities and towns.

From 1990 to 1998, it was additionally divided into five district offices, each comprising several municipalities.

== Demographics ==
== Leaders ==
The leader of the administrative division was the voivode. Those were:
* 1 June 1975 – February 1981: Józef Łabudek;
* 10 March 1981 – 7 November 1987: Stanisław Łuczkiewicz;
* 18 December 1987 – 2 April 1990: Franciszek Strzałka;
* 9 April 1990 – 1 February 1994: Mirosław Styczeń;
*24 February 1994 – 28 November 1997: Marek Trombski;
* 9 December 1997 – 31 December 1998: Andrzej Sikora.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1747120" start="4" end="23" title="Bielsko Voivodeship" label="Bielsko Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="25" end="31" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q150093" start="73" end="84" title="Voivodeships of Poland" label="voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="86" end="94" title="province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="103" end="132" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="160" end="184" title="Poland" label="Third Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q106583" start="220" end="233" title="Bielsko-Biała" label="Bielsko-Biała"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="308" end="316" title="Katowice Voivodeship (1950–1975)" label="Katowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377185" start="322" end="328" title="Kraków Voivodeship (1945–1975)" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q54159" start="415" end="428" title="Lesser Poland Voivodeship" label="Lesser Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54181" start="434" end="454" title="Silesian Voivodeship" label="Silesian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="543" end="564" title="1975 administrative reform of Poland" label="administrative reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q150093" start="585" end="597" title="Voivodeships of Poland" label="voivodeships"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="617" end="646" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="718" end="726" title="Katowice Voivodeship (1950–1975)" label="Katowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377185" start="732" end="738" title="Kraków Voivodeship (1945–1975)" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q106583" start="779" end="792" title="Bielsko-Biała" label="Bielsko-Biała"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="917" end="941" title="Poland" label="Third Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54159" start="1118" end="1131" title="Lesser Poland Voivodeship" label="Lesser Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54181" start="1137" end="1157" title="Silesian Voivodeship" label="Silesian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15334" start="1226" end="1231" title="gmina" label="gmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="1234" end="1248" title="municipality" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1431" end="1447" title="district office (Poland)" label="district offices"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="1573" end="1580" title="voivode" label="voivode"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1625" end="1638" title="Józef Łabudek" label="Józef Łabudek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1675" end="1696" title="Stanisław Łuczkiewicz" label="Stanisław Łuczkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1733" end="1752" title="Franciszek Strzałka" label="Franciszek Strzałka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1788" end="1804" title="Mirosław Styczeń" label="Mirosław Styczeń"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1844" end="1858" title="Marek Trombski" label="Marek Trombski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1898" end="1912" title="Andrzej Sikora (born 1946)" label="Andrzej Sikora"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385031" wikidata="Q1196955" url="?curid=385031" title="Marunouchi">
<text>Marunouchi () is an area in Chiyoda, Tokyo, Japan, located between Tokyo Station and the Imperial Palace. The name, meaning &quot;inside the circle&quot;, derives from its location within the palace&#x27;s outer moat. Marunouchi is the core of Tokyo&#x27;s central business district as well as one of the main financial centres in Japan. 20 of the &quot;Fortune Global 500&quot; companies are headquartered in the area in 2021, while many other such companies based outside Japan have Asian or Japanese offices there. Together with the neighbouring districts of Yūrakuchō (有楽町) and Ōtemachi (大手町), Marunouchi is part of a larger business district sometimes referred to as Daimaruyū (大丸有).

==History==

In 1590, before shogun Tokugawa Ieyasu entered Edo Castle, the area now known as Marunouchi was an inlet of Tokyo Bay and had the name &quot;Hibiya.&quot; With the expansion of the castle, this inlet was filled, beginning in 1592. A new outer moat was constructed, and the earlier moat became the inner moat. The area took the name &quot;Okuruwauchi&quot; (&quot;within the enclosure&quot;). &quot;Daimyōs&quot;, particularly &quot;shinpan&quot; and &quot;fudai&quot;, constructed their mansions here, and with 24 such estates, the area also became known as &quot;daimyō kōji&quot; (&quot;daimyō alley&quot;). The offices of the North and South Magistrates, and that of the Finance Magistrate, were also here.

Following the Meiji Restoration, Marunouchi came under control of the national government, which erected barracks and parade grounds for the Imperial Japanese Army. In 1890 Iwasaki Yanosuke, brother of the founder (and later the second leader) of Mitsubishi, purchased the land for 1.5 million yen. As the company developed the land, it came to be known as &quot;Mitsubishi-ga-hara&quot; (the &quot;Mitsubishi Fields&quot;). Much of the land remains under the control of Mitsubishi Estate Co., and the headquarters of many companies in the Mitsubishi Group are in Marunouchi.

The government of Tokyo constructed its headquarters on the site of the former Kōchi han in 1894. They moved it to the present Tokyo Metropolitan Government Building in Shinjuku in 1991, and the Tokyo International Forum and Toyota Tsusho Corporation now stands on the site. Nearly a quarter of Japan&#x27;s GDP is generated in this area. Tokyo Station opened in 1914, and the Marunouchi Building in 1923. Marunouchi was targeted in the 1974 Mitsubishi Heavy Industries bombing by the radical far-left terrorist organisation East Asia Anti-Japan Armed Front. Tokyo Station reopened on 1 October 2012 after a 5 year refurbishment.

==Landmarks==
=== Extant historical buildings ===

==== Fully preserved ====
* Tokyo Station (1914)
* Meiji Insurance Headquarters (1934)
* Mitsubishi Ichigokan Museum (1894, rebuilt partially using original materials in 2009)

==== Partially preserved ====
* (1933, preserved as the lower-storey structure of the JP Tower since 2012)
* Japan Industry Club (1920, preserved as the lower-storey structure of the Mitsubishi Trust&amp;Banking Head Office since 2003)
==Companies based in Marunouchi==

Calbee has its headquarters in the Marunouchi Trust Tower Main. Konica Minolta has its headquarters in the Marunouchi Center Building in Marunouchi.

*Mitsubishi Group companies:
**MUFG
**Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance
**Mitsubishi Corporation
**Mitsubishi Heavy Industries
**Mitsubishi Electric
**Nippon Yusen
**Tokio Marine Nichido
**Asahi Glass
*Hitachi
*Furukawa Electric
*Nikko Citigroup
*Ushio, Inc.
*Tanaka Kikinzoku Group

Japan Airlines used to have its headquarters in the Tokyo Building in Marunouchi.

===International companies===

Marunouchi also houses the Japan offices of Aeroméxico (Pacific Century Place Marunouchi), Bain &amp; Company, Bayerische Landes Bank, Bloomberg, First National Bank of Boston, BT Group, Citigroup, Banca Commerciale Italiana, Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, Bank of India, JPMorgan Chase, KPMG, Latham &amp; Watkins, Mellon Bank, Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius, Morrison &amp; Foerster, NatWest Group, Nikko Cordial, Nikko Citigroup, Rabobank, Bank Negara Indonesia, Overseas Union Bank, Philadelphia National Bank, PricewaterhouseCoopers, Ropes &amp; Gray, Royal Insurance, Standard Chartered Bank and Standard &amp; Poor&#x27;s.

==Rail and subway stations==
*Nijūbashimae Station (Chiyoda Line)
*Otemachi Station (Chiyoda Line, Hanzomon Line, Marunouchi Line, Toei Mita Line, Tozai Line)
*Tokyo Station (Chūō Line, Keihin-Tohoku Line, Keiyo Line, Marunouchi Line, Shinkansen, Sōbu Line, Yamanote Line, Yokosuka Line)

==Education==
 operates public elementary and junior high schools. Chiyoda Elementary School (千代田小学校) is the zoned elementary of Marunouchi 1-3 chōme. There is a freedom of choice system for junior high schools in Chiyoda Ward, and so there are no specific junior high school zones.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1196955" start="0" end="10" title="Marunouchi" label="Marunouchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q214051" start="28" end="35" title="Chiyoda, Tokyo" label="Chiyoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="37" end="42" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="44" end="49" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q283196" start="67" end="80" title="Tokyo Station" label="Tokyo Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q500681" start="89" end="104" title="Kokyo" label="Imperial Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q621102" start="354" end="372" title="Fortune Global 500" label="Fortune Global 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376701" start="562" end="571" title="Yūrakuchō" label="Yūrakuchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332496" start="582" end="590" title="Ōtemachi" label="Ōtemachi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="683" end="686" title=":ja:大丸有" label="大丸有"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="719" end="725" title="shogun" label="shogun"/>
<link wikidata="Q171977" start="726" end="741" title="Tokugawa Ieyasu" label="Tokugawa Ieyasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q865913" start="750" end="760" title="Edo Castle" label="Edo Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q141017" start="811" end="820" title="Tokyo Bay" label="Tokyo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="1101" end="1107" title="Daimyō" label="Daimyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331112" start="1135" end="1142" title="Shinpan (daimyō)" label="shinpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q643640" start="1159" end="1164" title="Fudai daimyō" label="fudai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="1428" end="1445" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="1555" end="1577" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923018" start="1587" end="1603" title="Iwasaki Yanosuke" label="Iwasaki Yanosuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q183275" start="1661" end="1671" title="Mitsubishi" label="Mitsubishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8146" start="1708" end="1711" title="Japanese yen" label="yen"/>
<link wikidata="Q304962" start="1885" end="1906" title="Mitsubishi Estate Co." label="Mitsubishi Estate Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q134093" start="2070" end="2075" title="Kōchi Prefecture" label="Kōchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q841985" start="2076" end="2079" title="Han (country subdivision)" label="han"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973" start="2118" end="2156" title="Tokyo Metropolitan Government Building" label="Tokyo Metropolitan Government Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q179645" start="2160" end="2168" title="Shinjuku, Tokyo" label="Shinjuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359892" start="2186" end="2211" title="Tokyo International Forum" label="Tokyo International Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q716457" start="2216" end="2229" title="Toyota Tsusho" label="Toyota Tsusho"/>
<link wikidata="Q283196" start="2330" end="2343" title="Tokyo Station" label="Tokyo Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362078" start="2428" end="2468" title="1974 Mitsubishi Heavy Industries bombing" label="1974 Mitsubishi Heavy Industries bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061320" start="2516" end="2548" title="East Asia Anti-Japan Armed Front" label="East Asia Anti-Japan Armed Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q283196" start="2701" end="2714" title="Tokyo Station" label="Tokyo Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023897" start="2724" end="2752" title="Meiji Seimei Kan" label="Meiji Insurance Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q11226072" start="2936" end="2944" title="JP Tower" label="JP Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q846834" start="3121" end="3127" title="Calbee" label="Calbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q118911" start="3185" end="3199" title="Konica Minolta" label="Konica Minolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q183275" start="3272" end="3288" title="Mitsubishi" label="Mitsubishi Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542175" start="3302" end="3306" title="MUFG" label="MUFG"/>
<link wikidata="Q174081" start="3309" end="3336" title="Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance Company" label="Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q650745" start="3339" end="3361" title="Mitsubishi Corporation" label="Mitsubishi Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q648280" start="3364" end="3391" title="Mitsubishi Heavy Industries" label="Mitsubishi Heavy Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q53257" start="3394" end="3413" title="Mitsubishi Electric" label="Mitsubishi Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478918" start="3416" end="3428" title="Nippon Yusen" label="Nippon Yusen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214909" start="3431" end="3451" title="Tokio Marine Nichido" label="Tokio Marine Nichido"/>
<link wikidata="Q720484" start="3454" end="3465" title="Asahi Glass" label="Asahi Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q53238" start="3467" end="3474" title="Hitachi" label="Hitachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509800" start="3476" end="3493" title="Furukawa Electric" label="Furukawa Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122510" start="3495" end="3510" title="Nikko Citigroup" label="Nikko Citigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288886" start="3512" end="3523" title="Ushio, Inc." label="Ushio, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q11575980" start="3525" end="3547" title="Tanaka Kikinzoku" label="Tanaka Kikinzoku Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q213140" start="3549" end="3563" title="Japan Airlines" label="Japan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q381563" start="3707" end="3717" title="Aeroméxico" label="Aeroméxico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122339" start="3719" end="3751" title="Pacific Century Place Marunouchi" label="Pacific Century Place Marunouchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q764850" start="3754" end="3772" title="Bain &amp;amp; Company" label="Bain &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q152106" start="3774" end="3796" title="BayernLB" label="Bayerische Landes Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q13977" start="3798" end="3807" title="Bloomberg L.P." label="Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855883" start="3809" end="3838" title="First National Bank of Boston" label="First National Bank of Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="3840" end="3848" title="BT Group" label="BT Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q219508" start="3850" end="3859" title="Citigroup" label="Citigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882013" start="3861" end="3887" title="Banca Commerciale Italiana" label="Banca Commerciale Italiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q491748" start="3889" end="3913" title="Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu" label="Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004439" start="3915" end="3928" title="Bank of India" label="Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q192314" start="3930" end="3944" title="JPMorgan Chase" label="JPMorgan Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q493751" start="3946" end="3950" title="KPMG" label="KPMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806949" start="3952" end="3972" title="Latham &amp;amp; Watkins" label="Latham &amp;amp; Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305204" start="3974" end="3985" title="Mellon Bank" label="Mellon Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302384" start="3987" end="4014" title="Morgan, Lewis &amp;amp; Bockius" label="Morgan, Lewis &amp;amp; Bockius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913998" start="4016" end="4039" title="Morrison &amp;amp; Foerster" label="Morrison &amp;amp; Foerster"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218598" start="4041" end="4054" title="NatWest Group" label="NatWest Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341541" start="4056" end="4069" title="Nikko Cordial" label="Nikko Cordial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122510" start="4071" end="4086" title="Nikko Citigroup" label="Nikko Citigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q252004" start="4088" end="4096" title="Rabobank" label="Rabobank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882611" start="4098" end="4119" title="Bank Negara Indonesia" label="Bank Negara Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064074" start="4121" end="4140" title="Overseas Union Bank" label="Overseas Union Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170142" start="4142" end="4168" title="Philadelphia National Bank" label="Philadelphia National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="4170" end="4192" title="PricewaterhouseCoopers" label="PricewaterhouseCoopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366746" start="4194" end="4210" title="Ropes &amp;amp; Gray" label="Ropes &amp;amp; Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q96402928" start="4212" end="4227" title="Royal Insurance" label="Royal Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q548278" start="4229" end="4252" title="Standard Chartered Bank" label="Standard Chartered Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q106158" start="4257" end="4283" title="Standard &amp;amp; Poor&amp;#x27;s" label="Standard &amp;amp; Poor&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q390676" start="4316" end="4336" title="Nijūbashimae Station" label="Nijūbashimae Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075089" start="4338" end="4350" title="Chiyoda Line" label="Chiyoda Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326767" start="4353" end="4369" title="Ōtemachi Station (Tokyo)" label="Otemachi Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075089" start="4371" end="4383" title="Chiyoda Line" label="Chiyoda Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376030" start="4385" end="4398" title="Hanzomon Line" label="Hanzomon Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147028" start="4400" end="4415" title="Marunouchi Line" label="Marunouchi Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374506" start="4417" end="4431" title="Toei Mita Line" label="Toei Mita Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143898" start="4433" end="4443" title="Tōzai Line (Kyoto)" label="Tozai Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q283196" start="4446" end="4459" title="Tokyo Station" label="Tokyo Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078110" start="4461" end="4470" title="Chūō Main Line" label="Chūō Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197028" start="4472" end="4490" title="Keihin-Tohoku Line" label="Keihin-Tohoku Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q741145" start="4492" end="4502" title="Keiyo Line" label="Keiyo Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147028" start="4504" end="4519" title="Marunouchi Line" label="Marunouchi Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q164338" start="4521" end="4531" title="Shinkansen" label="Shinkansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191364" start="4533" end="4542" title="Sōbu Line" label="Sōbu Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q693036" start="4544" end="4557" title="Yamanote Line" label="Yamanote Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332317" start="4559" end="4572" title="Yokosuka Line" label="Yokosuka Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757962" start="4719" end="4724" title="chōme" label="chōme"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385032" wikidata="Q1341945" url="?curid=385032" title="Biała Podlaska Voivodeship">
<text>The Biała Podlaska Voivodeship was a voivodeship (province) of the Polish People&#x27;s Republic from 1975 to 1989, and the Third Republic of Poland from 1989 to 1998. Its capital was Biała Podlaska. It was established on 1 June 1975, from the parts of the voivodeships of Lublin, and Warsaw Voivodeship, and existed until 31 December 1998, when it was partitioned between then-established Lublin, and Masovian Voivodeships.

== History ==
The Biała Voivodeship was established on 1 June 1975, as part of the administrative reform, and was one of the voivodeships (provinces) of the Polish People&#x27;s Republic. It was formed mostly from the part of the territory of the Lublin Voivodeship, additionally including part of the territory of the Łosice County, of the Warsaw Voivodeship. Its capital was located in the city of Biała Podlaska. In 1975, it had a population of 280 400 people.

On 9 December 1989, the Polish People&#x27;s Republic was replaced by the Third Republic of Poland. In 1997, the voivodeship had a population of 309 000 people, and had an area of 5 348 km2. It existed until 31 December 1998, when it was partitioned between then-established Lublin, and Masovian Voivodeships.

== Subdivisions ==

In 1997, the voivodeship was divided into 40 gminas (municipalities), including four urban municipalities, two urban-rural municipalities, and 34 rural municipalities. It had six cities that functioned as separate municipalities.

From 1990 to 1998, it was additionally divided into three district offices, each comprising several municipalities.

== Demographics ==
== Leaders ==
The leader of the administrative division was the voivode. The people in that office, between 1975, and 1998, were:
*1975–1986: Józef Piela;
*1986–1990: Stanisław Rapa;
*1990–1992: Andrzej Czapski;
*1992–1997: Tadeusz Korszeń;
*1997–1998: Marek Czarnecki.

== Citations ==
=== Notes ===
=== References ===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1341945" start="4" end="30" title="Biała Podlaska Voivodeship" label="Biała Podlaska Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q150093" start="37" end="48" title="Voivodeships of Poland" label="voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="50" end="58" title="province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="67" end="96" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="124" end="148" title="Poland" label="Third Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q209932" start="184" end="198" title="Biała Podlaska" label="Biała Podlaska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="273" end="279" title="Lublin Voivodeship (1944–1975)" label="Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163574" start="285" end="303" title="Warsaw Voivodeship (1944–1975)" label="Warsaw Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q54155" start="390" end="396" title="Lublin Voivodeship" label="Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q54169" start="402" end="422" title="Masovian Voivodeship" label="Masovian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="509" end="530" title="1975 administrative reform of Poland" label="administrative reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q150093" start="551" end="563" title="Voivodeships of Poland" label="voivodeships"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="583" end="612" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="673" end="691" title="Lublin Voivodeship (1944–1975)" label="Lublin Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q947509" start="745" end="758" title="Łosice County" label="Łosice County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163574" start="767" end="785" title="Warsaw Voivodeship (1944–1975)" label="Warsaw Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q209932" start="826" end="840" title="Biała Podlaska" label="Biała Podlaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="965" end="989" title="Poland" label="Third Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54155" start="1166" end="1172" title="Lublin Voivodeship" label="Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q54169" start="1178" end="1198" title="Masovian Voivodeship" label="Masovian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15334" start="1267" end="1272" title="gmina" label="gmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="1275" end="1289" title="municipality" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1511" end="1527" title="district office (Poland)" label="district offices"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="1653" end="1660" title="voivode" label="voivode"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1731" end="1742" title="Józef Piela" label="Józef Piela"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1756" end="1770" title="Stanisław Rapa" label="Stanisław Rapa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1784" end="1799" title="Andrzej Czapski" label="Andrzej Czapski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1813" end="1828" title="Tadeusz Korszeń" label="Tadeusz Korszeń"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758817" start="1842" end="1857" title="Marek Czarnecki" label="Marek Czarnecki"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385041" wikidata="Q1268102" url="?curid=385041" title="Kasumigaseki">
<text>Kasumigaseki (霞が関, 霞ヶ関 or 霞ケ関) is a district in Chiyoda, Tokyo. Most government ministries are located in the neighbourhood, making its name a metonym for the Japanese bureaucracy, while Nagatachō refers to the elected government or legislative branch. It faces the Imperial Palace to the north, Hibiya Park to the east, and Nagatachō to the west.

==Notable sites==
===Government offices===
* 2nd Bldg. of the Central Common Government Office
**Japan Transport Safety Board
**National Public Safety Commission
*Fair Trade Commission
*Coast Guard
*Patent Office
*Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications
*Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
*Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry
*Ministry of Finance
*Ministry of Foreign Affairs
*Ministry of Justice
*Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism
*Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare
*Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology
*Ministry of the Environment
*Public Security Intelligence Agency
*National Police Agency
*Financial Services Agency
*Agency for Cultural Affairs
*National Personnel Authority
*Board of Audit of Japan
*Tokyo Metropolitan Police HQ
*Tokyo High Court and Intellectual Property High Court
*Tokyo District Court, Summary Court and Family Court

===Other buildings===
*Japan Post headquarters
*Kasumigaseki Building - Tokyo&#x27;s first high-rise office building
**The Asian Development Bank Institute has its head office on the 8th floor of the Kasumigaseki Building. On the same floor, the Asian Development Bank has its Japan offices.
*Kasumigaseki Common Gate - Twin tower buildings adjacent to the Kasumigaseki Building.
*New Kasumigaseki Building
*Nipponkoa Insurance Building

==Subway stations==
*Kasumigaseki Station (Chiyoda Line, Hibiya Line, Marunouchi Line)
*Sakuradamon Station (Yūrakuchō Line)
*Toranomon Station (Ginza Line)

==Economy==
Japan Post Holdings has its headquarters in Kasumigaseki. Tokuyama Corporation has its headquarters in Kasumigaseki Common Gate West Tower and PricewaterhouseCoopers has offices on the 15th floor of the Kasumigaseki Building. Also in the Kasumigaseki Building has its headquarters the Lixil Group Corporation.

At different points of time All Nippon Airways and Mitsui Chemicals had their headquarters in the Kasumigaseki Building. In July 1978, when Nippon Cargo Airlines first began, it operated within a single room inside All Nippon Airways&#x27;s space in the Kasumigaseki Building.

At one time Cantor Fitzgerald had an office in the Toranomon Mitsui Building in Kasumigaseki.

==Education==
 operates public elementary and junior high schools. Kōjimachi Elementary School (千代田区立麹町小学校) is the zoned elementary of Kasumigaseki 1-3 chōme. There is a freedom of choice system for junior high schools in Chiyoda Ward, and so there are no specific junior high school zones.

==Spelling==
The current official spelling of the district&#x27;s name is , with が in hiragana; before 1967, it was spelled , with a small ヶ. The name of the Tokyo Metro station is spelled &quot;&quot;, with a large ケ. All three spellings can still be found by various institutions in the area.

==References==


==External links==

*History of Kasumigaseki </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1268102" start="0" end="12" title="Kasumigaseki" label="Kasumigaseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q214051" start="48" end="55" title="Chiyoda, Tokyo" label="Chiyoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="57" end="62" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124690" start="159" end="179" title="Civil service of Japan" label="Japanese bureaucracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197269" start="187" end="196" title="Nagatachō" label="Nagatachō"/>
<link wikidata="Q500681" start="266" end="281" title="Tokyo Imperial Palace" label="Imperial Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378533" start="296" end="307" title="Hibiya Park" label="Hibiya Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6157874" start="446" end="474" title="Japan Transport Safety Board" label="Japan Transport Safety Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q905830" start="477" end="510" title="National Public Safety Commission (Japan)" label="National Public Safety Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q842043" start="512" end="533" title="Fair Trade Commission (Japan)" label="Fair Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q565418" start="535" end="546" title="Japan Coast Guard" label="Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141991" start="548" end="561" title="Japan Patent Office" label="Patent Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322293" start="563" end="610" title="Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications" label="Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376786" start="612" end="659" title="Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (Japan)" label="Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197264" start="661" end="700" title="Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (Japan)" label="Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322605" start="702" end="721" title="Ministry of Finance (Japan)" label="Ministry of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q222241" start="723" end="750" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031145" start="752" end="771" title="Ministry of Justice (Japan)" label="Ministry of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376196" start="773" end="828" title="Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism" label="Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191238" start="830" end="868" title="Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (Japan)" label="Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054379" start="870" end="932" title="Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (Japan)" label="Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125558" start="934" end="961" title="Ministry of the Environment (Japan)" label="Ministry of the Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346667" start="963" end="998" title="Public Security Intelligence Agency" label="Public Security Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q154200" start="1000" end="1022" title="National Police Agency (Japan)" label="National Police Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q615316" start="1024" end="1049" title="Financial Services Agency" label="Financial Services Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009519" start="1051" end="1078" title="Agency for Cultural Affairs" label="Agency for Cultural Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q178314" start="1080" end="1108" title="National Personnel Authority" label="National Personnel Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q615225" start="1110" end="1133" title="Board of Audit (Japan)" label="Board of Audit of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312559" start="1135" end="1160" title="Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department" label="Tokyo Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q82679" start="1165" end="1181" title="Tokyo High Court" label="Tokyo High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q82678" start="1220" end="1240" title="Tokyo District Court" label="Tokyo District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372543" start="1297" end="1307" title="Japan Post" label="Japan Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q844780" start="1322" end="1343" title="Kasumigaseki Building" label="Kasumigaseki Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806617" start="1397" end="1429" title="Asian Development Bank Institute" label="Asian Development Bank Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="1520" end="1542" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q10855015" start="1567" end="1591" title="Kasumigaseki Common Gate" label="Kasumigaseki Common Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q741614" start="1733" end="1753" title="Kasumigaseki Station (Tokyo)" label="Kasumigaseki Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075089" start="1755" end="1767" title="Chiyoda Line" label="Chiyoda Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196223" start="1769" end="1780" title="Hibiya Line" label="Hibiya Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147028" start="1782" end="1797" title="Marunouchi Line" label="Marunouchi Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q277196" start="1800" end="1819" title="Sakuradamon Station" label="Sakuradamon Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q787305" start="1821" end="1835" title="Tokyo Metro Yūrakuchō Line" label="Yūrakuchō Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q347972" start="1838" end="1855" title="Toranomon Station" label="Toranomon Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073046" start="1857" end="1867" title="Ginza Line" label="Ginza Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372049" start="1882" end="1901" title="Japan Post Holdings" label="Japan Post Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q11321180" start="1940" end="1960" title="Tokuyama Corporation" label="Tokuyama Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10855015" start="1985" end="2020" title="Kasumigaseki Common Gate" label="Kasumigaseki Common Gate West Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="2025" end="2047" title="PricewaterhouseCoopers" label="PricewaterhouseCoopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q844780" start="2085" end="2106" title="Kasumigaseki Building" label="Kasumigaseki Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q11229276" start="2167" end="2190" title="Lixil Group" label="Lixil Group Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q204284" start="2221" end="2239" title="All Nippon Airways" label="All Nippon Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q777141" start="2244" end="2260" title="Mitsui Chemicals" label="Mitsui Chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364998" start="2333" end="2354" title="Nippon Cargo Airlines" label="Nippon Cargo Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q204284" start="2408" end="2426" title="All Nippon Airways" label="All Nippon Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936874" start="2483" end="2500" title="Cantor Fitzgerald" label="Cantor Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757962" start="2718" end="2723" title="chōme" label="chōme"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385042" wikidata="Q14756366" url="?curid=385042" title="Białystok Voivodeship (1975–1998)">
<text>Białystok Voivodeship () was a unit of administrative division and local government in Poland from 1975 to 1998, when it was superseded by the Podlaskie Voivodeship. Its capital city was Białystok. It was formed in 1975 from part of the existing Białystok Voivodeship. The region was , and its population in 1994, about 700 000 inhabitants. It was divided into 20 cities and 50 municipalities. It bordered with four Voivodeships: Suwałki, Łomża, Siedlce and Biała Podlaska and until 1991 with the Soviet Union (Belorussian SSR), and later with Belarus.

== History ==

Starting 1 June 1975, pursuant to a law proclaimed on 28 May 1975, the Białystok Voivodeship was formed from part of the existing Białystok Voivodeship. In addition the intermediate administrative level of powiats were eliminated, but the secondary administrative units of gminas were retained. The unstated reason for the 1975 reform was the desire of the Polish Central Committee to strengthen control over lower layers of the state apparatus. After Edward Gierek replaced Władysław Gomułka as first secretary of the Polish United Workers&#x27; Party, his clique maintained power by dividing the Politburo. Through administrative reorganization and the new territorial division, Gierek was able to nominate his supporters to provincial committees and break the hold of older elements of the party.

After the fall of the People&#x27;s Republic of Poland, District Offices () were established in the voivodeship under the Act of 22 March 1990 and the Regulation of the Minister – Head of the Office of the Council of Ministers on 1 August 1990. Within the limits of the district offices were several gmina. The offices did not constitute organs of self-government, but performed the tasks and powers of the voivodeship administration.

During 1991 and 1992 the large municipalities were restructured, significantly changing the division of powers between the voivodeship cities and the surrounding rural gminas.

In the Polish administrative reform of 1999 Poland introduced a further reform of local government administration, disestablishing the Białystok Voivodeship effective 31 December 1998 and establishing the Podlaskie Voivodeship.

==Politics==
Secretaries of the Voivodeship Committee of the Polish United Workers&#x27; Party:
Voivodes:

Chairmen of the Voivodeship National Council Presidium ():

==Administrative divisions==
From 1975 until 1990 the voivodeship was solely divided into Gmina of the following types:
*urban gmina () consisting of the cities of: Białystok, Bielsk Podlaski, Brańsk, Hajnówka and Siemiatycze
*rural gmina () consisting of villages and countryside of: Bielsk Podlaski, Boćki, Brańsk, Orla, Rudka, Wyszki, Białowieża, Czeremcha, Czyże, Dubicze Cerkiewne, Hajnówka, Kleszczele, Narew, Narewka, Jasionówka, Jaświły, Knyszyn, Krypno, Mońki, Drohiczyn, Dziadkowice, Grodzisk, Mielnik, Milejczyce, Nurzec-Stacja, Siemiatycze, Dąbrowa Białostocka, Janów, Korycin, Krynki, Kuźnica, Nowy Dwór, Sidra, Sokółka, Suchowola, Szudziałowo, Choroszcz, Czarna Białostocka, Dobrzyniewo Kościelne, Gródek, Juchnowiec Dolny, Łapy, Michałowo, Poświętne, Supraśl, Suraż, Turośń Kościelna, Tykocin, Wasilków and Zabłudów

In 1990 the Voivodeship set up a number of District offices ():
* Białystok for the gminas of: Choroszcz, Czarna Białostocka, Dobrzyniewo Kościelne, Gródek, Juchnowiec Dolny, Łapy, Michałowo, Poświętne, Supraśl, Suraż, Turośń Kościelna, Tykocin, Wasilków and Zabłudów along with the City of Białystok
* Bielsk Podlaski for the gminas of: Bielsk Podlaski, Boćki, Brańsk, Orla, Rudka and Wyszki along with the Cities of Bielsk Podlaski and Brańsk
* Hajnówka for the gminas of: Białowieża, Czeremcha, Czyże, Dubicze Cerkiewne, Hajnówka, Kleszczele, Narew and Narewka along with the City of Hajnówka
* Mońki for the Gminas: Jasionówka, Jaświły, Knyszyn, Krypno and Mońki
* Siemiatycze for the gminas of: Drohiczyn, Dziadkowice, Grodzisk, Mielnik, Milejczyce, Nurzec-Stacja and Siemiatycze along with the City of Siemiatycze
* Sokółka for the gminas of: Dąbrowa Białostocka, Janów, Korycin, Krynki, Kuźnica, Nowy Dwór, Sidra, Sokółka, Suchowola and Szudziałowo

== Cities and towns ==
Major cities and towns (population in December 1998):
===Population===

==See also==
* Białystok Voivodeship (1919–1939)
* Białystok Voivodeship (1945–1975)

== References ==
===Citations===

===Bibliography===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14756366" start="0" end="21" title="Białystok Voivodeship (1975–1998)" label="Białystok Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="87" end="93" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54177" start="143" end="164" title="Podlaskie Voivodeship" label="Podlaskie Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q761" start="187" end="196" title="Białystok" label="Białystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261695" start="246" end="267" title="Białystok Voivodeship (1945–1975)" label="Białystok Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639312" start="416" end="427" title="Voivodeship" label="Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755166" start="430" end="437" title="Suwałki Voivodeship" label="Suwałki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755185" start="439" end="444" title="Łomża Voivodeship" label="Łomża"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752654" start="446" end="453" title="Siedlce Voivodeship" label="Siedlce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341945" start="458" end="472" title="Biała Podlaska Voivodeship" label="Biała Podlaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="497" end="509" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895" start="511" end="526" title="Belorussian SSR" label="Belorussian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="544" end="551" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9305247" start="605" end="634" title="Administrative reform in Poland (1975)" label="law proclaimed on 28 May 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261695" start="699" end="720" title="Białystok Voivodeship (1945–75)" label="Białystok Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q247073" start="775" end="782" title="powiats" label="powiats"/>
<link wikidata="Q15334" start="842" end="847" title="gmina" label="gmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060625" start="926" end="950" title="Central Committee of the Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Polish Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q312185" start="1021" end="1034" title="Edward Gierek" label="Edward Gierek"/>
<link wikidata="Q159603" start="1044" end="1061" title="Władysław Gomułka" label="Władysław Gomułka"/>
<link wikidata="Q537303" start="1088" end="1121" title="Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210131" start="1167" end="1176" title="Politburo of the Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1990" end="2026" title="Administrative reform in Poland (1999)" label="Polish administrative reform of 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q54177" start="2188" end="2209" title="Podlaskie Voivodeship" label="Podlaskie Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15334" start="2469" end="2474" title="Gmina" label="Gmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q761" start="2544" end="2553" title="Białystok" label="Białystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q850714" start="2555" end="2570" title="Bielsk Podlaski" label="Bielsk Podlaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q607410" start="2572" end="2578" title="Brańsk" label="Brańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q276859" start="2580" end="2588" title="Hajnówka" label="Hajnówka"/>
<link wikidata="Q218980" start="2593" end="2604" title="Siemiatycze" label="Siemiatycze"/>
<link wikidata="Q761" start="3502" end="3511" title="Białystok" label="Białystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q607410" start="3649" end="3655" title="Brańsk" label="Brańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q276859" start="3798" end="3806" title="Hajnówka" label="Hajnówka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305171" start="4278" end="4311" title="Białystok Voivodeship (1919–1939)" label="Białystok Voivodeship (1919–1939)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261695" start="4314" end="4347" title="Białystok Voivodeship (1945–1975)" label="Białystok Voivodeship (1945–1975)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385046" wikidata="Q1197269" url="?curid=385046" title="Nagatachō">
<text>is a district of Tokyo, Japan, located in Chiyoda Ward. It is the location of the Diet of Japan and the Prime Minister&#x27;s residence (Kantei). The Supreme Court of Japan is located in neighboring Hayabusachō. Nagatachō is often used to refer to the elected Japanese government, while Kasumigaseki refers to the Japanese civil service.

==Landmarks==

*National Diet Building
*National Diet Library
*Parliamentary Museum
*Cabinet Office
*Headquarters of the Liberal Democratic Party (Japan)
*Hie Shrine
*Hibiya High School

==Subway stations==
*Akasaka-mitsuke Station (Ginza Line, Marunouchi Line)
*Kokkai-gijidō-mae Station (Chiyoda Line, Marunouchi Line)
*Nagatachō Station (Hanzōmon Line, Namboku Line, Yūrakuchō Line)
*Tameike-Sannō Station (Ginza Line, Namboku Line)

==Education==
 operates public elementary and junior high schools. Kōjimachi Elementary School (麹町小学校) is the zoned elementary of Nagatcho 1-2 chōme. Kōjimachi Elementary was formed from the merger of the former Kōjimachi Elementary and Nagatachō Elementary School (永田町小学校). It began holding classes, in the year 2000, at the former Nagatachō Elementary facility. Its current building opened on April 1, 2003.

There is a freedom of choice system for junior high schools in Chiyoda Ward, and so there are no specific junior high school attendance zones.

==See also==

*Sannō Matsuri
*Rosanjin
*February 26 Incident
*New Sanno Hotel

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="17" end="22" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q214051" start="42" end="49" title="Chiyoda, Tokyo" label="Chiyoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q137773" start="50" end="54" title="Wards of Japan" label="Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q202384" start="82" end="95" title="Diet of Japan" label="Diet of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="104" end="118" title="Prime Minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q659013" start="137" end="143" title="Kantei" label="Kantei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142255" start="150" end="172" title="Supreme Court of Japan" label="Supreme Court of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552735" start="199" end="210" title="Hayabusachō" label="Hayabusachō"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="239" end="247" title="metonym" label="refer to"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268102" start="287" end="299" title="Kasumigaseki" label="Kasumigaseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124690" start="314" end="336" title="Civil service of Japan" label="Japanese civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338856" start="355" end="377" title="National Diet Building" label="National Diet Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q477675" start="379" end="400" title="National Diet Library" label="National Diet Library"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="402" end="422" title="Parliamentary Museum" label="Parliamentary Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005" start="424" end="438" title="Cabinet Office (Japan)" label="Cabinet Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q232595" start="460" end="492" title="Liberal Democratic Party (Japan)" label="Liberal Democratic Party (Japan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q702042" start="494" end="504" title="Hie Shrine" label="Hie Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750869" start="506" end="524" title="Hibiya High School" label="Hibiya High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q602384" start="547" end="570" title="Akasaka-mitsuke Station" label="Akasaka-mitsuke Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073046" start="572" end="582" title="Ginza Line" label="Ginza Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147028" start="584" end="599" title="Marunouchi Line" label="Marunouchi Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192508" start="602" end="627" title="Kokkai-gijidō-mae Station" label="Kokkai-gijidō-mae Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075089" start="629" end="641" title="Chiyoda Line" label="Chiyoda Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147028" start="643" end="658" title="Marunouchi Line" label="Marunouchi Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142211" start="661" end="678" title="Nagatachō Station" label="Nagatachō Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376030" start="680" end="693" title="Hanzōmon Line" label="Hanzōmon Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q520772" start="695" end="707" title="Tokyo Metro Namboku Line" label="Namboku Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q62769091" start="709" end="723" title="Yūrakuchō Line" label="Yūrakuchō Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q277208" start="726" end="747" title="Tameike-Sannō Station" label="Tameike-Sannō Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073046" start="749" end="759" title="Ginza Line" label="Ginza Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q520772" start="761" end="773" title="Tokyo Metro Namboku Line" label="Namboku Line"/>
<link wikidata="" start="872" end="877" title=":ja:千代田区立麹町小学校" label="麹町小学校"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757962" start="919" end="924" title="chōme" label="chōme"/>
<link wikidata="Q218663" start="1346" end="1359" title="Sannō Matsuri" label="Sannō Matsuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367324" start="1361" end="1369" title="Rosanjin" label="Rosanjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q477958" start="1371" end="1391" title="February 26 Incident" label="February 26 Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q4368396" start="1393" end="1408" title="New Sanno Hotel" label="New Sanno Hotel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385049" wikidata="Q1752936" url="?curid=385049" title="Chełm Voivodeship">
<text>Chełm Voivodeship () was a unit of administrative division and local government in Poland in years 1975–1998, superseded by Lublin Voivodeship. Its capital city was Chełm.

==Major cities and towns (population in 1995)==
* Chełm (69,100)
* Krasnystaw (20,600)

==See also==
* Voivodeships of Poland

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1752936" start="0" end="17" title="Chełm Voivodeship" label="Chełm Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="83" end="89" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54155" start="124" end="142" title="Lublin Voivodeship" label="Lublin Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q234184" start="165" end="170" title="Chełm" label="Chełm"/>
<link wikidata="Q234184" start="223" end="228" title="Chełm" label="Chełm"/>
<link wikidata="Q155088" start="240" end="250" title="Krasnystaw" label="Krasnystaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q150093" start="276" end="298" title="Voivodeships of Poland" label="Voivodeships of Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385051" wikidata="Q375261" url="?curid=385051" title="Bibby Line">
<text>Bibby Line is a UK company concerned with shipping and marine operations.

Its parent company, Bibby Line Group Limited, can be traced back to John Bibby who founded the company in 1807. The company along with the group is based in Liverpool. 

It owns the Bibby Stockholm, used in August 2023 to accommodate asylum seekers at Portland Port before it was evacuated on 11 August 2023 due to legionella on board and amid fire safety concerns.

==History==


The Bibby Line was founded in 1807 by the first John Bibby (1775–1840). The history of Calderstones Park in Liverpool notes that &#x27;although John Bibby &amp; Co was founded in 1807, the year Britain abolished the slave trade, the family’s business activities and investments can be traced back further. Prior to abolition, as a metals trader and ship broker, John Sr. held a stake in three slaving voyages on the ships &quot;Harmonie&quot;, &quot;Eagle&quot; and &quot;Sally.&quot;&#x27; The ships can be found on the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade Database using the voyage IDs 81106, 81732, 83481, which shows a total 787 enslaved people were transported on ships owned by John Bibby, of whom 75 did not survive the voyages. (*Note: The company has not addressed an open letter from the Refugee Council requesting it acknowledge potential links to the transatlantic slave trade.).

After John Bibby was attacked and murdered on 19 July 1840, his sons John and James took ownership of the Bibby Line.

It was one of the first businesses in the world to fit its entire fleet with radio, by the British based Radio Communication Company.

Along with other British ship owners, it endured hard economic conditions in the 1970s and 1980s, but survived through diversification into floating accommodation. The group diversified in the 1980s into separate divisions, including Bibby Financial Services which was formed in 1982. The parent company is now called Bibby Line Group, and is a £800 million global business, operating in 14 countries, employing 4,000 people in sectors including retail, financial services, distribution, shipping, marine and infrastructure.

Since 2007, Bibby Line Group and its employees have donated over £10 million and thousands of volunteering hours to over 1,000 charitable causes.

In 2008, the Bibby Line Group continued to diversify with the purchase of the construction asset hire company Garic UK. Bibby Line Group’s investment enabled Garic to remain a key market player, in a competitive sector. Currently, Garic has four sites across the UK and is one of the most trusted specialized plant and welfare facility providers in the UK.

In July 2023, an open letter signed by over fifty NGOs and campaigners, including the Refugee Council, called Bibby Marine, as owner of the Bibby Stockholm, to acknowledge its founder John Bibby&#x27;s links to the Atlantic slave trade and to end the practice of containing asylum seekers on its vessels. Later that month, a &quot;Guardian&quot; report highlighted safety concerns on board the Bibby Stockholm, including potential overcrowding along with narrow corridors and a lack of lifejackets on board. &quot;The Times&quot; also reported there were concerns about fire safety, noting it could become &#x27;a floating Grenfell&#x27;. On 11 August 2023 legionella was found to be on board and a water sample taken on 15 August 2023 confirmed this to be of &#x27;the most deadly strain&#x27; of legionella pneumophila, found in the ship&#x27;s kitchen&#x27;s galley pot wash hose.

==Ships==
Bibby Line has a fleet of accommodation barges and Service Operation Vessels.

===Current fleet===
Vessels currently operated by Bibby Line include:

* Diving support vessel
* Accommodation barge

===Former fleet===
Vessels that have previously operated for Bibby Line include:
* &quot;Cheshire&quot; - operated by Bibby Transport suffered a cargo fire in August 2017 off the coast of the Canary Islands during a passage from Norway to Thailand with a cargo of ammonium nitrate fertilizer. The cargo in all five of the ship’s cargo holds burned for two straight weeks. Shipping Watch reports that &#x27;toxic gases had M/V Cheshire&#x27;s cargo exploding and made it rain fertilizer&#x27;. In 2021 the Norwegian Court of Appeal upheld a ruling that crew negligence was a key factor in the loss of the Cheshire and ordered Bibby Transport and Singapore-based operator J. Lauritzen to pay compensation and costs totalling around US$30m. Safety4Sea reports: &#x27;Ruling that Bibby and Lauritzen were liable to pay damages, the court said it had found evidence of a ‘&quot;negligent breach of clear and repeated instructions’&quot; by the ship’s crew, who had failed to ensure that all heat sources in the cargo holds were disconnected before loading. The judgment further states that a light by a ladder in cargo hold 4 had probably been left on from the time of loading and, most likely, had not been disconnected until four days after that,– by which time the heat around the lamp had started the chemical reaction. &quot;The instructions were to disconnect the power supply, not just to turn off the switches. That such disconnection probably only took place after four days is in itself clearly reprehensible,&quot; the court pointed out. The court also decided that the crew were negligent in failing to act more quickly when the first signs of problems with the cargo had been detected.&#x27; 
* - Lost on 9 September 1980 during Typhoon Orchid with all 44 hands onboard. Largest British vessel ever lost at sea.
* - wrecked on Cardigan Island in 1934 while on the way to be scrapped
* 
* &quot;Leicestershire&quot; - sold, renamed and sunk in the Aegean Sea in 1966
* - official number 131454, recorded travelling Liverpool - Marseilles - Port Said - Colombo - Rangoon, departing Liverpool 2 March 1923. [UK and Ireland, Outward Passenger Lists, 1890–1960, Liverpool, 2 March 1923]
* 
* &quot;Somersetshire&quot; 
* &quot;Worcestershire&quot;
* - sunk by in September 1939 with the loss of 58 lives

== Current operations ==

As of 2023 the Bibby Line labels itself a diverse company which has three separate services split into: Financial Services, Marine Services, and infrastructure applications. These businesses within the Bibby line group, operate across multiple countries and currently it is recorded to employ 1300 colleagues. It is now recording management of 1 billion pounds in funds.

After suffering through COVID-19 and ultimately undertaking a restructuring it was recorded that generally after working at a net loss they were able to run more profitably. In reports sent to the Uk companies house it can be seen that on December 31, 2021, the group made a net profit of £35.5m, compared with a net loss of £29.9m in 2020.

=== Leadership ===

Since 1965 Bibby has come into its modern era of leadership with the fifth generation, Derek Bibby becoming MD. He led diversification into new areas specifically financial services and infrastructure applications. Following his retirement Simon Sherrard was appointed the first non-family managing director and helped continue to modernize and drive diversification before handing over to the sixth generation Michael Bibby in 2000. Since then Bibby Line has continued to rapidly grow and diversify further and Michael stepped back from managing director to chairman. Currently the board is composed of 5 members; Jonathan Lewis the Executive Director (Group Managing Director, ), and the Non-Executive Directors including: Sir Michael Bibby Bt. DL (Chairman), David Anderson (Senior Independent), Susan Searle, and Geoffrey Bibby.

=== Financial Services ===
Bibby Financial Services was set up in 1982, is seen to be the UK’s largest independent invoice finance company. It offers services providing factoring and invoice discounting financial support for growing SME&#x27;s. Through It aims to “help businesses around the world grow, combining international scope with expert local knowledge”. In a report released in 2023 it note that it employed 900 people and had expanded to nine different countries. After a restructuring of the company in 2020 turnover was reported to have increased by 2022 from £132.4m to £150.5m for 2022, while its pre-tax profits increased from £255,000 to £9.4m.

=== Marine Services ===
Bibby Marine Limited, established in 1982, currently has 1 &quot;Wavemaster&quot; that can operate up to 30 days at a time and 1 Bibby Challenge that contains 337 rooms known as the Bibby Stockholm. This has led to the current dominant trait of the Bibby Line fleet being the application of these vessels for “walk to work service” where special operations ships, &quot;Wavemasters&quot;, can take off shore workers out to their remote locations. Part of this then also extends into floating off shore worker accommodation locations providing floating barges where workers can live on or off duty. These marine services aim to provide cost effective and environmentally friendly options for workers on large scale marine infrastructure projects. There have been large controversies with Bibby Stockholm which aims to provide support housing for asylum seekers. Claims of prison like conditions were leveled and according to the Financial Times, governments were only saving £9.28 per person per day.

=== Infrastructure ===
Existing for the last 30 years and employing 230 people, &quot;Garic&quot; has worked in the welfare and plant hire market. This is through the “hire and sell welfare accommodation, modular buildings, plant and storage products, tower lights, environmental solutions, wheel washing, dust control and site shelters”. These can be set up, serviced and broken down by Garic and are generally aimed towards fields like construction, infrastructure, industrial, house building, water and waste, power, utilities and renewables and commercial property sectors. They have moved into sustainable sectors as is one of their goals as seen in an article where Garic promotes sustainable solutions to business growth on the ground.

==See also==

*Bibby baronets
*Bibby Financial Services

==References==
==External links==
*Bibby Line Group – official website
* – unofficial history</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q375261" start="0" end="10" title="Bibby Line" label="Bibby Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q155930" start="42" end="50" title="ship transport" label="shipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="232" end="241" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q117037268" start="257" end="272" title="Bibby Stockholm" label="Bibby Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239073" start="504" end="514" title="John Bibby (businessman)" label="John Bibby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="977" end="1012" title="Www.slavevoyages.org" label="Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307651" start="1244" end="1259" title="Refugee Council" label="Refugee Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1563" end="1590" title="Radio Communication Company" label="Radio Communication Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871209" start="1827" end="1851" title="Bibby Financial Services" label="Bibby Financial Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="2674" end="2678" title="Non-governmental organisation" label="NGOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307651" start="2710" end="2725" title="Refugee Council" label="Refugee Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q117037268" start="2764" end="2779" title="Bibby Stockholm" label="Bibby Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239073" start="2808" end="2818" title="John Bibby (businessman)" label="John Bibby"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="2839" end="2859" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="3138" end="3147" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364292" start="3545" end="3565" title="Barracks ship" label="accommodation barges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201871" start="3570" end="3595" title="Platform supply vessel" label="Service Operation Vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q776704" start="3671" end="3692" title="Diving support vessel" label="Diving support vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q97279178" start="5453" end="5467" title="Typhoon Orchid (1980)" label="Typhoon Orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399401" start="5551" end="5566" title="Cardigan Island" label="Cardigan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="5671" end="5681" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871209" start="7645" end="7669" title="Bibby Financial Services" label="Bibby Financial Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q622439" start="7851" end="7861" title="Small and medium-sized enterprises" label="SME&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902983" start="10065" end="10079" title="Bibby baronets" label="Bibby baronets"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871209" start="10081" end="10105" title="Bibby Financial Services" label="Bibby Financial Services"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385055" wikidata="Q1146779" url="?curid=385055" title="Ciechanów Voivodeship">
<text>Ciechanów Voivodeship () was a unit of administrative division and local government in Poland in years 1975–1998, superseded by the Masovian Voivodeship. Its capital city was Ciechanów.

==Major cities and towns (population in 1995)==
* Ciechanów (46,600)
* Mława (29,800)
* Płońsk (22,700)
* Działdowo (20,700)

==See also==
* Voivodeships of Poland

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1146779" start="0" end="21" title="Ciechanów Voivodeship" label="Ciechanów Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="87" end="93" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54169" start="132" end="152" title="Masovian Voivodeship" label="Masovian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q745051" start="175" end="184" title="Ciechanów" label="Ciechanów"/>
<link wikidata="Q745051" start="237" end="246" title="Ciechanów" label="Ciechanów"/>
<link wikidata="Q983868" start="258" end="263" title="Mława" label="Mława"/>
<link wikidata="Q270656" start="275" end="281" title="Płońsk" label="Płońsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q983720" start="293" end="302" title="Działdowo" label="Działdowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q150093" start="328" end="350" title="Voivodeships of Poland" label="Voivodeships of Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385057" wikidata="Q1499927" url="?curid=385057" title="Częstochowa Voivodeship">
<text>Częstochowa Voivodeship () was a unit of administrative division and local government in Poland from 1975 to 1998, superseded mainly by Silesian Voivodeship, with a few gminas attached to surrounding voivodeships. Though most of the current territory of the former Częstochowa Voivodeship belongs to the Silesian Voivodeship, it historically is part of Lesser Poland, apart from western areas around Lubliniec and Olesno. The voivodeship&#x27;s capital and largest city was Częstochowa.

Major cities and towns: (population in 1995):
* Częstochowa (259,500);
* Myszków (34,000);
* Lubliniec (26,900).

==See also==
* Voivodeships of Poland
* Voivodeships of Poland (1975–1998)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1499927" start="0" end="23" title="Częstochowa Voivodeship" label="Częstochowa Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="89" end="95" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54181" start="136" end="156" title="Silesian Voivodeship" label="Silesian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15334" start="169" end="174" title="gmina" label="gmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11390" start="353" end="366" title="Lesser Poland" label="Lesser Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q985238" start="400" end="409" title="Lubliniec" label="Lubliniec"/>
<link wikidata="Q717404" start="414" end="420" title="Olesno" label="Olesno"/>
<link wikidata="Q103217" start="474" end="485" title="Częstochowa" label="Częstochowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q103217" start="536" end="547" title="Częstochowa" label="Częstochowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q731079" start="561" end="568" title="Myszków" label="Myszków"/>
<link wikidata="Q985238" start="581" end="590" title="Lubliniec" label="Lubliniec"/>
<link wikidata="Q150093" start="617" end="639" title="Voivodeships of Poland" label="Voivodeships of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q72799" start="642" end="676" title="Voivodeships of Poland (1975–1998)" label="Voivodeships of Poland (1975–1998)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385059" wikidata="Q257260" url="?curid=385059" title="OpenCola (drink)">
<text>OpenCola is a brand of open-source cola whose list of ingredients and preparation instructions are freely available and modifiable. Anybody can make the drink, and anyone can modify and improve on the recipe. It was launched in 2001 by the now-defunct free software P2P company Opencola, to promote their company.

==Background==

The original version 1.0 was released on 27 January 2001 by Grad Conn, Cory Doctorow, and John Henson. The current version is 1.1.3, released on 20 February 2001. Although originally intended as a promotional tool to explain free and open source software, the drink took on a life of its own and 150,000 cans were sold. The Toronto-based company Opencola shut down in 2003, and had become better known for the drink than for the software it was supposed to promote. Laird Brown, the company&#x27;s senior strategist, attributed its success to a widespread mistrust of big corporations and the &quot;proprietary nature of almost everything&quot;.

== Flavouring formula ==

The flavouring formula for OpenCola is:

* 10.0 g food-grade gum arabic
* 3.5 mL orange oil
* 3.0 mL water
* 2.75 mL lime oil
* 1.25 mL cassia oil
* 1.0 mL lemon oil
* 1.0 mL nutmeg oil
* 0.25 mL coriander oil
* 0.25 mL neroli oil
* 0.25 mL lavender oil

== Concentrate formula ==

* 2.36 kg plain granulated white table sugar
* 2.28 L water
* 30.0 mL caramel color
* 17.5 mL (3.50 tsp.) 75% phosphoric acid or citric acid
* 10.0 mL (2.00 tsp.) flavouring formula
* 2.5 mL (0.50 tsp.) caffeine (optional)

== Dilution ==

After mixing up the concentrate to the prescribed recipe (including all recommended safety precautions), the syrup is diluted 5:1 with (&quot;preferably sodium-free&quot;) soda water to make the finished drink; at this dilution, the above combination of ingredients will yield approximately 24 litres of OpenCola.

The full recipe also includes instructions for home-made soda water produced from basic ingredients such as yeast and sugar in order to make the entire process open source; otherwise there would be a need to use commercially produced bottled or canned soda, or consumer carbonation machines with commercially manufactured carbon dioxide canisters.

== See also ==

* Cube Cola
* Coca-Cola formula
* Free Beer, open-source beer, formerly known as &quot;Our Beer&quot; ()
* List of brand name soft drinks products
* List of soft drink flavors

== References ==
== External links ==
* OpenCola soft drink
* Cube Cola, Bristol, UK
* How to Make OpenCola - WikiHow
* The recipe from Wiki-How, condensed into a single, easily printable page
* OpenSoda.org, a defunct continuation of the OpenCola work for recipe and methodology
* OpenCola on GitHub</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q257260" start="0" end="8" title="OpenCola (drink)" label="OpenCola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096417" start="23" end="39" title="open-source cola" label="open-source cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q110436" start="402" end="415" title="Cory Doctorow" label="Cory Doctorow"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="556" end="585" title="free and open source software" label="free and open source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q535814" start="1065" end="1075" title="gum arabic" label="gum arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q516584" start="1085" end="1095" title="orange oil" label="orange oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="1105" end="1110" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q13195" start="1121" end="1125" title="lime (fruit)" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q204148" start="1140" end="1146" title="Cinnamomum aromaticum" label="cassia"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="1160" end="1165" title="lemon" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q72496959" start="1179" end="1189" title="nutmeg oil" label="nutmeg oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q41611" start="1200" end="1209" title="coriander" label="coriander"/>
<link wikidata="Q900616" start="1224" end="1230" title="neroli" label="neroli"/>
<link wikidata="Q900534" start="1245" end="1257" title="lavender oil" label="lavender oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="1325" end="1330" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q227816" start="1356" end="1369" title="caramel coloring" label="caramel color"/>
<link wikidata="Q216425" start="1386" end="1390" title="Teaspoon" label="tsp."/>
<link wikidata="Q184782" start="1396" end="1411" title="phosphoric acid" label="phosphoric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="1415" end="1426" title="citric acid" label="citric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="1489" end="1497" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="1679" end="1685" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q264554" start="1698" end="1708" title="soda water" label="soda water"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="1949" end="1954" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="1959" end="1964" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139722" start="2111" end="2122" title="carbonation" label="carbonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="2163" end="2177" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096417" start="2208" end="2217" title="Cube Cola" label="Cube Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661372" start="2220" end="2237" title="Coca-Cola formula" label="Coca-Cola formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378288" start="2240" end="2249" title="Free Beer" label="Free Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608137" start="2313" end="2352" title="List of brand name soft drinks products" label="List of brand name soft drinks products"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099143" start="2355" end="2381" title="List of soft drink flavors" label="List of soft drink flavors"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="2456" end="2467" title="Bristol, UK" label="Bristol, UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q306527" start="2493" end="2500" title="WikiHow" label="WikiHow"/>
<link wikidata="Q364" start="2677" end="2683" title="GitHub" label="GitHub"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385060" wikidata="Q1415833" url="?curid=385060" title="Elbląg Voivodeship">
<text>Elbląg Voivodeship () was a unit of administrative division and local government in Poland from 1975 to 1998, superseded by the Pomeranian Voivodeship and the Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship. Its capital city was Elbląg.

==Major cities and towns (population in 1995)==
* Elbląg (128,700)
* Malbork (40,300)
* Kwidzyn (39,300)

==See also==
* Voivodeships of Poland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1415833" start="0" end="18" title="Elbląg Voivodeship" label="Elbląg Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="84" end="90" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54180" start="128" end="150" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Pomeranian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q54184" start="159" end="187" title="Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship" label="Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q104712" start="210" end="216" title="Elbląg" label="Elbląg"/>
<link wikidata="Q104712" start="269" end="275" title="Elbląg" label="Elbląg"/>
<link wikidata="Q146820" start="288" end="295" title="Malbork" label="Malbork"/>
<link wikidata="Q326582" start="307" end="314" title="Kwidzyn" label="Kwidzyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q150093" start="340" end="362" title="Voivodeships of Poland" label="Voivodeships of Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385061" wikidata="Q3133389" url="?curid=385061" title="Herbert W. Kalmbach">
<text>Herbert Warren Kalmbach (October 19, 1921 – September 15, 2017) was an American attorney and banker. He served as the personal attorney to United States President Richard Nixon (1968–1973). He became embroiled in the Watergate scandal due to his fundraising activities in the early 1970s, some of which supported undercover operatives directed by senior White House figures under Nixon. Kalmbach was convicted and served 191 days in jail for his part in the scandal, and lost his license to practice law for a time, although he was later reinstated.

==Education, early career==
Kalmbach was born on October 19, 1921, in Port Huron, Michigan. He earned both his undergraduate and law degrees at the University of Southern California, and was admitted to the bar in 1952. He was a real estate lawyer and founding partner of Kalmbach, DeMarco, Knapp &amp; Chillingworth.

==Meets Nixon, political fundraiser==
Kalmbach was introduced to Richard Nixon, then vice-president, by H. R. Haldeman in the 1950s. He raised money for Richard Nixon&#x27;s candidacy in the 1960 United States presidential election and again in the 1968 United States presidential election.

==Banker, becomes Nixon&#x27;s attorney==
Kalmbach declined Nixon&#x27;s offer to appoint him Under Secretary of Commerce, choosing instead to remain in California and build up his law practice, becoming the former Vice President&#x27;s private lawyer. His law firm prospered during this period; it employed two lawyers in 1968, 14 in 1970, and 24 by 1973. The presidential connection drew United Airlines, Dart Industries, Marriott Corporation, and MCA Inc. as clients. During this period Kalmbach founded the Bank of Newport, in Newport Beach, California. The firm performed routine legal chores for the President.

It was a shrewd choice. Kalmbach&#x27;s solid but unspectacular career as a real estate lawyer was quickly touched with gold. Suddenly major clients from all over the nation were eager to sign up with the attorney who represented the President: United Air Lines, Dart Industries Inc., the Marriott Corp., MCA Inc. (the dominant producer of prime-time TV shows). National companies traditionally seek out lawyers who have friends and clients in high places in Washington, and Kalmbach&#x27;s were very high indeed.

==Arranges private polling==
Kalmbach was involved in a secret Nixon polling operation hidden from all but his closest senior advisors. Nixon used the poll results to shape policy and campaign strategy and manipulate popular opinion. On December 21, 1971, Kalmbach set up a Delaware shell corporation with private funding, to hide Administration sponsorship of polls.

==Joins 1972 re-election campaign==
Kalmbach was also the Deputy Finance Chairman for the Committee to Re-elect the President. In this capacity he was eventually implicated in a fund-raising scandal involving re-election campaign contributions by Associated Milk Producers, Inc. (AMPI) and two other major dairy-farm cooperatives in connection with Nixon&#x27;s support of an increase in price supports for milk in 1971. Testimony by AMPI general manager George L. Mehrens in 1973 identified Kalmbach as a major solicitor of these contributions. Articles on Charles Colson&#x27;s involvement in the AMPI scandal indicated that $2 million in contributions had been expected, but that the actual donations were nearer to $400,000, of which some $197,500 had been given by AMPI.

==Manages finances for undercover operations==
Kalmbach handled a secret $500,000 fund to finance the sabotage and espionage operations of Donald Segretti.

==Convicted, imprisoned==
Kalmbach was associate finance chairman of the 1968 Nixon for President campaign and was an unofficial fund-raiser for the Committee for the Re-election of the President, controlling several secret funds. Kalmbach served six months in jail and was fined $10,000 for operating an illegal campaign committee and for offering an ambassadorship in return for political support. He also handled a secret $500,000 fund to finance sabotage and espionage operations in the salary of Donald H. Segretti, a lawyer, whose job it was to discredit the Democrats. including $30,000 to $40,000 in 1972 alone for spying on Democrats. Segretti was paid from re-election funds gathered before the April 7, 1972, cutoff point after which a new law required full disclosure of contributors; Kalmbach told investigators in early 1973 that he had destroyed the contribution records prior to the April 7 date, violating the Federal Corrupt Practices Act, which required the records be maintained for two years and which expired only as of the new law&#x27;s going into effect. Kalmbach claimed in a later FBI interview that he had not known who was supervising Segretti nor what activities he was being paid to perform. 
Kalmbach also raised $220,000 in &quot;hush money&quot; to pay off the Watergate burglars. He claimed that he was told the money was for lawyer&#x27;s fees; a claim he accepted because he felt the burglars wrongly believed that they were acting on authority.

But it was his raising of $3.9 million for a secret Republican congressional campaign committee and promising an ambassador a better post in exchange for $100,000 that led to his conviction and imprisonment for 191 days and a $10,000 fine. Kalmbach pleaded guilty on February 25, 1974, on one count of violation of the Federal Corrupt Practices Act and on one count of promising federal employment as a reward for political activity and support of a candidate. He was sentenced to serve 6 to 18 months in prison for the first count and 6 months in prison on the second count. He executed both sentences concurrently and was released from prison on January 5, 1975. Kalmbach lost his license to practice law, although he was reinstated in 1977.

==Later life==
Although he retired in the late 1980s, he remained of counsel to Baker Hostetler. He died on September 15, 2017, in Newport Beach, California.

==Notes==
==Further reading==
* Biography Index. A cumulative index to biographical material in books and magazines. Volume 10: September, 1973-August, 1976. New York: H. W. Wilson Co., 1977.
* Biography Index. A cumulative index to biographical material in books and magazines. Volume 12: September, 1979-August, 1982. New York: H. W. Wilson Co., 1983.
* Who&#x27;s Who in America. 38th edition, 1974–1975. Wilmette: Marquis Who&#x27;s Who, 1974.
* Who&#x27;s Who in America. 39th edition, 1976–1977. Wilmette: Marquis Who&#x27;s Who, 1976.
* Who&#x27;s Who in the West. 14th edition, 1974–1975. Wilmette: Marquis Who&#x27;s Who, 1974.
* Select Committee on Presidential Campaign Activities (AKA Senate Watergate Hearings), 1973. Testimony given to the committee and cross-examination by senators and counsel. Can be found on YouTube.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3133389" start="0" end="23" title="Herbert W. Kalmbach" label="Herbert Warren Kalmbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="139" end="162" title="President of the United States" label="United States President"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="163" end="176" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="217" end="234" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000222" start="621" end="641" title="Port Huron, Michigan" label="Port Huron, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="699" end="732" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683819" start="742" end="761" title="Admission to the bar in the United States" label="admitted to the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="780" end="795" title="real estate law" label="real estate law"/>
<link wikidata="Q728646" start="812" end="819" title="Partnership" label="partner"/>
<link wikidata="Q958413" start="974" end="988" title="H. R. Haldeman" label="H. R. Haldeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="1061" end="1101" title="1960 United States presidential election" label="1960 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="1119" end="1159" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="1968 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1256" end="1271" title="Under Secretary#United States" label="Under Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="1275" end="1283" title="United States Department of Commerce" label="Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="1552" end="1567" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318267" start="1569" end="1584" title="Dart Industries" label="Dart Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772977" start="1586" end="1606" title="Marriott Corporation" label="Marriott Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q304509" start="1612" end="1620" title="MCA Inc." label="MCA Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q268873" start="1693" end="1718" title="Newport Beach, California" label="Newport Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q49958" start="2364" end="2371" title="opinion poll" label="polling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="2569" end="2577" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q290000" start="2578" end="2595" title="shell corporation" label="shell corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755212" start="2754" end="2789" title="Committee to Re-elect the President" label="Committee to Re-elect the President"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2911" end="2942" title="Associated Milk Producers, Inc." label="Associated Milk Producers, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1670749" start="3052" end="3065" title="price support" label="price support"/>
<link wikidata="Q451808" start="3222" end="3236" title="Charles Colson" label="Charles Colson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240340" start="3580" end="3595" title="Donald Segretti" label="Donald Segretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q121998" start="3950" end="3960" title="ambassador" label="ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="4231" end="4240" title="Democratic party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440161" start="4525" end="4554" title="Federal Corrupt Practices Act" label="Federal Corrupt Practices Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="4706" end="4709" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="4893" end="4902" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q121998" start="5195" end="5205" title="ambassador" label="ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683816" start="5765" end="5788" title="license to practice law" label="license to practice law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015373" start="5893" end="5903" title="of counsel" label="of counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849104" start="5907" end="5922" title="Baker Hostetler" label="Baker Hostetler"/>
<link wikidata="Q268873" start="5958" end="5983" title="Newport Beach, California" label="Newport Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040912" start="6342" end="6367" title="Who&amp;#x27;s Who in America" label="Who&amp;#x27;s Who in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q578301" start="6394" end="6402" title="Wilmette, Illinois" label="Wilmette"/>
<link wikidata="Q209726" start="6404" end="6411" title="Marquis" label="Marquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040912" start="6530" end="6556" title="Who&amp;#x27;s Who in the West" label="Who&amp;#x27;s Who in the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459168" start="6625" end="6677" title="Select Committee on Presidential Campaign Activities" label="Select Committee on Presidential Campaign Activities"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385064" wikidata="Q1410914" url="?curid=385064" title="Gorzów Voivodeship">
<text>Gorzów Voivodeship () was a unit of administrative division and local government in Poland between 1975 and 1998 when it was superseded by Lubusz Voivodeship. Its capital city was Gorzów Wielkopolski.

==Major cities and towns (population in 1998)==
* Gorzów Wielkopolski – 126 019
* Międzyrzecz – 20 155
* Słubice – 17 637
* Kostrzyn nad Odrą – 17 500
* Choszczno – 16 053
* Barlinek – 15 134
* Dębno – 14 405
* Myślibórz – 12 676
* Międzychód – 11 224
* Drezdenko – 10 600
* Skwierzyna – 10 477
* Strzelce Krajeńskie – 10 299
* Sulęcin – 10 071

==See also==
* Voivodeships of Poland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1410914" start="0" end="18" title="Gorzów Voivodeship" label="Gorzów Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="84" end="90" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54157" start="139" end="157" title="Lubusz Voivodeship" label="Lubusz Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q104731" start="180" end="199" title="Gorzów Wielkopolski" label="Gorzów Wielkopolski"/>
<link wikidata="Q104731" start="252" end="271" title="Gorzów Wielkopolski" label="Gorzów Wielkopolski"/>
<link wikidata="Q639241" start="284" end="295" title="Międzyrzecz" label="Międzyrzecz"/>
<link wikidata="Q200709" start="307" end="314" title="Słubice" label="Słubice"/>
<link wikidata="Q156837" start="326" end="343" title="Kostrzyn nad Odrą" label="Kostrzyn nad Odrą"/>
<link wikidata="Q640223" start="355" end="364" title="Choszczno" label="Choszczno"/>
<link wikidata="Q808344" start="376" end="384" title="Barlinek" label="Barlinek"/>
<link wikidata="Q335446" start="396" end="401" title="Dębno" label="Dębno"/>
<link wikidata="Q640453" start="413" end="422" title="Myślibórz" label="Myślibórz"/>
<link wikidata="Q556484" start="434" end="444" title="Międzychód" label="Międzychód"/>
<link wikidata="Q836961" start="456" end="465" title="Drezdenko" label="Drezdenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q994585" start="477" end="487" title="Skwierzyna" label="Skwierzyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q717399" start="499" end="518" title="Strzelce Krajeńskie" label="Strzelce Krajeńskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q718038" start="530" end="537" title="Sulęcin" label="Sulęcin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150093" start="563" end="585" title="Voivodeships of Poland" label="Voivodeships of Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385066" wikidata="Q1795217" url="?curid=385066" title="Kyōbashi, Tokyo">
<text>is a neighborhood east of Tokyo Station in Chūō, Tokyo, Japan. It is one of the city&#x27;s oldest commercial districts, although it has since been eclipsed by Ginza to the south and Nihonbashi to the north.
Kyobashi, together with Nihonbashi and Kanda, is the core of Shitamachi, the original downtown center of Edo-Tokyo, before the rise of newer secondary centers such as Shinjuku and Shibuya.

==History==

Its name comes from the bridge that once spanned the Kyōbashi Canal. The south side of the canal was called Takegashi (竹河岸 Bamboo Quay) because it was bamboo wholesalers&#x27; area.

The Kyōbashi, or Capital Bridge, linked the Ginza and the Kyōbashi neighborhood. According to the sign erected at the site by the Chuo-ku Board of Education, together with Nihonbashi, it was one of the famous bridges of Edo. When the canal was filled in 1959, the bridge was removed. Today, a pillar stands to mark the site of the old bridge.

Kyobashi was also a ward of Tokyo City, encompassing 16 neighborhoods, including Ginza, Tsukiji, and Tsukishima, in addition to Kyobashi itself. In 1947, when the 35 wards of Tokyo were reorganized into 23, it was merged with Nihonbashi to form the modern Chuo ward.

==Transportation==
Kyōbashi and Takarachō stations provide subway service.

==Corporate tenants==
Meidi-Ya, an upscale grocery store chain, has its headquarters in this area.

==Education==
Public elementary and junior high schools are operated by Chuo City Board of Education. The zoned schools are Joto Elementary School (中央区立城東小学校) and Ginza Junior High School (中央区立銀座中学校)

==Notable people==
Ryūnosuke Akutagawa, the &quot;father of the modern Japanese short-story&quot;, was born here.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q283196" start="26" end="39" title="Tokyo Station" label="Tokyo Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q212704" start="43" end="54" title="Chūō, Tokyo" label="Chūō, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q746052" start="160" end="165" title="Ginza" label="Ginza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141952" start="183" end="193" title="Nihonbashi" label="Nihonbashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q338861" start="247" end="252" title="Kanda, Tokyo" label="Kanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q67406560" start="269" end="279" title="Shitamachi" label="Shitamachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179645" start="375" end="383" title="Shinjuku" label="Shinjuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q193638" start="388" end="395" title="Shibuya" label="Shibuya"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="562" end="568" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q746052" start="638" end="643" title="Ginza" label="Ginza"/>
<link wikidata="Q215646" start="814" end="817" title="Edo" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207735" start="966" end="976" title="Tokyo City" label="Tokyo City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201337" start="1026" end="1033" title="Tsukiji" label="Tsukiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048979" start="1039" end="1049" title="Tsukishima" label="Tsukishima"/>
<link wikidata="Q212704" start="1194" end="1203" title="Chūō, Tokyo" label="Chuo ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q347981" start="1225" end="1233" title="Kyōbashi Station (Tokyo)" label="Kyōbashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040938" start="1238" end="1247" title="Takaracho Station" label="Takarachō"/>
<link wikidata="Q11512349" start="1304" end="1312" title="Meidi-Ya" label="Meidi-Ya"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1530" end="1539" title=":ja:中央区立城東小学校" label="中央区立城東小学校"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1571" end="1580" title=":ja:中央区立銀座中学校" label="中央区立銀座中学校"/>
<link wikidata="Q186326" start="1602" end="1621" title="Ryūnosuke Akutagawa" label="Ryūnosuke Akutagawa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385067" wikidata="Q2911303" url="?curid=385067" title="Clark Kerr">
<text>Clark Kerr (May 17, 1911 – December 1, 2003) was an American economist and academic administrator. He was the first chancellor of the University of California, Berkeley, and twelfth president of the University of California.

==Early life and education==
Kerr was born in Stony Creek, Pennsylvania, to Samuel William and Caroline (Clark) Kerr. He was raised on rural farms outside of Reading, Pennsylvania, first in the Stony Creek area and then in the Oley Valley after age 10. Even after Kerr became one of the most prominent academic administrators of his generation, he always regarded himself as a &quot;Pennsylvania farm boy&quot; and expressed frustration with intellectuals who showed condescension towards agriculture.

Kerr earned his A.B. from Swarthmore College in 1932, an M.A. from Stanford University in 1933, and a Ph.D. in economics from UC Berkeley in 1939. In 1945, he became an associate professor of industrial relations and was the founding director of the UC Berkeley Institute of Industrial Relations.

==Career==
===UC Berkeley===
In 1949, soon after the beginning of the McCarthy era, the Regents of the University of California adopted an anti-communist loyalty oath to be signed by all University of California employees. Kerr signed the oath, but fought against the firing of those who refused to sign. Kerr gained respect from his stance and was named University of California, Berkeley&#x27;s first chancellor when that position was created in 1952. As chancellor, Kerr oversaw the construction of 12 high-rise dormitories. In September 1953, then U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower appointed him to the Commission on Intergovernmental Relations.

===University of California president===


In October 1957, Kerr was the Board of Regents&#x27; unanimous choice to lead the entire university system. Raymond B. Allen had been widely expected to succeed Robert Gordon Sproul as systemwide president, but Allen&#x27;s tenure as UCLA&#x27;s first chancellor was marred by athletics scandals, poor campus planning, and the perception among the southern regents that he had not put up enough resistance—especially in comparison to Kerr—to Sproul&#x27;s stubborn refusal to delegate anything to the campus chancellors. Therefore, when Sproul finally announced his retirement in 1957, Allen was passed over in favor of Kerr. With a clear mandate for change, Kerr led UC&#x27;s rapid transformation into a true public university system through a series of proposals adopted unanimously by the regents from 1957 to 1960. Kerr&#x27;s reforms included delegating to the chancellors the full range of powers, privileges, and responsibilities which Sproul had previously denied them.

Kerr&#x27;s term as UC president saw the opening of campuses in San Diego, Irvine, and Santa Cruz to accommodate the influx of baby boomers. Faced with a dramatic increase of students entering college, Kerr helped establish the now much-copied California system of having the handful of University of California campuses act as &#x27;top tier&#x27; research institutions, the more numerous California State University campuses handle the bulk of undergraduate students and the very numerous California Community College campuses provide vocational and transfer-oriented college programs to the remainder. A &quot;Mother Jones&quot; article mentioned that Kerr&#x27;s achievements in this field earned him international acclaim.

In 1959, Kerr along with Chancellor Glenn T. Seaborg helped found the Berkeley Space Sciences Laboratory.

==== Student protests====
On March 22, 1961, at the invitation of SLATE, Frank Wilkinson gave a speech at the Berkeley campus, and in response to the ensuing controversy, Kerr defended the importance of freedom of speech: &quot;The University is not engaged in making ideas safe for students. It is engaged in making students safe for ideas.&quot; His remarks were widely quoted, and Regent Thomas M. Storke arranged to have them engraved on a bell at Storke Tower at the Santa Barbara campus.

Controversy exploded in 1964 when Berkeley students led the Free Speech Movement in protest of regulations limiting political activities on campus, including Civil Rights advocacy and protests against the Vietnam War. It culminated in hundreds of arrested students at a sit-in. Kerr&#x27;s initial decision was to not expel University of California students that participated in sit-ins off campus. That decision evolved into reluctance to expel students who later protested on campus, in a series of escalating events on the Berkeley campus in late 1964. Kerr was criticized both by students, for not agreeing to their demands, and by conservative UC Regent Edwin Pauley and others, for responding too leniently to the student unrest.

====Blacklisting====
In late 1964, President Lyndon Johnson picked Kerr to become secretary of Health, Education and Welfare. He later withdrew the nomination after the FBI background check on Kerr included damaging information the agency knew to be false. Almost 40 years later, in 2002, the FBI released documents used to blacklist Kerr as part of a government campaign to suppress subversive viewpoints at the university. This information had been classified by the FBI and was released only after a fifteen-year legal battle that the FBI repeatedly appealed up to the Supreme Court, but agreed to settle before the Supreme Court decided on hearing the matter. 

Edwin Pauley approached John McCone, a Berkeley alum and associate, at the CIA for assistance. McCone in turn met with FBI director J. Edgar Hoover. Hoover agreed to supply Pauley with confidential FBI information on &quot;ultra-liberal&quot; regents, faculty members, and students, and to assist in removing Kerr. Pauley received dozens of briefings from the FBI to this end. The FBI assisted Pauley and Ronald Reagan in painting Kerr as a dangerous &quot;liberal&quot;.

====Dismissal====
During his successful campaign in the 1966 California gubernatorial election, Reagan repeatedly promised to &quot;clean up the mess at Berkeley.&quot; In 1987, Lyn Nofziger revealed to Kerr that Reagan actually did not know much about UC at the beginning of his campaign, but had tacked right in order to prevail in the Republican primary against George Christopher, and started focusing on the &quot;student revolt at Berkeley&quot; after a poll determined that it was a priority of Republican voters. As a newly elected governor, Reagan appointed several more regents who, together with himself (in his capacity as an &quot;ex officio&quot; regent) aligned with existing members of the Board of Regents to form a majority (14 to 8) to vote for Kerr&#x27;s dismissal on January 20, 1967. Kerr knew what was coming and did not actively fight it in the sense of actively lobbying individual regents. But as a matter of principle (because he felt the Board of Regents should have stood up for the university&#x27;s institutional autonomy from the rest of the state government), Kerr chose to not make it easy for Reagan by not resigning, even though he believed it would mean bearing the lifelong stigma of being dismissed.

Shortly thereafter, Kerr&#x27;s old friend Storke insisted that Kerr should be allowed to participate, as previously scheduled, in the dedication of a building on the Santa Barbara campus in Storke&#x27;s honor. At the dedication ceremony Kerr stated that he had left the presidency of the university just as he had entered it: &quot;fired with enthusiasm&quot;.

Kerr&#x27;s second memoir, &quot;The Gold and the Blue: A Personal Memoir of the University of California, 1949-1967 Volume Two: Political Turmoil&quot; details what he refers to as his greatest blunders in dealing with the Free Speech Movement that ultimately led to his firing.

====Later career====
Following his dismissal, Kerr served on the Carnegie Commission on Higher Education until 1973 and was chairman of the Carnegie Council on Policy Studies in Higher Education from 1974 to 1979.

Kerr also served as chair of the 1984 USPS National Agreement Arbitration Panel, after which he joined the USPS panel of national contract arbitrators.

===Personal life===
Kerr was married to Catherine &quot;Kay&quot; Spaulding on Christmas Day, 1934. Kay along with friends founded the Save San Francisco Bay Association in 1961, which became Save the Bay. The couple had three children; Clark E., Jr., Alexander, and Caroline Gage. He died on December 1, 2003, in El Cerrito, California, following complications from a fall.

==Legacy and honors==
There are Kerr Halls on the Davis, Santa Barbara, and Santa Cruz campuses. At UC Berkeley the Clark Kerr Campus is a 50-acre student residence complex.

The Clark Kerr Award is named in his honor. Since 1968, it has been awarded annually by the UC Berkeley Academic Senate to recognize an individual who has made an extraordinary and distinguished contribution to the advancement of higher education. Kerr himself was the first recipient of the award.

Another important part of Kerr&#x27;s legacy was his wit—after writing a serious book, &quot;The Uses of the University&quot;, Kerr surprised an audience with this riposte—&quot;The three purposes of the University?—To provide sex for the students, sports for the alumni, and parking for the faculty.&quot;

==Bibliography==
* Charles Burress &quot;The Long, Hard Years at Berkeley; Second Volume of Clark Kerr&#x27;s Memoir Covers Politics and &#x27;Blunders, &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot;, February 9, 2003, Sunday Review, p. 1.
* Arthur Levine (ed., 1993). &quot;Higher Learning in America&quot;. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
*Seth Rosenfeld &quot;Subversives: The FBI&#x27;s War on Student Radicals, and Reagan&#x27;s Rise to Power&quot;. Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2012. 
* Schrum, Ethan, &quot;Clark Kerr&#x27;s Early Career, Social Science, and the American University&quot;, &quot;Perspectives on the History of Higher Education&quot; 28 (2011), 193–222.
*Schrum, Ethan. &quot;The Instrumental University: Education in Service of the National Agenda after World War II&quot;. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2019.

===Primary sources===
*Clark Kerr &quot;The Gold and the Blue: A Personal Memoir of the University of California, 1949-1967&quot;
*Clark Kerr &quot;The Uses of the University&quot;, 5th edition. 1963; Harvard University Press, 2001.
*Clark Kerr, John T. Dunlop, Frederick H. Harbison, and Charles A. Myers, &quot;Industrialism and Industrial Man: The Problem of Labor and Management in Economic Growth&quot;. Harvard University Press, 1960.
*&quot;UC Won&#x27;t Expel Sit-in Students&quot;, &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, May 6, 1964, p. 8.
*&quot;The Arrests at Berkeley&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, December 5, 1964, p. 30.

==References==
==External links==

*U.C. Berkeley news release
* &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot;, &quot;Reagan, Hoover, and the UC Red Scare&quot;, June 9, 2002.
*AP obituary
*NPR &quot;All Things Considered&quot; - Educator Clark Kerr Dies at 92
*account of secret files of the FBI on Kerr, and Kerr&#x27;s ouster.
*In Memoriam at the University of California.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2911303" start="0" end="10" title="Clark Kerr" label="Clark Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q61061" start="116" end="126" title="Chancellor (education)" label="chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="134" end="168" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="199" end="223" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619536" start="272" end="297" title="Stony Creek, Pennsylvania" label="Stony Creek, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q237896" start="384" end="405" title="Reading, Pennsylvania" label="Reading, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086486" start="453" end="464" title="Oley Valley" label="Oley Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="745" end="749" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="A.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q1378320" start="755" end="773" title="Swarthmore College" label="Swarthmore College"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="786" end="790" title="Master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="M.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="796" end="815" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="831" end="836" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Ph.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q207066" start="1097" end="1109" title="McCarthyism" label="McCarthy era"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308136" start="1115" end="1154" title="Regents of the University of California" label="Regents of the University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="1166" end="1180" title="anti-communist" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1181" end="1193" title="Loyalty oath#Truman era" label="loyalty oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="1214" end="1238" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="1382" end="1416" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="1594" end="1614" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152721" start="1636" end="1677" title="Commission on Intergovernmental Relations" label="Commission on Intergovernmental Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308136" start="1753" end="1769" title="Regents of the University of California" label="Board of Regents"/>
<link wikidata="Q16011520" start="1831" end="1847" title="Raymond B. Allen" label="Raymond B. Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344872" start="1884" end="1904" title="Robert Gordon Sproul" label="Robert Gordon Sproul"/>
<link wikidata="Q622664" start="2767" end="2776" title="University of California, San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q868421" start="2778" end="2784" title="University of California, Irvine" label="Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047293" start="2790" end="2800" title="University of California, Santa Cruz" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q610548" start="2830" end="2839" title="baby boom" label="baby boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451064" start="2947" end="2964" title="California Master Plan for Higher Education" label="California system"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="2990" end="3014" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q815352" start="3093" end="3120" title="California State University" label="California State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460112" start="3194" end="3222" title="California Community College" label="California Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q851510" start="3316" end="3328" title="Mother Jones (magazine)" label="Mother Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q48973" start="3468" end="3484" title="Glenn T. Seaborg" label="Glenn T. Seaborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306371" start="3511" end="3536" title="Space Sciences Laboratory" label="Space Sciences Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390745" start="3605" end="3610" title="SLATE" label="SLATE"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497695" start="3612" end="3627" title="Frank Wilkinson" label="Frank Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546654" start="3930" end="3946" title="Thomas M. Storke" label="Thomas M. Storke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620067" start="3991" end="4003" title="Storke Tower" label="Storke Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412282" start="4094" end="4114" title="Free Speech Movement" label="Free Speech Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="4218" end="4250" title="Opposition to the Vietnam War" label="protests against the Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346892" start="4693" end="4705" title="Edwin Pauley" label="Edwin Pauley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="4816" end="4830" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="4866" end="4895" title="United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare" label="Health, Education and Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="5064" end="5067" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346892" start="5437" end="5449" title="Edwin Pauley" label="Edwin Pauley"/>
<link wikidata="Q973836" start="5461" end="5472" title="John McCone" label="John McCone"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="5512" end="5515" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="5556" end="5559" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q210435" start="5569" end="5584" title="J. Edgar Hoover" label="J. Edgar Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="5842" end="5855" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021251" start="5966" end="6004" title="1966 California gubernatorial election" label="1966 California gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708356" start="6088" end="6100" title="Lyn Nofziger" label="Lyn Nofziger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537899" start="6275" end="6293" title="George Christopher (mayor)" label="George Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="7596" end="7620" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412282" start="7739" end="7759" title="Free Speech Movement" label="Free Speech Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491651" start="7861" end="7900" title="Carnegie Commission on Higher Education" label="Carnegie Commission on Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7936" end="7970" title="Carnegie Council on Policy Studies" label="Carnegie Council on Policy Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q18926759" start="8204" end="8239" title="Catherine Kerr (environmentalist)" label="Catherine &amp;quot;Kay&amp;quot; Spaulding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428059" start="8356" end="8368" title="Save the Bay" label="Save the Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q996569" start="8478" end="8500" title="El Cerrito, California" label="El Cerrito, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q129421" start="8590" end="8595" title="University of California, Davis" label="Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="8597" end="8610" title="University of California, Santa Barbara" label="Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047293" start="8616" end="8626" title="University of California, Santa Cruz" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8656" end="8673" title="University of California, Berkeley student housing#Clark Kerr Campus (Unit 5)" label="Clark Kerr Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127298" start="8719" end="8735" title="Clark Kerr Award" label="Clark Kerr Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9342" end="9357" title="Charles Burress" label="Charles Burress"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9554" end="9567" title="Arthur Levine" label="Arthur Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119415" start="9669" end="9683" title="Seth Rosenfeld" label="Seth Rosenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q19282246" start="10430" end="10451" title="Frederick H. Harbison" label="Frederick H. Harbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="10665" end="10682" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385068" wikidata="Q386333" url="?curid=385068" title="Jelenia Góra Voivodeship">
<text>Jelenia Góra Voivodeship () was a unit of administrative division and local government in Poland in the years 1975–1998, superseded by the Lower Silesian Voivodeship. Its capital city was Jelenia Gora.

==Major cities and towns (population in 1995)==
* Jelenia Góra (93,500)
* Bolesławiec (44,400)
* Zgorzelec (36,800)
* Lubań (24,400)
* Kamienna Góra (23,600)

==See also==
* Voivodeships of Poland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q386333" start="0" end="24" title="Jelenia Góra Voivodeship" label="Jelenia Góra Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="90" end="96" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54150" start="139" end="165" title="Lower Silesian Voivodeship" label="Lower Silesian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q147934" start="188" end="200" title="Jelenia Gora" label="Jelenia Gora"/>
<link wikidata="Q147934" start="253" end="265" title="Jelenia Góra" label="Jelenia Góra"/>
<link wikidata="Q156828" start="277" end="288" title="Bolesławiec" label="Bolesławiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q147929" start="300" end="309" title="Zgorzelec" label="Zgorzelec"/>
<link wikidata="Q115723" start="321" end="326" title="Lubań" label="Lubań"/>
<link wikidata="Q219110" start="338" end="351" title="Kamienna Góra" label="Kamienna Góra"/>
<link wikidata="Q150093" start="377" end="399" title="Voivodeships of Poland" label="Voivodeships of Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385069" wikidata="Q1343075" url="?curid=385069" title="Quanah Parker">
<text>Quanah Parker (, ; – February 23, 1911) was a war leader of the Kwahadi (&quot;Antelope&quot;) band of the Comanche Nation. He was likely born into the Nokoni (&quot;Wanderers&quot;) band of Tabby-nocca and grew up among the Kwahadis, the son of Kwahadi Comanche chief Peta Nocona and Cynthia Ann Parker, an Anglo-American who had been abducted as an eight-year-old child during the Fort Parker massacre in 1836 and assimilated into the Nokoni tribe. Following the apprehension of several Kiowa chiefs in 1871, Quanah Parker emerged as a dominant figure in the Red River War, clashing repeatedly with Colonel Ranald S. Mackenzie. With European-Americans hunting American bison, the Comanches&#x27; primary sustenance, into near extinction, Quanah Parker eventually surrendered and peaceably led the Kwahadi to the reservation at Fort Sill, Oklahoma.

Quanah Parker was never elected chief by his people but was appointed by the federal government as principal chief of the entire Comanche Nation. He became a primary emissary of southwest indigenous Americans to the United States legislature. In civilian life, he gained wealth as a rancher, settling near Cache, Oklahoma. Though he encouraged Christianization of Comanche people, he also advocated the syncretic Native American Church alternative, and fought for the legal use of peyote in the movement&#x27;s religious practices. He was elected deputy sheriff of Lawton in 1902. After his death in 1911, the leadership title of Chief was replaced with chairman; Quanah Parker is thereby described as the &quot;Last Chief of the Comanche&quot;, a term also applied to Horseback.

He is buried at Chief&#x27;s Knoll on Fort Sill. Many cities and highway systems in southwest Oklahoma and north Texas, once southern Comancheria, bear reference to his name.

==Early life==

Quanah Parker&#x27;s mother, Cynthia Ann Parker (born ), was a member of the large Parker frontier family that settled in east Texas in the 1830s. She was captured in 1836 () by Comanches during the raid of Fort Parker near present-day Groesbeck, Texas. Given the Comanche name &quot;Nadua&quot; (Foundling), she was adopted into the Nokoni band of Comanches, as foster daughter of Tabby-nocca.
Assimilated into the Comanche, Cynthia Ann Parker married the Kwahadi warrior chief Peta Nocona, also known as Puhtocnocony, Noconie, Tah-con-ne-ah-pe-ah, or Nocona (&quot;Lone Wanderer&quot;).

Quanah Parker&#x27;s paternal grandfather was the Kwahadi chief Iron Jacket (Puhihwikwasu&#x27;u), a warrior of the earlier Comanche-American Wars, famous among his people for wearing a Spanish coat of mail.

Cynthia Ann Parker and Nocona&#x27;s first child was Quanah Parker, born in the Wichita Mountains of southwestern Oklahoma. In a letter to rancher Charles Goodnight, Quanah Parker writes, &quot;From the best information I have, I was born about 1850 on Elk Creek just below the Wichita Mountains.&quot; Alternative sources cite his birthplace as Laguna Sabinas/Cedar Lake in Gaines County, Texas.

Cynthia Ann Parker and Nocona also had another son, &quot;Pecos&quot; (&quot;Pecan&quot;), and a daughter, &quot;Topsana&quot; (Prairie Flower). In December 1860, Cynthia Ann Parker and Topsana were captured during the Pease River Massacre. American forces were led by Sgt. John Spangler, who commanded Company H of the U.S. 2nd Cavalry, and Texas Rangers under Sul Ross would claim that at the end of the battle, he wounded Peta Nocona, who was thereafter killed by Spangler&#x27;s Mexican servant but this was disputed by eyewitnesses among the Texas Rangers and by Quanah Parker. It was believed that Quanah Parker and his brother Pecos were the only two to have escaped on horseback, and were tracked by Ranger Charles Goodnight but escaped to rendezvous with other Nokoni. Some, including Quanah Parker himself, claim this story is false and that he, his brother, and his father Peta Nocona were not at the battle, that they were at the larger camp miles away, and that Peta Nocona died years later of illness caused by wounds from battles with Apache.

Cynthia Ann Parker, along with her infant daughter Topsana, were taken by the Texas Rangers against her will to Cynthia Ann Parker&#x27;s brother&#x27;s home. After 24 years with the Comanche, Cynthia Ann Parker refused re-assimilation. Topsana died of an illness in 1863. Cynthia Ann Parker died by suicide through voluntary starvation in March 1871.

In the Comanche language, &quot;kwana&quot; means &quot;an odor&quot; or &quot;a smell&quot;. Comanche warriors often took on more active, masculine names in maturity, but Quanah Parker retained the name his mother gave him, initially in tribute to her after her recapture.

==Career==

After Peta Nocona&#x27;s death (c. 1864), being now Parra-o-coom (&quot;Bull Bear&quot;) the head chief of the Kwahadi people, Horseback, the head chief of the Nokoni people, took young Quanah Parker and his brother Pecos under his wing. After Peta Nocona and Iron Jacket, Horseback taught them the ways of the Comanche warrior, and Quanah Parker grew to considerable standing as a warrior. He left and rejoined the Kwahadi band with warriors from another band. Quanah Parker surrendered to Mackenzie and was taken to Fort Sill, Indian Territory where he led the Comanches successfully for a number of years on the reservation. Quanah Parker was never elected principal chief of the Comanche by the tribe. The U.S. government appointed him principal chief of the entire nation once the people had gathered on the reservation and later introduced general elections. 

In October 1867, when Quanah Parker was only a young man, he had come along with the Comanche chiefs as an observer at treaty negotiations at Medicine Lodge, Kansas. Horseback made a statement about Quanah Parker&#x27;s refusal to sign the treaty. In the early 1870s, the Plains Indians were losing the battle for their land with the United States government. Following the capture of the Kiowa chiefs Sitting Bear, Big Tree, and Satanta, the last two paroled in 1873 after two years thanks to the firm and stubborn behaviour of Guipago, the Kiowa, Comanche, and Southern Cheyenne tribes joined forces in several battles. Colonel Ranald Mackenzie led U.S. Army forces in rounding up or killing the remaining Indians who had not settled on reservations.

In 1873, Isatai&#x27;i, a Comanche claiming to be a medicine man, called for all the Comanche bands to gather together for a Sun Dance, even though that ritual was Kiowa, and was not a Comanche practice. The bands gathered in May on the Red River, near present-day Texola, Oklahoma. At that gathering, Isatai&#x27;i and Quanah Parker recruited warriors for raids into Texas to avenge slain relatives. Other Comanche chiefs, notably Isa-Rosa (&quot;White Wolf&quot;) and Tabananika (&quot;Sound of the Sunrise&quot;) of the Yamparika, and Big Red Meat of the Nokoni band, identified the buffalo hide merchants as the real threat to their way of life. They suggested that if Quanah Parker were to attack anybody, he should attack the merchants. A war party of around 250 warriors, composed mainly of Comanches and Cheyennes, who were impressed by Isatai&#x27;i&#x27;s claim of protective medicine to protect them from their enemies&#x27; bullets, headed into Texas towards the trading post of Adobe Walls. The raid should have been a slaughter, but the saloonkeeper had heard about the coming raid and kept his customers from going to bed by offering free drinks. Around 4 am, the raiders drove down into the valley. Quanah Parker and his band were unable to penetrate the two-foot thick sod walls and were repelled by the hide merchants&#x27; long-range .50 caliber Sharps rifles. As they retreated, Quanah Parker&#x27;s horse was shot out from under him at five hundred yards. He hid behind a buffalo carcass, and was hit by a bullet that ricocheted off a powder horn around his neck and lodged between his shoulder blade and his neck. The wound was not serious, and Quanah Parker was rescued and brought back out of the range of the buffalo guns. The attack on Adobe Walls caused a reversal of policy in Washington. It led to the Red River War, which culminated in a decisive Army victory in the Battle of Palo Duro Canyon. On September 28, 1874, Mackenzie and his Tonkawa scouts razed the Comanche village at Palo Duro Canyon and killed nearly 1,500 Comanche horses, the main form of the Comanche wealth and power.

==On the reservation==
With their food source depleted, and under constant pressure from the army, the Kwahadi Comanche finally surrendered in 1875. With Colonel Mackenzie and Indian Agent James M. Hayworth, Parker helped settle the Comanche on the Kiowa-Comanche-Apache Reservation in southwestern Indian Territory.

Quanah Parker&#x27;s home in Cache, Oklahoma was called the Star House. 

Parker went on hunting trips with President Theodore Roosevelt, who often visited him. Nevertheless, he rejected both monogamy and traditional Protestant Christianity in favor of the Native American Church Movement, of which he was a founder.

==Samuel Burk Burnett==
The story of the unique friendship that grew between Quanah Parker and the Burnett family is addressed in the exhibition of cultural artifacts that were given to the Burnett family from the Parker family. The presentation of a cultural relic as significant as Quanah Parker&#x27;s war lance was not done lightly. It is a clear indication of the high esteem to which the Burnett family was regarded by the Parkers. The correspondence between Quanah Parker and Samuel Burk Burnett, Sr. (1849–1922) and his son Thomas Loyd Burnett (1871–1938), expressed mutual admiration and respect. The historical record mentions little of Quanah Parker until his presence in the attack on the buffalo hunters at Adobe Walls on June 27, 1874. Fragmented information exists indicating Quanah Parker had interactions with the Apache at about this time.

This association may have related to his taking up the Native American Church, or peyote religion. Quanah Parker was said to have taken an Apache wife, but their union was short-lived. The Apache dress, bag and staff in the exhibit may be a remnant of this time in Quanah Parker&#x27;s early adult life. With the buffalo nearly exterminated and having suffered heavy loss of horses and lodges at the hands of the US military, Quanah Parker was one of the leaders to bring the Kwahadi (Antelope) band of Comanches into Fort Sill during late May and early June 1875. This brought an end to their nomadic life on the southern plains and the beginning of an adjustment to more sedentary life. Burk Burnett began moving cattle from South Texas in 1874 to near present-day Wichita Falls, Texas. There he established his ranch headquarters in 1881. Changing weather patterns and severe drought caused grasslands to wither and die in Texas. Burnett and other ranchers met with Comanche and Kiowa tribes to lease land on their reservation—nearly just north of the Red River in Oklahoma.

Quanah Parker, like many of his contemporaries, was originally opposed to the opening of tribal lands for grazing by Anglo ranching interests. Quanah Parker changed his position and forged close relationships with a number of Texas cattlemen, such as Charles Goodnight and the Burnett family. As early as 1880, Quanah Parker was working with these new associates in building his own herds. In 1884, due largely to Quanah Parker&#x27;s efforts, the tribes received their first &quot;grass&quot; payments for grazing rights on Comanche, Kiowa and Apache lands. It is during this period that the bonds between Quanah Parker and the Burnett family grew strong.

Burnett ran 10,000 cattle until the end of the lease in 1902. The cattle baron had a strong feeling for Native American rights, and his respect for them was genuine. Where other cattle kings fought natives and the harsh land to build empires, Burnett learned Comanche ways, passing both the love of the land and his friendship with the natives to his family. As a sign of their regard for Burnett, the Comanches gave him a name in their own language: &quot;Mas-sa-suta,&quot; meaning &quot;Big Boss&quot;. Quanah Parker earned the respect of US governmental leaders as he adapted to the white man&#x27;s life and became a prosperous rancher in Oklahoma. His spacious, two-story Star House had a bedroom for each of his seven wives and their children. He had his own private quarters, which were rather plain. Beside his bed were photographs of his mother Cynthia Ann Parker and younger sister Topʉsana. Quanah Parker extended hospitality to many influential people, both Native American and European American. Among the latter were the Texas surveyor W. D. Twichell and the cattleman Charles Goodnight.

During the next 27 years Quanah Parker and the Burnetts shared many experiences. Burnett helped by contributing money for the construction of Star House, Quanah Parker&#x27;s large frame home. Burnett asked for (and received) Quanah Parker&#x27;s participation in a parade with a large group of warriors at the Fort Worth Fat Stock Show and other public events. The &quot;Parade&quot; lance depicted in the exhibit was usually carried by Quanah Parker at such public gatherings. Burnett assisted Quanah Parker in buying the granite headstones used to mark the graves of his mother and sister. After years of searching, Quanah Parker had their remains moved from Texas and reinterred in 1910 in Oklahoma on the Comanche reservation at Fort Sill.

According to his daughter &quot;Wanada&quot; Page Parker, her father helped celebrate President Theodore Roosevelt&#x27;s 1905 inauguration by appearing in the parade. In April 1905, Roosevelt visited Quanah Parker at the Star House. President Roosevelt and Quanah Parker went wolf hunting together with Burnett near Frederick, Oklahoma. During the occasion, the two discussed serious business. Quanah Parker wanted the tribe to retain ownership of that the government planned to sell off to homesteaders, an argument he eventually lost. Quanah Parker asked for help combating unemployment among his people and later received a letter from the President stating his own concern about the issue. The wolf hunt was believed to be one of the reasons that Roosevelt created the Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge.

==Marriage and family==
Quanah Parker took two wives in 1872 according to Baldwin Parker, one of Quanah Parker&#x27;s sons. His first wife was &quot;Ta-ho-yea&quot; (or &quot;Tohayea&quot;), the daughter of Mescalero Apache chief Old Wolf. He had wed her in Mescalero by visiting his Apache allies since the 1860s and had got her for five mules. After a year of marriage and a visit of Mescalero Apache in the Quohada camps, &quot;Ta-ho-yea&quot; asked to return home, citing as her reason her inability to learn the Comanche language. Quanah Parker sent her back to her people. Quanah Parker&#x27;s other wife in 1872 was &quot;Wec-Keah&quot; or &quot;Weakeah&quot;, daughter of Penateka Comanche subchief Yellow Bear (sometimes &quot;Old Bear&quot;). Although first espoused to another warrior, she and Quanah Parker eloped, and took several other warriors with them. Yellow Bear pursued the band and eventually Quanah Parker made peace with him. The two bands united, forming the largest force of Comanche Indians.

Over the years, Quanah Parker married six more wives: Chony, Mah-Chetta-Wookey, Ah-Uh-Wuth-Takum, Coby, Toe-Pay, and Tonarcy. A photograph, , by William B. Ellis of Quanah Parker and two of his wives identified them as &quot;Topay&quot; and &quot;Chonie&quot;. Quanah Parker had eight wives and twenty-five children (some of whom were adopted).

After moving to the reservation, Quanah Parker got in touch with his white relatives from his mother&#x27;s family. He stayed for a few weeks with them, where he studied English and Western culture, and learned white farming techniques.

==Founder of the Native American Church Movement==
Quanah Parker is credited as one of the first important leaders of the Native American Church movement. Quanah Parker adopted the peyote religion after having been gored in southern Texas by a bull. Parker was visiting his uncle, John Parker, in Texas where he was attacked, giving him severe wounds. To fight an onset of blood burning fever, a Mexican curandera was summoned and she prepared a strong peyote tea from fresh peyote to heal him. Thereafter, Quanah Parker became involved with peyote, which contains hordenine, mescaline or phenylethylamine alkaloids, and tyramine which act as natural antibiotics when taken in a combined form. 

Quanah Parker taught that the sacred peyote medicine was the sacrament given to the Indian peoples and was to be used with water when taking communion in a traditional Native American Church medicine ceremony. Quanah Parker was a proponent of the &quot;half-moon&quot; style of the peyote ceremony. The &quot;cross&quot; ceremony later evolved in Oklahoma because of Caddo influences introduced by John Wilson, a Caddo-Delaware religious leader who traveled extensively around the same time as Parker during the early days of the Native American Church movement.

Quanah Parker&#x27;s most famous teaching regarding the spirituality of the Native American Church:

The White Man goes into his church house and talks &quot;about&quot; Jesus, but the Indian goes into his tipi and talks &quot;to&quot; Jesus.

The modern reservation era in Native American history began with the adoption of the Native American Church and Christianity by nearly every Native American tribe and culture within the United States and Canada as a result of Quanah Parker and Wilson&#x27;s efforts. The peyote religion and the Native American Church were never the traditional religious practice of North American Indian cultures. This religion developed in the nineteenth century, inspired by events of the time being east and west of the Mississippi River, Quanah Parker&#x27;s leadership, and influences from Native Americans of Mexico and other southern tribes. They had used peyote in spiritual practices since ancient times. He advocated only using mind-altering substances for ritual purposes.

== Performing ==
Quanah Parker acted in several silent films, including &quot;The Bank Robbery&quot; (1908).

==Death==

At the age of 66, Quanah Parker died on February 23, 1911, at Star House. In 1911, Quanah Parker&#x27;s body was interred at Post Oak Mission Cemetery near Cache, Oklahoma. In 1957, his remains were moved to Fort Sill Post Cemetery at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, along with his mother Cynthia Ann Parker and sister Topsannah (&quot;Prairie Flower&quot;). The inscription on his tombstone reads:

Biographer Bill Neeley wrote:
&quot;Not only did Quanah pass within the span of a single lifetime from a Stone Age warrior to a statesman in the age of the Industrial Revolution, but he never lost a battle to the white man and he also accepted the challenge and responsibility of leading the whole Comanche tribe on the difficult road toward their new existence.&quot;

==Criticism==
Although praised by many in his tribe as a preserver of their culture, Quanah Parker also had Comanche critics. Critic Paul Chaat Smith called &quot;Quanah Parker: sellout or patriot?&quot; the &quot;basic Comanche political question&quot;.

Quanah Parker did adopt some European-American ways, but he always wore his hair long and in braids. He also refused to follow U.S. marriage laws and had up to eight wives at one time.

==Family reunion==
The Quanah Parker Society, based in Cache, Oklahoma, holds an annual family reunion and powwow. Events usually include a pilgrimage to sacred sites in Quanah, Texas; tour of his &quot;Star Home&quot; in Cache; dinner; memorial service at Fort Sill Post Cemetery; gourd dance, pow-wow, and worship services. This event is open to the public.

==Memorials and honors==

* In 1970, the Star House was listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
* The Quanah Parker Trail, a public art project begun in 2010 by the Texas Plains Trail Region, commemorates sites of Comanche history in the Plains and Panhandle of Texas, the central region of Comancheria.
* Quanah, Texas, county seat of Hardeman County. The Quanah Parker Inn is located on U.S. Highway 287. At the founding of Quanah, Parker made this blessing:
May the Great Spirit smile on your little town, May the rain fall in season, and in the warmth of the sunshine after the rain, May the earth yield bountifully, May peace and contentment be with you and your children forever.
* Nocona, Texas, is named after Quanah Parker&#x27;s father, Comanche chief Peta Nocona.
* 1962, Parker Hall, a residence hall at Oklahoma State University.
* Parker Hall, a residence hall at Southwestern Oklahoma State University.
* The Quanah Parker Trailway portion of Highway 62 in southern Oklahoma.
* Quanah Parker Lake and Quanah Creek, both in the Wichita Mountains, are named in his honor.
* Quanah Parker Trail, a small residential street on the northeast side of Norman, Oklahoma. 
* In Fort Worth, along the banks of the Trinity River, is Quanah Parker Park.
* The Quanah, Acme and Pacific Railway, which originated in Texas in 1902 and was merged with the Burlington Northern Railroad in 1981.
* Quanah Parker Elementary School in Midland, Texas
* 2007, State of Texas historical marker erected in the name of Quanah Parker near the Fort Worth Stockyards Historic District recognizing his endeavors as a cattleman and Oklahoma rancher.
* In 2019, the asteroid (260366) Quanah = 2004 US3, discovered on October 28, 2004, by J. Dellinger at Needville, was named in his honor.

== In popular culture ==
* In the 1956 film &quot;Comanche&quot;, directed by George Sherman, Quanah Parker is played by Kent Smith.
* In the 1961 film &quot;Two Rode Together&quot;, Quanah Parker is portrayed by Henry Brandon.
* Chapter XIV of Poul Anderson&#x27;s novel &quot;The Boat of a Million Years&quot; portrays Parker in a fictional incident in 1872 concerning the imminent massacre of a settler family by Comanches. Parker is portrayed in a sympathetic light.
* The 2008 miniseries &quot;Comanche Moon&quot; featured Quanah Parker as a minor character, played by Eddie Spears.
* Richard Angarola (1920–2008) was cast as Quanah Parker in the 1959 episode &quot;Tribal Justice&quot; of the syndicated television anthology series &quot;Death Valley Days&quot;, hosted by Stanley Andrews. In the story line, Parker, before he becomes Comanche chief, must clear his name for causing the death of a fellow tribesman.
* In the 2021 Paramount+ TV series &quot;1883&quot;, Martin Sensmeier plays Sam, a skilled Comanche warrior loyal to Quanah Parker, who later takes Elsa as his wife.
* In the 2024 LP &quot;Le Loup et la Guitare&quot; from the french guitarist , there&#x27;s a special tribute to Quanah Parker.
* In TEXAS! OUTDOOR MUSICAL, an outdoor drama performed in the Palo Duro Canyon State Park since 1966, Quanah Parker is a character currently depicted by his descendant Benny Tahmahkera.

==Notes==
==Further reading==
* La Barre, Weston (1938). &quot;The Peyote Cult&quot;, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press
* Carlson, Paul H. and Crum, Tom (2012). &quot;Myth, Memory and Massacre: The Pease River Capture of Cynthia Ann Parker&quot;. Texas Tech University Press. . 
* Gwynne, S. C. (2010). &quot;Empire of the Summer Moon: Quanah Parker and the Rise and Fall of the Comanches, the Most Powerful Tribe in American History&quot;, Scribner, 2010, 
* Hagan, William T. (1976) &quot;United States-Comanche Relations: The Reservation Years&quot;, Yale University Press: New Haven, CT. . 
* Hamalainen, Pekka (2008). &quot;Comanche Empire&quot;, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press 
* Exley, Jo Ann Powell (2001) &quot;Frontier Blood: the Saga of the Parker Family&quot;, Texas A &amp; M University
* Jackson, Clyde L. and Grace (1963). &quot;Quanah Parker, last chief of the Comanches; a study in Southwestern Frontier history&quot;, New York: Exposition Press, 1963
* Selden, Jack K. (2006). &quot;Return: The Parker Story&quot;, Clacton Press

==External links==
* Photographs of Quanah Parker, 1890–1900, Portal to Texas History, University of North Texas
* &quot;Comanche Nation&quot;, Official Website
* &quot;Quanah Parker&quot;, Texas Handbook Online
* Quanah Parker and Peyote
* Quanah Parker – Biography of the Famous Warrior
* Map of Comancheria</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1343075" start="0" end="13" title="Quanah Parker" label="Quanah Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="107" end="122" title="Comanche Nation" label="Comanche Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="254" end="262" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360142" start="269" end="280" title="Peta Nocona" label="Peta Nocona"/>
<link wikidata="Q371602" start="285" end="303" title="Cynthia Ann Parker" label="Cynthia Ann Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q96036383" start="308" end="322" title="Anglo-Americans" label="Anglo-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471788" start="383" end="403" title="Fort Parker massacre" label="Fort Parker massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="416" end="427" title="Cultural assimilation" label="assimilated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119025" start="561" end="574" title="Red River War" label="Red River War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349610" start="601" end="628" title="Ranald S. Mackenzie" label="Colonel Ranald S. Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="662" end="676" title="American bison" label="American bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="829" end="838" title="Fort Sill" label="Fort Sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239711" start="1157" end="1172" title="Cache, Oklahoma" label="Cache, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q920084" start="1264" end="1286" title="Native American Church" label="Native American Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q271937" start="1332" end="1338" title="peyote" label="peyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q503336" start="1416" end="1422" title="Lawton, Oklahoma" label="Lawton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206575" start="1620" end="1629" title="Horseback (Comanche)" label="Horseback"/>
<link wikidata="Q648279" start="1766" end="1777" title="Comancheria" label="Comancheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q371602" start="1853" end="1871" title="Cynthia Ann Parker" label="Cynthia Ann Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="1951" end="1956" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="2002" end="2010" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471788" start="2031" end="2042" title="Fort Parker Massacre" label="Fort Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q980571" start="2060" end="2076" title="Groesbeck, Texas" label="Groesbeck, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360142" start="2303" end="2314" title="Peta Nocona" label="Peta Nocona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360142" start="2391" end="2404" title="Lone Wanderer" label="Lone Wanderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072624" start="2478" end="2489" title="Iron Jacket" label="Iron Jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150525" start="2538" end="2560" title="Comanche Wars" label="Comanche-American Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2600" end="2607" title="Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q659631" start="2608" end="2620" title="Mail (armour)" label="coat of mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305333" start="2703" end="2720" title="Wichita Mountains" label="Wichita Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064563" start="2770" end="2787" title="Charles Goodnight" label="Charles Goodnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q109836" start="2998" end="3011" title="Gaines County" label="Gaines County"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581505" start="3240" end="3260" title="Pease River Massacre" label="Pease River Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q210609" start="3341" end="3357" title="2nd Cavalry Regiment (United States)" label="U.S. 2nd Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q510865" start="3363" end="3376" title="Texas Ranger Division" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q648147" start="3383" end="3391" title="Sul Ross" label="Sul Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064563" start="3736" end="3753" title="Charles Goodnight" label="Charles Goodnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206575" start="4847" end="4856" title="Horseback (Comanche)" label="Horseback"/>
<link wikidata="Q486912" start="5989" end="6001" title="Sitting Bear" label="Sitting Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q859416" start="6003" end="6011" title="Big Tree (war chief)" label="Big Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q486925" start="6017" end="6024" title="Satanta (chief)" label="Satanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q486933" start="6116" end="6123" title="Guipago" label="Guipago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349610" start="6217" end="6233" title="Ranald Mackenzie" label="Ranald Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673345" start="6350" end="6363" title="Isatai&amp;#x27;i" label="Isatai&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q263937" start="6466" end="6475" title="Sun Dance" label="Sun Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q117100" start="6505" end="6510" title="Kiowa" label="Kiowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287635" start="6606" end="6622" title="Texola, Oklahoma" label="Texola, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="6864" end="6873" title="Yamparika" label="Yamparika"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387294" start="6879" end="6891" title="Big Red Meat" label="Big Red Meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q360448" start="7332" end="7343" title="Adobe Walls, Texas" label="Adobe Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q968374" start="7706" end="7718" title="Sharps rifle" label="Sharps rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119025" start="8172" end="8185" title="Red River War" label="Red River War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871974" start="8238" end="8264" title="Battle of Palo Duro Canyon" label="Battle of Palo Duro Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493185" start="8307" end="8314" title="Tonkawa" label="Tonkawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369399" start="8352" end="8368" title="Palo Duro Canyon" label="Palo Duro Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="8758" end="8774" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239711" start="8806" end="8821" title="Cache, Oklahoma" label="Cache, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268834" start="8837" end="8847" title="Quanah Parker Star House" label="Star House"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="8895" end="8913" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q184211" start="8969" end="8977" title="monogamy" label="monogamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="8994" end="9004" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="9005" end="9017" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q920084" start="9034" end="9056" title="Native American Church" label="Native American Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q18646023" start="9578" end="9602" title="Samuel Burk Burnett" label="Samuel Burk Burnett, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q920084" start="10009" end="10031" title="Native American Church" label="Native American Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q271937" start="10036" end="10042" title="peyote" label="peyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="10472" end="10481" title="Fort Sill" label="Fort Sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q128349" start="10721" end="10741" title="Wichita Falls, Texas" label="Wichita Falls, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q156032" start="11009" end="11018" title="Red River of the South" label="Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268834" start="12369" end="12379" title="Quanah Parker Star House" label="Star House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12742" end="12756" title="W. D. Twichell" label="W. D. Twichell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064563" start="12775" end="12792" title="Charles Goodnight" label="Charles Goodnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="13637" end="13655" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029925" start="13818" end="13830" title="wolf hunting" label="wolf hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q165941" start="13858" end="13877" title="Frederick, Oklahoma" label="Frederick, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q743584" start="14315" end="14348" title="Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge" label="Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q56585" start="14558" end="14567" title="Mescalero" label="Mescalero"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="14568" end="14574" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="15886" end="15893" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15933" end="15951" title="History of agriculture in the United States#Ranching" label="farming techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q920084" start="16076" end="16098" title="Native American Church" label="Native American Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q547457" start="16358" end="16367" title="curandera" label="curandera"/>
<link wikidata="Q119915" start="16519" end="16528" title="hordenine" label="hordenine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193140" start="16530" end="16539" title="mescaline" label="mescaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q407411" start="16543" end="16559" title="phenylethylamine" label="phenylethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="16560" end="16569" title="alkaloids" label="alkaloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q165930" start="16575" end="16583" title="tyramine" label="tyramine"/>
<link wikidata="Q35170" start="17017" end="17022" title="Caddo" label="Caddo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264486" start="17048" end="17059" title="John Wilson (Caddo)" label="John Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q35170" start="17063" end="17068" title="Caddo" label="Caddo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336809" start="17069" end="17077" title="Delaware Nation" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="17384" end="17389" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134932" start="17420" end="17424" title="tipi" label="tipi"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="17662" end="17668" title="First Nations in Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="17966" end="17983" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314452" start="18058" end="18064" title="Indigenous peoples of Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q907924" start="18075" end="18090" title="Plains Indians" label="southern tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268834" start="18411" end="18421" title="Quanah Parker Star House" label="Star House"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343869" start="18474" end="18482" title="Post Oak, Oklahoma" label="Post Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239711" start="18505" end="18520" title="Cache, Oklahoma" label="Cache, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="18584" end="18593" title="Fort Sill, Oklahoma" label="Fort Sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q371602" start="18627" end="18645" title="Cynthia Ann Parker" label="Cynthia Ann Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="18843" end="18852" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="18866" end="18875" title="politician" label="statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="18894" end="18915" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11940596" start="19241" end="19257" title="Paul Chaat Smith" label="Paul Chaat Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239711" start="19605" end="19620" title="Cache, Oklahoma" label="Cache, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588400" start="19832" end="19843" title="gourd dance" label="gourd dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q254279" start="19845" end="19852" title="pow-wow" label="pow-wow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268834" start="19952" end="19962" title="Quanah Parker Star House" label="Star House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="19981" end="20017" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q974733" start="20229" end="20242" title="Quanah, Texas" label="Quanah, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q109317" start="20259" end="20274" title="Hardeman County, Texas" label="Hardeman County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139467" start="20312" end="20328" title="U.S. Highway 287" label="U.S. Highway 287"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172865" start="20392" end="20404" title="Great Spirit" label="Great Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q973864" start="20611" end="20617" title="Nocona, Texas" label="Nocona"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="20721" end="20735" title="residence hall" label="residence hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q749718" start="20739" end="20764" title="Oklahoma State University" label="Oklahoma State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="20783" end="20797" title="residence hall" label="residence hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811567" start="20801" end="20839" title="Southwestern Oklahoma State University" label="Southwestern Oklahoma State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174789" start="20881" end="20891" title="U.S. Route 62 in Oklahoma" label="Highway 62"/>
<link wikidata="Q40347" start="21083" end="21089" title="Norman, Oklahoma" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="21107" end="21117" title="Fort Worth, Texas" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969490" start="21142" end="21155" title="Trinity River (Texas)" label="Trinity River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412858" start="21186" end="21218" title="Quanah, Acme and Pacific Railway" label="Quanah, Acme and Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016648" start="21278" end="21306" title="Burlington Northern Railroad" label="Burlington Northern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q128321" start="21353" end="21360" title="Midland, Texas" label="Midland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895076" start="21455" end="21494" title="Fort Worth Stockyards" label="Fort Worth Stockyards Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21582" end="21608" title="List of minor planets: 260001–261000#366" label="(260366) Quanah = 2004 US3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150510" start="21741" end="21761" title="Comanche (1956 film)" label="&amp;quot;Comanche&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q974947" start="21818" end="21828" title="Kent Smith" label="Kent Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q232234" start="21855" end="21872" title="Two Rode Together" label="Two Rode Together"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606541" start="21910" end="21923" title="Henry Brandon (actor)" label="Henry Brandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q220883" start="21942" end="21955" title="Poul Anderson" label="Poul Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718935" start="21975" end="22002" title="The Boat of a Million Years" label="The Boat of a Million Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712569" start="22190" end="22215" title="Comanche Moon (miniseries)" label="&amp;quot;Comanche Moon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q661304" start="22271" end="22283" title="Eddie Spears" label="Eddie Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="22396" end="22417" title="Television syndication" label="syndicated television"/>
<link wikidata="Q23653" start="22418" end="22434" title="anthology series" label="anthology series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230894" start="22441" end="22458" title="Death Valley Days" label="Death Valley Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496795" start="22476" end="22491" title="Stanley Andrews" label="Stanley Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q27903045" start="22633" end="22643" title="Paramount+" label="Paramount+"/>
<link wikidata="Q110124251" start="22654" end="22670" title="1883 (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;1883&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q26923578" start="22672" end="22688" title="Martin Sensmeier" label="Martin Sensmeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q19662371" start="23385" end="23398" title="S. C. Gwynne" label="Gwynne, S. C."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385074" wikidata="Q1626030" url="?curid=385074" title="Katowice Voivodeship">
<text>Katowice Voivodeship () can refer to one of two political entities in Poland:

Katowice Voivodeship (1), initially &quot;Silesian-Dabrowa Voivodeship&quot; (), was a unit of administrative division and local government in the years 1946–1975. It was superseded by Katowice Voivodeship (2), Częstochowa Voivodeship, Bielsko-Biała Voivodeship, and Opole Voivodeship. Its capital city was Katowice.

Katowice Voivodeship (2) was a unit of administrative division and local government in Poland in the years 1975–1998, superseded by the Silesian Voivodeship. Its capital city was Katowice. The Katowice Special Economic Zone was created on 18 June 1996 &quot;in order to support and advance restructuring processes, as well as to generate employment in the region.&quot; In a 1995 issue of the journal &quot;Habitat Debate&quot;, it was reported that two-thirds of the rivers in the voivodeship were below the lowest pollution quality classification and that air pollution was also extremely high, with lead levels up to 13 times the allowable standard being measured.

==Major cities and towns== 
:&quot;Population in 1995 in brackets&quot;

* Katowice (354,200)
* Sosnowiec (249,000)
* Bytom (227,600)
* Gliwice (214,000)
* Zabrze (201,600)
* Ruda Śląska (166,300)
* Rybnik (144,300)
* Tychy (133,900)
* Dąbrowa Górnicza (130,900)
* Chorzów (125,800)
* Jastrzębie-Zdrój (103,500)
* Jaworzno (98,500)
* Mysłowice (80,000)
* Siemianowice Śląskie (78,100)
* Wodzisław Śląski (68,600)
* Tarnowskie Góry (67,200)
* Piekary Śląskie (67,200)
* Żory (66,300)
* Racibórz (65,100)
* Będzin (63,100)
* Świętochłowice (59,600)
* Zawiercie (56,300)
* Knurów (44,200)
* Chrzanów (42,100)
* Olkusz (40,500)
* Mikołów (38,900)
* Czeladź (36,600)
* Czechowice-Dziedzice (35,600)
* Pszczyna (34,600)
* Czerwionka-Leszczyny (30,100)
* Rydułtowy (24,100)
* Łaziska Górne (23,000)
* Bieruń (22,100)
* Pyskowice (21,900)
* Trzebinia (20,000)
* Brzeszcze (12,441)
==See also==
* Voivodeships of Poland

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1626030" start="0" end="20" title="Katowice Voivodeship" label="Katowice Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="70" end="76" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626030" start="79" end="103" title="Katowice Voivodeship" label="Katowice Voivodeship (1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499927" start="290" end="313" title="Częstochowa Voivodeship" label="Częstochowa Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747120" start="315" end="340" title="Bielsko-Biała Voivodeship" label="Bielsko-Biała Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q54171" start="346" end="363" title="Opole Voivodeship" label="Opole Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626030" start="397" end="421" title="Katowice Voivodeship" label="Katowice Voivodeship (2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="484" end="490" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54181" start="533" end="553" title="Silesian Voivodeship" label="Silesian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q588" start="576" end="584" title="Katowice" label="Katowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11737462" start="590" end="620" title="Katowice Special Economic Zone" label="Katowice Special Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q588" start="1141" end="1149" title="Katowice" label="Katowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q105060" start="1162" end="1171" title="Sosnowiec" label="Sosnowiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q102350" start="1184" end="1189" title="Bytom" label="Bytom"/>
<link wikidata="Q105084" start="1202" end="1209" title="Gliwice" label="Gliwice"/>
<link wikidata="Q103892" start="1222" end="1228" title="Zabrze" label="Zabrze"/>
<link wikidata="Q108679" start="1241" end="1252" title="Ruda Śląska" label="Ruda Śląska"/>
<link wikidata="Q107094" start="1265" end="1271" title="Rybnik" label="Rybnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q11977" start="1284" end="1289" title="Tychy" label="Tychy"/>
<link wikidata="Q108672" start="1302" end="1318" title="Dąbrowa Górnicza" label="Dąbrowa Górnicza"/>
<link wikidata="Q104302" start="1331" end="1338" title="Chorzów" label="Chorzów"/>
<link wikidata="Q107106" start="1351" end="1367" title="Jastrzębie-Zdrój" label="Jastrzębie-Zdrój"/>
<link wikidata="Q158006" start="1380" end="1388" title="Jaworzno" label="Jaworzno"/>
<link wikidata="Q161595" start="1400" end="1409" title="Mysłowice" label="Mysłowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q158485" start="1421" end="1441" title="Siemianowice Śląskie" label="Siemianowice Śląskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q500260" start="1453" end="1469" title="Wodzisław Śląski" label="Wodzisław Śląski"/>
<link wikidata="Q329833" start="1481" end="1496" title="Tarnowskie Góry" label="Tarnowskie Góry"/>
<link wikidata="Q158488" start="1508" end="1523" title="Piekary Śląskie" label="Piekary Śląskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q393171" start="1535" end="1539" title="Żory" label="Żory"/>
<link wikidata="Q25302" start="1551" end="1559" title="Racibórz" label="Racibórz"/>
<link wikidata="Q461513" start="1571" end="1577" title="Będzin" label="Będzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45197" start="1589" end="1603" title="Świętochłowice" label="Świętochłowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q148827" start="1615" end="1624" title="Zawiercie" label="Zawiercie"/>
<link wikidata="Q276860" start="1636" end="1642" title="Knurów" label="Knurów"/>
<link wikidata="Q93323" start="1654" end="1662" title="Chrzanów" label="Chrzanów"/>
<link wikidata="Q764943" start="1674" end="1680" title="Olkusz" label="Olkusz"/>
<link wikidata="Q659905" start="1692" end="1699" title="Mikołów" label="Mikołów"/>
<link wikidata="Q161605" start="1711" end="1718" title="Czeladź" label="Czeladź"/>
<link wikidata="Q263684" start="1730" end="1750" title="Czechowice-Dziedzice" label="Czechowice-Dziedzice"/>
<link wikidata="Q948304" start="1762" end="1770" title="Pszczyna" label="Pszczyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005538" start="1782" end="1802" title="Czerwionka-Leszczyny" label="Czerwionka-Leszczyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q948281" start="1814" end="1823" title="Rydułtowy" label="Rydułtowy"/>
<link wikidata="Q345293" start="1835" end="1848" title="Łaziska Górne" label="Łaziska Górne"/>
<link wikidata="Q325108" start="1860" end="1866" title="Bieruń" label="Bieruń"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001326" start="1878" end="1887" title="Pyskowice" label="Pyskowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q686167" start="1899" end="1908" title="Trzebinia" label="Trzebinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q916514" start="1920" end="1929" title="Brzeszcze" label="Brzeszcze"/>
<link wikidata="Q150093" start="1954" end="1976" title="Voivodeships of Poland" label="Voivodeships of Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="385076" wikidata="Q277913" url="?curid=385076" title="Victor (Alex Lifeson album)">
<text>Victor is the debut solo album by Rush guitarist Alex Lifeson under the pseudonym &quot;Victor&quot;, released in January 1996 on Anthem Records. The album was recorded at Lerxst Sound (Lifeson&#x27;s home studio) from October 1994 through July 1995.

The album reached number 99 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 in 1996 and received a 1997 Juno Award nomination for Best New Group.

==Track listing==
# &quot;Don&#x27;t Care&quot; (Alex Lifeson) – 4:04
# &quot;Promise&quot; (Lifeson, Bill Bell) – 5:44
# &quot;Start Today&quot; (Lifeson) – 3:48
# &quot;Mr. X&quot; (Instrumental) (Lifeson) – 2:21
# &quot;At the End&quot; (Lifeson, Adrian Zivojinovich) – 6:07
# &quot;Sending Out a Warning&quot; (Lifeson, Bell) – 4:11
# &quot;Shut Up Shuttin’ Up&quot; (Lifeson, Bell, Charlene, Esther) – 4:02
# &quot;Strip and Go Naked&quot; (Instrumental) (Lifeson, Bell) – 3:57
# &quot;The Big Dance&quot; (Lifeson, Zivojinovich) – 4:14
# &quot;Victor&quot; (Lifeson, W. H. Auden) – 6:25
# &quot;I Am the Spirit&quot; (Lifeson, Bell)– 5:31

&quot;Victor&quot; is based on the poem by W. H. Auden.

==Personnel==
* Alex Lifeson – spoken vocals (5, 7, 10), guitars, keyboards, bass, mandola, programming, production
* Les Claypool – bass (9)
* Peter Cardinali – bass
* Bill Bell – backing vocals (5), guitar
* Adrian Zivojinovich - programming
* Dalbello – lead vocals (3)
* Edwin – lead vocals (1, 2, 6, 9, 11), backing vocals (5)
* Blake Manning – drums
* Colleen Allen – horn

Lifeson&#x27;s wife Charlene is one of the two women in the track 7 dialogue; the other woman is simply listed as &quot;Esther&quot;.

==Singles==
==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="34" end="38" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q348177" start="49" end="61" title="Alex Lifeson" label="Alex Lifeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493638" start="130" end="144" title="Anthem Records" label="Anthem Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="287" end="312" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q507057" start="341" end="351" title="Juno Award" label="Juno Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q348177" start="433" end="445" title="Alex Lifeson" label="Alex Lifeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q178698" start="957" end="968" title="W. H. Auden" label="W. H. Auden"/>
<link wikidata="Q348177" start="1103" end="1115" title="Alex Lifeson" label="Alex Lifeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q514985" start="1205" end="1217" title="Les Claypool" label="Les Claypool"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1231" end="1246" title="Peter Cardinali" label="Peter Cardinali"/>
<link wikidata="Q468741" start="1333" end="1341" title="Dalbello" label="Dalbello"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346178" start="1362" end="1367" title="Edwin (musician)" label="Edwin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1421" end="1434" title="Blake Manning" label="Blake Manning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1445" end="1458" title="Colleen Allen" label="Colleen Allen"/>
</links>
</doc>
